University of Groningen
FACULTY OF MATHEMATICS
AND NATURAL SCIENCES
Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics
and Computer Science
ANNUAL REPORT 2015
JBI Annual Report
Introduction
This is the annual scientific report over 2015 of the ”Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and
Computer Science (JBI)”.
Some statistics
In 2015 the institute had 34 tenured scientific staff members and 6 support staff members. 99.5 PhD
candidates were enrolled, including 10.5 Ubbo Emmius scholarships for students from abroad, 19
PhD positions funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and 58 PhD
positions funded by the European Union, industry or other external funding. Also 5.5 postdocs worked
at the institute of whom 2.2 funded by NWO.
16 doctoral dissertations were successfully defended. A total of 91 journal papers, 18 (contributions
to) books, 86 refereed contributions to conference proceedings and 6 other professional publications
were published. Members of the institute served as editors-in-chief, associated editors or members of
the editorial boards of international journals and book series. The institute was visited by 65 (foreign)
scientists.
Personalia
In September 2015, Jiřı́ Kosinka was appointed as a tenure track assistant professor in the research
group Scientific Visualization and Computer Graphics. Jiřı́ obtained his PhD from Charles University
in Prague, Czech Republic, in 2006. From 2006 to 2014, he held post-doctoral positions in geometric
modelling at the Johannes Kepler university in Linz, Austria, at the University of Oslo, Norway, and
at the University of Cambridge, UK. From 2014 to 2015, he was a senior research associate and an
EPSRC IAA KT Fellow at the Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge. His research focuses
on curve and surface representations in geometric modelling and computer graphics.
In September 2015, Mircea Lungu was appointed as tenure track assistant professor in the research
group Software Engineering. He obtained his PhD degree in 2009 from the University of Lugano in
Switzerland. Between 2010 and 2015 he was a post-doctoral research fellow at the University of Bern
in Switzerland. His research is in analyzing software systems and their evolution to improve the tools
and processes of software engineering. He is also researching tools and techniques that accelerate the
way people learn.
Prof.dr. J.B.T.M. Roerdink
Scientific Director
Johann Bernoulli Institute for
Mathematics and Computer Science
1
JBI Annual Report
Contents
Introduction 1
Governing body and support staff 3
Address information 4
List of scientific programmes and tenured scientific staff 5
Research schools 7
1. Algebra 9
2. Computational Mechanics and Numerical Mathematics 15
3. Dynamical Systems, Geometry & Mathematical Physics 27
4. Probability and Statistics 45
5. Systems, Control and Applied Analysis 57
6. Distributed Systems 71
7. Fundamental Computing Science 87
8. Intelligent Systems 93
9. Scientific Visualization and Computer Graphics 117
10. Software Engineering 129
Colloquium Computer Science 2015 – List of Speakers 138
Colloquium Mathematics 2015 – List of Speakers 141
2
JBI Annual Report
Governing body and support staff 2015
Scientific director
Prof.dr. J.T.B.M. Roerdink
Scientific Board
Prof.dr. E.C. Wit – chairman
(professor of mathematics, RUG)
Prof.dr. G. Vegter
(professor of mathematics, RUG)
Prof.dr. M. Aiello
(professor of computer science, RUG)
Prof.dr. J.T.B.M. Roerdink
(professor of computer science, RUG)
Management team fte
J. de Jong-Schlukebir (controller) 0.6
R.G.A. Gmelig Meyling (controller) 0.4
International Advisory Panel (IAP)
Prof dr H.A. van der Vorst (chair)
Prof dr J. van Mill
Prof dr G. Grimmett
Prof dr M. Lenzerini
Prof dr F. Vaandrager
Administrative staff
Secretary of Research Institute
H.M. Steenhuis 0.5
D.J. Hansen 0.8
Secretaries
E.D. Elshof 1.0
I. Schelhaas 0.8
3
JBI Annual Report
Address:
Postal address:
P.O. Box 407
9700 AK Groningen
Visiting address:
Bernoulliborg
Nijenborgh 9
9747 AG Groningen
The Netherlands
Tel : 050-3633973
Fax : 050-3633800
email : jbibureau@rug.nl
www : http://www.rug.nl/jbi
4
JBI Annual Report
List of scientific programmes and tenured scientific staff
Mathematics
page
Programme 1 : Algebra 9
Prof.dr. J. Top
Dr. A.V. Kiselev
Programme 1 : Computational Mechanics & 15
Numerical Mathematics
Prof.dr. A.E.P. Veldman
Dr.ir. R.W.C.P. Verstappen
Dr.ir. F.W. Wubs
Dr. B. Carpentieri
Programme 2 : Dynamical Systems, Geometry & Mathematical
Physics
27
Prof.dr. H.W. Broer
Prof.dr. G. Vegter
Prof.dr.ir. H.S.V. de Snoo
Prof.dr. A.C.D. van Enter
Prof.dr. H. Waalkens
Prof.dr. E. Verbitskiy
Dr. K. Efstathiou
Dr. D. Valesin
Dr. A. Sterk
Programme 3 : Probability & Statistics 45
Prof.dr. E. Wit
Dr. M. Grzegorczyk
Dr. W.P. Krijnen
Programme 4 : Systems, Control & Applied Analysis 57
Prof.dr. A.J. van der Schaft
Dr. K. Camlibel
Prof.dr. H.L. Trentelman
5
JBI Annual Report
Computer Science
Programme 5 : Distributed Systems 71
Prof.dr. M. Aiello
Dr. A. Lazovik
Dr. D. Bucur
Programme 6 : Fundamental Computing Science 87
Prof.dr. G.R. Renardel de Lavalette
Dr. J.A. Pérez
Programme 7 : Intelligent Systems 93
Dr. M. Biehl
Prof.dr.sc.techn. N. Petkov
Dr. M.H.F. Wilkinson
Programme 8 : Scientific Visualization & Computer Graphics 117
Dr. H. Bekker
Prof.dr. J.B.T.M. Roerdink
Prof.dr. A. Telea
Dr. J. Kosinka
Programme 9 : Software Engineering 129
Prof.dr. P. Avgeriou
Dr. A. Ampatzoglou
Dr. M. Lungu
6
JBI Annual Report
Research schools
Researchers of the JBI participate in the following research schools:
1. Dutch Research School in Mathematics (WONDER)
Coordinating institution: University of Utrecht
Director: Prof.dr. J.E. Frank
Participating JBI programme(s): DS&MP, Geometry
2. Dutch Institute of Systems and Control (DISC)
Coordinating institution: Delft University of Technology
Director: Prof.dr H. Nijmeijer
Participating JBI programme(s): SCAA
3. The J.M. Burgers Centre for Fluid Dynamics
Coordinating institution: Delft University of Technology
Director: Prof.dr.G.J.F. van Heijst
Participating JBI programme(s): CM&NM
4. Institute for Programming Research and Algorithmics (IPA)
Coordinating institution: University of Eindhoven
Director: Prof.dr. W.J. Fokkink
Participating JBI programme(s): SE
5. Advanced School of Computing and Imaging (ASCI)
Coordinating institution: Delft University of Technology
Director: Prof.dr.ir. H. Bal
Participating JBI programme(s): IS, SV&CG
6. School of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences (BCN)
Coordinating institution: University of Groningen
Director: Prof.dr. R.A. Schoevers
Participating JBI programme(s): SV&CG
7
JBI Annual Report
8
JBI Annual Report
1. Algebra
Group leader: Prof.dr. J. Top
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof.dr. J. Top RuG 1.0
Tenure track source fte
Dr. A.V. Kiselev RuG 1.0
Emeritus source fte
Prof.dr. M. van der Put RuG 0.0
Postdoc source fte
Dr. M.C. Kronberg NWO 1.0
PhD students
A.S.I. Anema NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Top)
E. Ruiz Duarte Conacyt 1.0
(supervisor: Top)
S. Ringers RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Kiselev)
T.T. Nguyen VIED (Vietnam) 1.0
(supervisor: Top)
Guests
M. Kronberg, Oldenburg, Germany
9
JBI Annual Report
1.1 Research Program
1. Number theory and Algebraic geometry
Arithmetic properties of elliptic curves over a number field or a function field, like the rank
and generators of the Mordell-Weil group, are the subject of study. Also work is done on
applications to Diophantine equations, coding theory and arithmetic algebraic geometry; in
particular a study of the number of rational points on curves over finite fields. Moreover, the
history and the algebraic geometry of various series of geometrical models is studied.
2. Geometry of differential equations
This concerns algebraic, analytic (e.g., multisummability) and algorithmic aspects of linear
differential and linear difference equations; differential Galois theory and its applications, in
particular to symbolic (algorithmic) solvability of equations; (Lie) symmetries of non-linear
differential equations; isomonodromy and in particular the six Painlevé equations; nonlinear
first order equations, algebraic theory in positive characteristic.
Moreover, developing and applying algebraic, geometric, and algorithmic techniques to nonlin-
ear partial differential equations of Mathematical Physics arising, in particular, from the basic
models for the geometry of fundamental interactions. This research centers around the construc-
tion of the Schouten and Poisson brackets and aims at the BV- and deformation quantisation of
such models.
1.2 Overview of scientific results
J. Top
With M. van der Put, Top started a project on linear differential equations in positive characteristics.
One of the goals is to describe analogues of the classical hypergeometric equations in terms of so-
called stratified bundles. This has relations with work of Dos Santos and of Kindler.
The papers of Top and M. van der Put on first order (nonlinear) differential equations appeared in
the Journal of Symbolic Computation; one is joint work with L.X. Chau Ngo (Quy Nhon University,
Vietnam) and K.A. Nguyen (HUTECH, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam).
Top continued his collaboration with J.S. Chahal (Provo, Utah). Two joint papers on “albime trian-
gles” appeared in Expositiones Math. and in Nieuw Archief voor Wiskunde. A third joint paper related
to this theme is accepted by Rocky Mountain J. of Math. Moreover, we work on a joint manuscript
discussing the last Chapter of the Disquisitiones by Gauss.
Top participated in a DIAMANT workshop, and he co-orgainzed two workshops: a joint session of
the North German Algebraic Geometry Seminar and the Netherlands-Belgium Algebraic geometry
days in Nijmegen, and a workshop on Moduli Spaces and Arithmetic Geometry at the Lorentz Center
in Leiden (the latter one with an outstanding list of participants).
10
JBI Annual Report
A. Kiselev
Kiselev lifted the technique of deformation quantisation by Kontsevich (1997/2003) from finite-
dimensional Poisson geometries to the infinite-dimensional geometry of Poisson field models. Re-
lying on the use of geometry of iterated variations (Kiselev 2013), this extension result culminated the
five-year research by A. K. at the JBI RuG; it will be discussed with M. Kontsevich during Arthemy’s
visit to the IHÉS in November–December 2016.
Kiselev reported this result at the following platforms:
- XXIII International conference ‘Integrable systems & quantum symmetries,’ CVUT Prague,
Czech Republic (23–28 June 2015).1
- International workshop ‘Supersymmetry and quantum symmetries’ – SQS’15, JINR Dubna,
Russia (3–8 August 2015).
Three more talks containing joint results were pronounced by A. Bouisaghouane and R. Buring in
Děčı́n, Czech Republic at the III International workshop ‘Symmetries of discrete systems & processes’
(3–7 August 2015).
Also, S. Griffioen and A. Kiselev finalised their recreational-math paper in which they outlined and
illustrated a strategy to choose new colour(s) to paint the new line(s) on a metro map. The joint paper
will appear in the spring issue 38(1) of The Mathematical Intelligencer.
A.S.I. Anema
Anema finished essentially all problems described in his PhD thesis project. He is now in the process
of finalizing his PhD thesis.
S. Ringers
Sietse Ringers continued the part of his PhD thesis discussing anonymous credential protocols in
cryptography. Among others, he lectured about this at the DIAMANT meeting in May. A paper on
this appeared in the WISTP 2015 conference proceedings.
Nguyen Tu Thinh
Very unfortunately, for health reasons Tu stopped with his PhD research in February and returned to
Vietnam.
Eduardo Ruiz Duarte
Eduardo continues his project of extending results by Soomro and Top to the case of genus two curves.
He was also involved in two of the bachelor’s projects of 2015; a short joint paper on one of these is
due to appear in the journal for high school children “Pythagoras”.
1Because the conference ISQS’23 in Prague attracted a large number of participants, the peer-reviewed proceedings of
that event will appear in January 2016 in the issue J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 670.
11
JBI Annual Report
Max Kronberg
Max joined our group in September. We intend to collaborate on subjects treated in his PhD thesis
(Oldenburg), and extend work by our former PhD student Soomro with his assistance.
1.3 Research subjects
A.S.I. Anema: elliptic curves and surfaces.
E. R. Duarte: Hyperelliptic curves, applications to cryptography and number theory.
A. Kiselev: Geometry of differential equations, integrable systems, geometry of fundamental interac-
tions, BV- and deformation quantisation, brackets, mathematical physics.
M.C. Kronberg: Elliptic curves, torsion points on jacobians.
T.T. Nguyen: project was stopped.
S. Ringers: Attribute Based Credential schemes.
J. Top: arithmetical algebraic geometry, in particular: elliptic curves and surfaces, curves over finite
fields and over function fields, history of geometrical models, Galois representations, number theory;
differential equations.
1.4 Publications
Articles in peer-reviewed refereed journals
– L.X. Chau Ngo, K.A. Nguyen, M. van der Put, J. Top, Equivalence of differential equations of
order one, J. Symb. Comput., 71, 2015, 47–59.
– J.A. Cruz Morales and M. van der Put, Stokes matrices for the quantum differential equations
of some Fano varieties, Eur. J. Math. 1, 2015, 138–153.
– J. Eising, D. Radcliffe, and J. Top, A Simple Answer to Gelfand’s Question, Amer. Math.
Monthly, 122, 2015, 234–245.
– M. van der Put and J. Top, Stratified order one differential equations in positive characteristic,
J. Symb. Comput., 68, 2015, 308–315.
– M. van der Put, The Stokes phenomenon and some applications, SIGMA, 11, Paper 036, 2015,
13 pages.
12
JBI Annual Report
Articles in peer-reviewed refereed proceedings
– J.-H. Hoepman, W. Lueks, and S. Ringers, On Linkability and Malleability in Self-blindable
Credentials, Information Security Theory and Practice: 9th IFIP WG 11.2 Int. Conf., WISTP
2015. Ed. by N. R. Akram and S. Jajodia. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015,
203218.
– A.V. Kiselev and A.O. Krutov, Gardner’s deformation of the Krasil’shchik–Kersten system,
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 621, Proc. 7th Int. workshop ‘Group analysis of differential equations and
integrable systems’ (15–19 June 2014, Larnaca, Cyprus), Paper 012007, 2015, 19 pages.
1.5 External funding and collaboration
External funding
The Ph.D. position of Ane Anema (2012–2016) is funded by NWO via the cluster DIAMANT.
The postdoc position of Max Kronberg (2015–2016) is funded by NWO via the culster DIAMANT.
The PhD project of T.T. Nguyen (until February) is funded by the Lotus program (Vietnam).
The PhD position of Eduardo Ruiz Duarte is funded by Conacyt (Mexico)
Kiselev won the visitor grant from the IHÉS (Bures-sur-Yvette, France), which will allow for his col-
laboration with Kontsevich in November–December 2016.
External collaboration
See 1.2.
Kiselev continued his collaboration with Andrey Krutov from Ivanovo State Power University (ISPU)
in Russia. In early April, Arthemy Kiselev visited Steklov MI RAS (Moscow) and ISPU for scientific
collaboration.
1.6 Further information
Top served on three PhD evaluation committees: for Julio Brau (Leiden, supervisor Peter Steven-
hagen), for Gergely Alpár (Nijmegen, supervisor Bart Jacobs), and for Max Kronberg (Oldenburg,
supervisor Andreas Stein).
Top and his PhD students are involved in the North German Algebraic Geometry Seminars (NoGAGS,
a collaboration between Göttingen, Hannover, Berlin, Hamburg, Bremen and Groningen), and in the
13
JBI Annual Report
NWO-cluster DIAMANT.
Top gave an invited lecture in Tokyo during an arithmetic algebraic geometry conference.
Top gave several lectures popularizing math, e.g., for the Groningen “college caroussel”. Moreover (as
in previous years) he organized the regional math olympiad at the RUG, followed by several training
sessions for gifted high school children.
Kiselev gave five talks at the
- Complex Analysis seminar (Steklov MI RAS in Moscow, Russia) in April,
- Algebra, Geometry and Mathematical Physics (MPIM Bonn, Germany) and
Floris Takens – Dynamical Systems seminar (JBI RuG, The Netherlands) in May, and at the
- seminar on Lie algebras, Riemannian surfaces and Mathematical Physics (Independent Univer-
sity of Moscow, Russia) and
Quantum Gravity seminar (IMAPP RU Nijmegen, The Netherlands) in November.
Through the entire year 2015, Kiselev himself was the co-organizer of the JBI Math colloquium.
Involved in the NWO-cluster Geometry & Quantum Theory (GQT), Arthemy attended two confer-
ences and graduate schools which were organised by that cluster in June and October.
14
JBI Annual Report
2. Computational Mechanics and Numerical Mathematics
Group leader:
Prof.dr.ir. R.W.C.P. Verstappen
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof.dr.ir. R.W.C.P. Verstappen RUG 1.0
Dr.ir. F.W. Wubs RUG 1.0
Tenure track source fte
Dr. B. Carpentieri RUG 1.0
Emeritus
Prof.dr. A.E.P. Veldman
Postdocs
Ir. P. van der Plas STW 1.0
PhD students
S. Baars MSc (since 1-2-2015) NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Wubs)
Y.-M. Bu MSc NSFC/RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Carpentieri)
X.-M. Gu MSc NSFC/RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Carpentieri)
S. Kotnala MSc NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Wubs)
J. Liao MSc UE 1.0
(supervisor: Carpentieri)
Ir. J.H. Seubers STW 1.0
(supervisors: Van der Plas, Veldman)
Z. Li Shen MSc NSFC/RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Carpentieri)
M.H. Silvis MSc NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Verstappen)
W. Song MSc UE 1.0
(supervisor: Wubs)
D.-L. Sun MSc (since 1-8-2015) NSFC/RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Carpentieri)
15
JBI Annual Report
2.1 Research Program
With the continuing progress in numerical mathematics and computer technology, the impact of com-
puter simulation on society is rapidly increasing. Our group specializes in numerical algorithms for
the simulation of fluid dynamics and transport phenomena (Computational Fluid Dynamics CFD). On
the one hand research is focussed on basic advancement of numerical algorithms; on the other hand
- through extensive cooperation with external research groups - these methods are made available to
advance knowledge in other (applied) areas of science and technology.
Turbulence In most applications, the Navier-Stokes equations do not provide a trackable model for
turbulent flow. Therefore, finding a coarsed-grained description is one of the main challenges to tur-
bulence research. A most promising methodology for that is large-eddy simulation (LES). The basic
idea of LES is that the large scales of motion remain virtually unchanged, whereas the calculation
of all small-scale turbulence for which numerical resolution is not available is avoided. This keeps
the computational effort within reasonable limits, but a price is paid in terms of accuracy. To im-
prove the accuracy, we perform research into scale-truncation models for large-eddy simulation. The
mathematical rationale behind our approach focusses on approximations that preserve the underlying
PDE structure as well as on regularizations that truncate the nonlinear interactions with small scales
of motions.
Free-surface flow and fluid-structure interaction The main free-surface flow research concerns
application in maritime and coastal engineering. Numerical simulation methods are developed to
predict hydrodynamic wave loading on moving and/or deforming offshore platforms (fluid-structure
interaction) and coastal structures. The basic tool is the in-house developed simulation method Com-
FLOW. Fluid-structure interaction is also central in our research concerning bio-medical fluid dynam-
ics (with UMCG), like flow in elastic arteries or in the human ear (cochlea).
Sparse-matrix solvers The repeated solution of large systems of equations in most simulation meth-
ods makes the quest for improved matrix solvers another major research area. In-house a number of
multilevel preconditoners have been developed. For general systems, we designed MRILU (Matrix
renumbering ILU) and VBARMS (Variable Block Algebraic Recursive Multilevel Solver). MRILU
can be applied to discretizations of coupled PDEs. It particularly performs well for convection-
diffusion equations. VBARMS almost automatically exploits any available block structure during
the factorization, achieving increased throughput during the computation and improved reliability on
realistic applications. Additionally, the special purpose multilevel preconditioner HYMLS (Hybrid
Multilevel solver) is designed to meet the incompressiblity constraint efficiently. Both VBARMS and
HYMLS are parallelized using MPI. Typical application areas of the solvers are fluid flow, structural
problems, electro magnetics and bifurcation analysis.
16
JBI Annual Report
Bifurcation analysis Here the emphasis is on numerical methods for investigating the bifurcation
behaviour of fluid flow, also in the presence of noise. Applications range from academic to real world
problems like the lid-driven cavity problem and the global ocean circulation, respectively.
2.2 Overview of scientific results
In cooperation with NLR a PhD project (Rozema) was completed in which low-dissipation discretiza-
tions for subsonic turbulent flows and minimum-dissipation models for LES are developed. In a paral-
lel project (Bandringa) the low-dissipation methods and models are extended to unstructured grids, in
cooperation with MARIN. The joint work with Stanford University (Center for Turbulence Research)
has resulted into a journal paper. The PhD project on scale truncation models for LES (Silvis) has
led to a list of requirements that a subgrid model should satisfy in order to possess the symmetry
and conservation properties of the Navier-Stokes equations. Results have been presented at various
international conferences.
The previous phase of the STW-funded free-surface project on hydrodynamic wave loading has been
formally finalized with the release of ComFLOW version 3.9.5 In the new phase, called ComMo-
tion, several extensions to the method are being designed featuring the interaction with moving and
deforming objects. For the numerical coupling between solid-body dynamics and fluid dynamics a
quasi-simultaneous class of methods is developed that is stable for any added-mass ratio. With the
same approach, the coupling with elastically deforming objects can be simulated in a numerically sta-
ble way. Further, the influence of current is studied; an important ingredient is an absorbing boundary
condition, generalizing the work of Duz (who defended his PhD thesis). Finally, local grid refinement
and parallelization enhance the simulation efficiency.
Figure 1: Numerical simulation (with local grid refinement) of a lifeboat falling into a breaking wave.
In the research on sparse-matrix solvers three new parallel block solvers are produced, based on
the block Jacobi, the restricted additive Schwarz method and the Schur complement preconditioners.
Their performance was assessed for solving turbulent Navier-Stokes equations on a suite of two-
and three-dimensional test cases, among which the DPW3-W1 wing configuration of the third AIAA
17
JBI Annual Report
Drag Prediction Workshop. The results show that the solver may be noticeably more robust than
other state-of-the-art solvers for comparable memory usage. Additionally, a new algebraic recursive
multilevel sparse approximate inverse preconditioner has been developed for solving general systems
of linear equations. This solver combines recursive combinatorial algorithms, multilevel mechanisms
and overlapping techniques to maximize sparsity in the approximate inverse factors and to reduce the
overall factorization costs. In a joint project with the University of Chengdu, China, a new quasi-
minimal residual variant of nonsymmetric Krylov methods has been developed.
In the numerical bifurcation analysis the Jacobi-Davidson QR method available in the software pack-
age PHIST has been extended to cases with singular mass matrices and nonsymmetric system ma-
trices. Next we focussed on the solution of a generalized Lyapunov equation which results from a
study into the influence of noise on the state of an ocean model. The system matrix is sparse and
huge. Moreover the occurring mass matrix is singular, which leads to additional complications. A
first variant has been made that is able to solve a 2D problem more efficient than methods proposed in
the literature. Results of these tests will be compiled into a paper. Currently the method is improved
to make it run efficiently for 3D ocean models.
2.3 Research subjects
S. Baars: Efficient solution of generalized Lyapunov equations.
H.J. Bandringa: simulation of complex flows in maritime applications.
Y. Bu: matrix factorization methods for Markov chains, preconditioners for iterative solution of linear
systems of equations.
B. Carpentieri: numerical linear algebra, Krylov subspace methods, parallel multilevel solvers, elec-
tromagnetics, cardiac modeling.
X.M. Gu: Krylov subspace methods for solving non-Hermitian linear systems with application to
fractional differential equations.
D.J. Kort: numerical flow simulations with local grid refinement
S. Kotnala: efficient solution of stochastic PDEs.
J. Liao: parallel solvers for block-structured matrices.
R. Luppes: two-phase flow modeling for maritime applications.
P. van der Plas: local grid refinement for free-surface flow simulation.
W. Rozema: detailed numerical simulation of turbulent flow.
J.H. Seubers: interaction between extreme waves and floating bodies.
Z. Li Shen: matrix solvers for Markov chains problems.
M.H. Silvis: models for the larger eddies in turbulent flow.
W. Song: numerical linear algebra for bifurcation analysis on high-performance computers.
D.-L. Sun: numerical linear algebra methods in computational nanophotonics
A.E.P. Veldman: modeling and simulation of fluid flows in engineering applications, free-surface
flows, fluid-structure interaction.
18
JBI Annual Report
R.W.C.P. Verstappen: mathematics of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), modeling and simu-
lation of turbulence.
F.W. Wubs: preconditioners for sparse systems and Lyapunov equations in CFD; application to sta-
bility and bifurcation analysis and the study of the influence of noise on bifurcation points.
2.4 Publications
PhD defenses
– B. Duz, Wave generation, propagation and absorbtion in CFD simulations for free-surface
flows, Promotores: R.H.M. Huijsmans, A.E.P. Veldman, Delft University of Technology, Septem-
ber 21, 2015, 177 pages.
– J. Liao, VBARMS: A variable block algebraic recursive multilevel solver for sparse linear
systems, Promotor: A.E.P.Veldman; co-promotor: B. Carpentieri, University of Groningen,
November 15, 2015, 113 pages.
– W. Rozema, Low-dissipation methods and models for the simulation of turbulent subsonic flow
- Theory and applications, Promotores: R.W.C.P. Verstappen, A.E.P. Veldman; co-promotor:
J.C. Kok, University of Groningen, October 30, 2015, 193 pages.
Articles in scientific journals
– R. Albanese, B. Carpentieri, M. Cavinato, S. Minucci, R. Palmaccio, A. Portone, G. Rubinacci,
P. Testoni, S. Ventre, F. Villone, Effects of asymmetric vertical disruptions on ITER compo-
nents, Fusion Engineering and Design, 94, 2015, 7-21. doi:10.1016/j.fusengdes.2015.02.034
– X.-M. Gu, T.-Z. Huang, B. Carpentieri, L. Li and C. Wen, A hybridized iterative algorithm of
the BiCORSTAB and GPBiCOR methods for solving non-Hermitian linear systems, Computers
& Mathematics with Applications, 70, 2015, 3019–3031. doi:10.1016/j.camwa.2015.10.012
– W. Rozema, H.J. Bae, P. Moin and R. Verstappen, Minimum-dissipation models for large-eddy
simulation, Physics of Fluids, 27, paperno 085107, 2015, 14 pages. doi 10.1063/1.4928700.
– Z.-Li Shen, T.-Z. Huang, B. Carpentieri and C. Wen, A Cost-Effective Smoothed Multigrid
with Modified Neighborhood-Based Aggregation for Markov Chains, Mathematical Problems
in Engineering, 2015, article ID 816935, 15 pages. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/816935
19
JBI Annual Report
– R. Wemmenhove, R. Luppes, A.E.P. Veldman and T. Bunnik, Numerical simulation of hydro-
dynamic wave loading by a compressible two-phase flow method, Comp. & Fluids, 114, 2015,
218–231.
Articles in conference proceedings
– H.J. Bae, W. Rozema, P. Moin, R. Verstappen, Minimum-dissipation models for large-eddy sim-
ulation, 68th Meeting APS Division Fluid Dynamics, 22-24 November 2015, Boston, Bulletin
of the American Physical Society, 60, (21), 2015, 118 pages.
– B. Duz, R.H.M. Huijsmans, P.R. Wellens, M.J.A. Borsboom, A.E.P. Veldman and R. Luppes,
Generating and absorbing boundary conditions for free-surface flow simulations in offshore
applications, In Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engng OMAE2015, St.
John’s (Canada), 31 May–5 June 2015, paper OMAE2015-41577, 11 pages.
– H.J.L. van der Heiden, A.E.P. Veldman, R. Luppes, P. van der Plas, J. Helder and T.Bunnik.
Turbulence modeling for free-surface flow simulations in offshore applications, In Proc. 34th
Int. Conf. Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engng OMAE2015, St. John’s (Canada), 31 May–5 June
2015, paper OMAE2015-41578, 10 pages.
– J. Liao, A. Bonfiglioli, B. Carpentieri, M. Sosonkina, A parallel multilevel incomplete LU
factorization preconditioner that exploits block matrix structures, In Proc. 27th Int. Conf. on
Parallel Computational Fluid Dynamics (ParCFD), Montreal, Canada, 17-20 May, 2015.
– P. van der Plas, A.E.P. Veldman, H.J.L. van der Heiden and R. Luppes. Adaptive grid refinement
for free-surface flow simulations in offshore applications, In Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Ocean,
Offshore and Arctic Engng OMAE2015, St. John’s (Canada), 31 May–5 June 2015, paper
OMAE2015-42029, 10 pages.
– W. Rozema, R.W.C.P. Verstappen, J.C. Kok and A.E.P. Veldman, A symmetry-preserving dscretiza-
tion and regularization subgrid model for compressible turbulence, In Direct and Large-Eddy
Simulation IX, J. Frolich, J. Kuerten, B.J. Geurts, V. Armenio (eds.), ERCOFTAC Series, 20,
Springer, Berlin, 2015, 319–326.
– M.H. Silvis, R. Verstappen, Constructing Physically-Consistent Subgrid-Scale Models for Large-
Eddy Simulation of Incompressible Turbulent Flows, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. on Turbulence and
Interactions (TI2015), November 2-6, 2015, Cargese, France.
– M.H. Silvis, R. Verstappen, Physically-consistent subgrid models for large-eddy simulation of
incompressible turbulent flows, arXiv: 1510:07881, 2015.
20
JBI Annual Report
– M. Silvis and R. Verstappen, Going Beyound Eddy Viscosity: Finding a Minimal Representa-
tion of Subgrid Scale Stresses in Large Eddy Simulation, In Proc. 15th European Turbulence
Conference (ETC15), 25-28 August, 2015, Delft.
– M. Sosonkina, B. Carpentieri, J. Liao, Parallel multilevel incomplete LU factorization precon-
ditioner with variable-block structure, In Proc. SIAM Conference on Applied Linear Algebra,
Ocober 26–30 Atlanta, USA 2015.
– F.X. Trias, A. Gorobets, A. Oliva and R.W.C.P. Verstappen, New Differential Operators for
Large-Eddy Simulation and Regularization Modeling, In Direct and Large-Eddy Simulation IX,
J. Frolich, J. Kuerten, B.J. Geurts, V. Armenio (eds.), ERCOFTAC Series, 20, Springer, Berlin,
2015, 29–36.
– A.E.P. Veldman, R. Luppes, P. van der Plas, H.J.L. van der Heiden, J. Helder and T. Bunnik,
Turbulence modeling for locally-refined free-surface flow simulations in offshore applications,
In Proc. Int. Symp. Offshore and Polar Eng. ISOPE2015, Kona (Hawaii), 23-27 June 2015,
paper ISOPE2015-TPC-0282, 8 pages.
– A.E.P. Veldman, R. Luppes, P. van der Plas, H.J.L. van der Heiden, J. Helder and T. Bunnik.
Numerical simulation of turbulent free-surface flow in offshore applications, In: F. Salvatore, R.
Broglia and R. Muscari (eds), VI Int. Conf. on Computational Methods in Marine Engineering
MARINE 2015, Rome, 15-17 June 2015, 963–980.
– R. Verstappen, On Scale Separation in Large Eddy Simulation, In Direct and Large-Eddy Sim-
ulation IX, J. Frolich, J. Kuerten, B.J. Geurts, V. Armenio (eds.), ERCOFTAC Series, 20,
Springer, Berlin, 2015, 3–14.
– R. Verstappen, Truncation of Scales by Relaxation, In Proc. 15th European Turbulence Conf.
(ETC15), 25-28 August, 2015, Delft.
– R. Verstappen, Scale Truncation in Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulent Flow by Regularization,
In Proc. 8th Int. Congress on Industrial and Applied Mathematics (ICIAM), August 10-14,
2015, Beijing.
– R. Verstappen, M. Silvis Scale-truncating relaxation models for large-eddy simulations, 68th
Meeting APS Division Fluid Dynamics, 22-24 November 2015, Boston, Bulletin of the Ameri-
can Physical Society, 60 ( 21), 2015, 418 pages.
– R. Verstappen, A minimum-relaxation model for large-eddy simulation, In Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
on Turbulence and Interactions (TI2015), November 2-6, 2015, Cargese, France.
–
21
JBI Annual Report
2.5 External funding and collaboration
Most of our PhD projects are being funded externally from national and international resources. The
PhD-students with an Ubbo-Emmius funding perform two years of research at RUG and two years at
a partner institute. We summarize the situation:
– The ComMotion project concerning the interaction between extreme waves and moving or de-
forming objects, in cooperation with TU Delft and MARIN, is funded by STW, the Topsector
Water and several offshore companies. Its budget is around 1 MEuro. Researchers involved are
Veldman, Van der Plas and Seubers.
– The STW Perspectief programme granted the SLING proposal, which aims to study sloshing of
liquid natural gas (LNG) in large cargo tanks onboard LNG carriers. The project is a coopera-
tion with TU Delft, TU Eindhoven, University Twente and MARIN, with a total budget of more
than 5 MEuro (3.4 MEuro funded by STW and 1.9 MEuro by the European maritime industry).
As part of SLING, a PhD-project at RuG will start in 2016.
– Most of the turbulence research is funded by the Free Competition of NWO EW (Silvis), the
Netherlands Enterpise Agency (RVO), Topsector Water (Bandringa) and the Ubbo Emmius
Fund (Rozema). The exchange with UPC Barcelona is mainly paid by the spanish Ministerio de
Economia y Competitividad and the Generalitat de Cataluyna. Silvis and Verstappen received
a grant of $7.000 from Stanford University to participate in their 2016 Summer Program on
Turbulence.
– The Ubbo Emmius Fund and the German Aerospace Laboratory each sponsor two years of a
PhD project on numerical algorithms for exascale computers (Song). The NWO-complexity
program funds a PhD project on the analysis of the Kurioshio Current using Stochastic Partial
Differential Equations (Kotnala). The NWO program Mathematics of Planet Earth supports
a PhD-project on the study of efficient Lyapunov solvers for the oceanographic applications
(Baars).
– The Ubbo Emmius Fund and the National Natural Science Foundation of China sponsor a PhD
project on the design and parallelization of multilevel matrix solvers for partial differential equa-
tions (Bu). The Ubbo Emmius Fund and the University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China sponsor two years each of two PhD projects on the design and parallelization of mul-
tilevel matrix solvers for solving partial differential equations (Gu Xianming and Shen Zhaoli).
They also fund a follow-up project on numerical linear algebra methods and applications in
computational nanophotonics that started in August 2015 (Dong-Lin Sun).
22
JBI Annual Report
Societal relevance
As indicated above, part of our PhD and MSc research is carried out in physical or technological
applications. Close cooperation exists with several university research laboratories, with all Dutch
Technological Institutes (GTI’s), and with several industries: multi-nationals as well as small and
medium enterprises.
(Inter)national collaboration
Various bilateral contacts exist with research groups inside and outside the Netherlands, leading to
e.g. joint PhD projects, participation in summer schools, traineeships for Master’s students and/or to
joint publications.
– The research on free-surface flows and hydrodynamic wave loading, focussed around the Com-
FLOW development, is embedded in world-wide joint-industry projects with main partners the
Maritime Research Institute MARIN, TU Delft, Deltares, FORCE Technology Norway and
several offshore companies and shipyards throughout the world.
– The research on methods for bifurcation analysis for ocean circulation models is carried out
in close cooperation with prof. H.A. Dijkstra from the Institute for Marine and Atmospheric
Research (IMAU) in Utrecht. The project on numerical linear algebra for bifurcation analysis
on high-performace computers is a cooperation with Dr. J. Thies and Dr. A. Basermann from
DLR and Prof. A. Klawonn from the Technical University of Cologne. Furthermore there is
cooperation with Prof. M. Bollhoeffer from the Technical University of Braunschweig on the
solution of sparse linear systems by multilevel ILU preconditioners, and with Dr. Hochstenbach
from TUE on Krylov subspace methods and the numerical solution of Lyapunov equations.
– Our turbulence research comprises cooperation with the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
in Barcelona, TU München, TU Berlin, KU Leuven and Stanford University. We also work
together with MARIN (PhD-project Bandringa) and NLR (PhD-project Rozema).
– Activity on sparse matrix solvers has been conducted in cooperation with the University of
Chengdu (China), leading to two successful joint proposal submissions under NSFC’s (Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China) talent funding program series, namely the Young
Scientists Fund on block Krylov subspace methods for solving linear systems with multiple
right-hand sides, and the Tianyuan Fund for Mathematics on Krylov subspace methods with
applications in electromagnetic scattering.
– Cooperation is continued with Prof. Eric Deleersnijder (TUD and Institute of Mechanics, Ma-
terials and Civil Engineering (IMMC) & Earth and Life Institute (ELI) at Universit catholique
de Louvain, Belgium) on the numerical analysis of mixing models for geophysical flows.
23
JBI Annual Report
(Inter)national PhD committees
Carpentieri participated in one PhD defense at RUG. Veldman was a (joint) PhD promotor at TU
Delft, and participated in 3 PhD defense committees outside RUG: University Twente (2×) and TU
Eindhoven. Verstappen participated in 3 PhD defense committee (UPC Barcelona and 2x RUG) Wubs
participated in one PhD defense at RUG.
2.6 Further information
Carpentieri is on the editorial board of the Journal of Applied Mathematics He was co-presenter at
ParCFD 2015 (Montreal), SIAM Applied Linaer Algebra 2015 (Atlanta), the Burgersday 2015 (Delft)
and Preconditioning 2015 (Eindhoven). He co-authored two poster presentations at the Woudschouten
Conference on Scientific Computing (Woudschouten).
Veldman is a scientific consultant of the National Aerospace Laboratory NLR (Amsterdam) and he
is a member of the Advisory Board of the Maritime Research Institute MARIN (Wageningen). Fur-
ther, he is on the editorial board of Journal of Engineering Mathematics and Journal of Algorithms
and Computational Technology. He (co-)presented lectures at the 34th International Conference on
Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering OMAE2015 (St. Johns), the ECCOMAS Conference on
Computational Methods on Marine Engineering MARINE2015 (Rome) and the International Sympo-
sium on Offshore and Polar Engineering ISOPE2015 (Kona, Hawaii).
Verstappen is member of the NWO committee for Scientific Use of Supercomputers (WGS), the Steer-
ing Committee of the Special Interest Group Large Eddy Simulation of ERCOFTAC (European Re-
search Community On Flow Turbulence And Combustion), and the International Scientific Committee
of the Foundation for the Progress of Heat and Mass Transfer (FTCM). He is member of the Scientific
Advisory Board High Performance Computing and Visualisation (WAR HPC/V) of the University of
Groningen and Erasmus coordinator University Groningen–UPC Barcelona. He gave 5 presentations,
co-presented 9 papers. He is on the editorial board of Computers and Fluids.
Wubs and Carpentieri organized a minisymposium at the international conference on preconditioning
techniques for scientific and industrial applications in Eindhoven. Wubs and the PhD students Baars,
Song, Liao and Bu also gave talks at this conference. Wubs represents the group in the committee of
the Werkgemeenschap Scientific Computing.
Several PhD students gave presentions at conferences and workshops, e.g. Seubers at the Spring Meet-
24
JBI Annual Report
ing of the Dutch-Flemish Working Community on Scientific Computing (Antwerpen), Van der Plas at
the ASME 34th International Symposium on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering (St. John’s,
Canada), Liao at the 27th International Conference on Parallel Computational Fluid Dynamics Par-
CFD (Montreal), Silvis at the 15th European Turbulence Conference (Delft) and the 4th International
Conference on Turbulence and Interactions (Cargese, France). Also talks and posters at the “J.M.
Burgersdag” (Delft) and the Dutch-Flemish Conference on Scientific Computing (Woudschoten) can
be mentioned.
25
JBI Annual Report
26
JBI Annual Report
3. Dynamical Systems, Geometry & Mathematical Physics
Group leader: Prof.dr. G. Vegter
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof.dr. H.W. Broer (until May 2015) RuG 1.0
Prof.dr. A.C.D. van Enter RuG 1.0
Prof.dr.ir. H.S.V. de Snoo RuG 0.0
Prof.dr. G. Vegter RuG 1.0
Prof.dr. E. Verbitskiy RuG/Leiden 0.2
Prof.dr. H. Waalkens RuG 1.0
Tenure track source fte
Dr. K. Efstathiou RuG 1.0
Dr. A. Sterk RuG 1.0
Dr. D. Valesin RuG 1.0
Postdocs
Dr. R. Dyer (until 31 July 2015) RuG 1.0
Dr. K. Kuoch (until 30 September 2015) NWO/STAR 1.0
Dr. L. Zhao (until 1 September 2015) RuG 1.0
PhD students
J. Hidding (Kapteyn Institute/RuG) NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Van de Weijgaert)
(co-supervisor: Vegter)
H. Jardón Kojakhmetov (until 1 September
2015)
Conacyt 1.0
(supervisor: Broer)
D. L. van Kekem RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Sterk)
V. Krajňák (until 15 November) RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Waalkens)
N. Martynchuk RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Efstathiou)
M.H.M.J. Wintraecken (until 1 February
2015)
EU/RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Vegter)
(co-supervisor: Van de Weijgaert)
M. Zaman HEC Pakistan 1.0
(supervisor: Waalkens)
27
JBI Annual Report
Guests
J. Behrndt, TU Graz, Austria
E. Broman, Uppsala University, Sweden
C. Efthymiopoulos, Academy of Athens, Greece
J. Eldred, University of Indiana, US
E. Endo, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Brazil
A. Giacobbe, University of Padova, Italy
H. Hanßmann, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
B. Kolesnik, University of British Columbia, Canada
B. de Lima, Universidade Federal Minais Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
R. MacKay, University of Warwick, UK
P. Mardešić, University of Bourgogne, France
J.-C. Mourrat, ENS Lyon, France
R. Roussarie, Université de Bourgogne, France
D. Strub, University of Warwick, UK
H. Winkler, Ilmenau, Germany
28
JBI Annual Report
3.1 Research program
The research group Dynamical Systems, Geometry and Mathematical Physics has grown out of the
two groups Dynamical Systems and Mathematical Physics and Geometry which have merged in
September 2014. The research activities cover a broad and diverse spectrum of subjects in the fields
of fundamental, applied and computational dynamical systems theory, classical, statistical and quan-
tum mechanics and their interfaces in the light of dynamics, and theoretical and applied aspects of
geometry with many connections to dynamical systems theory.
General description
The interest of dynamical systems theory is the behaviour of systems that evolve in time. This first of
all concerns the long-term behaviour which comprise stationary, periodic, multi-periodic and chaotic
dynamics, but also transient behaviour is of interest. Moreover bifurcations or transitions between
asymptotic states – in particular transitions between regular and chaotic motions – under variation
of parameters are of great importance. We develop mathematical tools using methods from analysis,
geometry and measure theory to grasp, study and develop the structures involved. Moreover, we
develop methods to detect and understand the dynamics in specific models, employing numerical
and graphical tools and computer algebra. Many applications are from the field of mechanics. This
concerns the motion of point masses like planets and their satellites in celestial mechanics, and also
the motion of atoms and molecules which again can be described as point masses or rigid bodies.
Here also relativistic or quantum effects may play a role. This is a wide area with great outreach,
also in the direction of life sciences. If the number of constituent particles is huge then such systems
are best described by statistical means. Statistical mechanics deals with the question of how global
observables, like temperature, can be explained from the microscopic behaviour. There is a close
relationship with dynamical systems theory in particular with regard to random and chaotic behaviour
and the so-called non-equilibrium systems. Mathematical physics is the encompassing discipline of
all the above and still larger areas of theoretical physics. The research is very geometrical in nature.
It involves many tools from differential and computational geometry where the research in the field of
geometry has many facets also in its own right.
Dynamical Systems Theory
The discipline of Dynamical Systems is concerned with mathematical models for deterministic time
evolutions. A simple example is derived from the oscillator, which generally only displays periodic
dynamics. If subject to periodic driving or to coupling with another oscillator, it can illustrate many
parts of the Dynamical Systems research program.
One possible state of the system is resonance, where the combined system assumes one globally
periodic state, the frequency of which is an integer combination of the individual periodic motions.
Another possible state is multi- or quasi-periodicity, where the individual periodic motions combine in
a rationally independent way. When coupling three oscillators, a third possible combined state exists,
where a continuous range of frequencies is present: this is the state of chaos.
29
JBI Annual Report
The occurrence of resonance, quasi-periodicity and chaos as well as the transitions or bifurcations in
between, is the central theme of research in the current Dynamical Systems program – not only for a
few coupled oscillators but for a wide class of systems.
The questions posed vary from fundamental to applied, where the focus can be on different classes of
systems. Examples of this are the world of general ‘dissipative’ systems with a finite-dimensional state
space, the classes of Hamiltonian or reversible systems or systems with a very low-dimensional state
space. Also concrete examples are being studied, where sometimes numerical or symbolic algorithms
have to be developed. The mathematics of these different levels strongly interact. For instance, in
order to know what to look for in a special case, one has to know beforehand what can be expected
and what is logically possible.
There is cooperation with groups in other sciences on the analysis of specific systems. This concerns
the Department of Engineering, University of Bristol (A. Champneys), the University of Auckland
(B. Krauskopf, H.M. Osinga), the University of Eindhoven (H. Nijmeijer), the Department of Ap-
plied Mathematics and Analysis of the University of Barcelona (C. Simó and À. Jorba) as well as the
University of Utrecht (O. Diekmann, H.A. Dijkstra, H. Hanßmann, T. Opsteegh, F. Verhulst), Boston
University (R.L. Devaney, T. Kaper), the University of Exeter (M.P. Holland and D.B. Stephenson)
and the Radboud University Nijmegen (M. Krupa). Various PhD students and postdocs at all these
institutions are involved as well. The theoretical work is also internationally oriented and involves
intensive cooperation with the universities of Dijon (R. Roussarie), Ohio State University (M. Gol-
ubitsky), IMPA Rio de Janeiro (J. Palis, W. de Melo, M. Peixoto and M. Viana), the Université de
Marseille (J.C. Poggiale and S. Troubetskoy), the Russian Academy of Sciences (M.B. Sevryuk) and
other places, resulting in joint publications on a regular basis.
Geometry and Geometric Approximation
The research topics in geometry fall within several subfields of Geometry, like Differential Geometry
and Singularity Theory on the more theoretical side, and Computational Geometry on the more ap-
plied side. In collaboration with other local and international groups in Mathematics and Computer
Science, this research is also focused on applications in Geometric Modeling, Dynamical Systems,
and Astrophysics. The goal is to obtain constructive and certified methods for the study of geomet-
ric and topological structures arising in a wide range of scientific problems. The approximation of
shapes in various representations by ‘simple’ geometric objects, like polyhedral objects or piecewise
quadratic surfaces, is one of the central topics of our research program. This field has attracted a lot
of interest from researchers in Computer Aided Geometric Design, where mainly numerical aspects
of the problem are emphasized. However, our scope is rather different in that we focus on topological
correctness, a criterion often disregarded in applications: the topology of the approximating object
should be the same as that of the original shape.
We also apply techniques from Algebraic and Computational Topology to Data Analysis in Cosmol-
ogy. This project involves an investigation of the Cosmic Web, the space-filling foamlike pattern
30
JBI Annual Report
permeating the Universe. The Cosmic Web represents the most striking example of a complex geo-
metric pattern in nature and defines the cosmic environment in which galaxies emerge. In both the
observed galaxy distribution as well as in computer simulations of cosmic structure formation we see
matter accumulate in walls, filaments and dense compact clusters, surrounding vast near empty Voids.
The research is carried out in collaborations with the Cosmology group of R. van de Weygaert at the
Kapteyn Astronomical Institute of the University of Groningen, with the INRIA-groups Geometrica
(Boissonnat, Dyer, Wintraecken) at Sophia Antipolis and VEGAS (Lazard, Teillaud) at Nancy, France,
with C.K. Yap of the Courant Institute at New York University, and with A. Chattopadhyay at IIIT-
Bangalore, India.
Statistical Mechanics and Stochastics
Statistical mechanics forms a substantial part of the research in the group. Both equilibrium and
non-equilibrium questions are considered. In comparison with dynamical systems, the emphasis is
on systems with infinitely many, rather than finitely many, degrees of freedom. Links between the
two can be fruitfully studied in the thermodynamic limit, where one can consider the asymptotics of
systems with a large (but finite) number of degrees of freedom. Such questions often lead to the use
of stochastic methods.
The general aim of the stochastics part of the program is to understand interacting stochastic systems
on a mathematical level. Even when the interaction is local, such systems typically exhibit a complex
global behavior, with a spatial long-range dependence resulting in phase transitions. In this picture
phase transitions are characterized by discontinuous behavior of the possible states of the system as a
function of external parameters.
The equilibrium properties of such systems can often be described by Gibbs measures. These are
probability measures on the set of possible states of the system given in terms of the energy resulting
from local interactions. For specifically tuned values of the parameters there can be more than one
Gibbs measure, and Gibbs measures can be highly non-trivial. In one direction of research we are
focusing on these. Moreover we are also interested in the time-evolution of such measures. It was
discovered a few years ago that time-evolved measures may lose (and recover) their Gibbsian nature
as a function of time. Related to this is the preservation of the Gibbs property under discretisations
and spatial coarse-graining. We are trying to approach this phenomenon in case studies. In a related
line of research we are investigating continuous interfaces. With former STAR-postdoc S. Taati and
R. Fernández we study the nematic transition in hard-rod models.
Percolation theory is another field in which the study of phase transitions and other statistical-mechanical
phenomena have been very fruitful. The object of study of percolation theory are the connectivity
properties of random sets obtained after some stochastic procedure is applied to a lattice or graph. We
are currently working on models of percolation in which this stochastic procedure presents some form
of long-range dependence, a theme that has received considerable attention in recent years. We also
investigate how stable long-range models models are in the sense of changing inifinite range to finite
31
JBI Annual Report
but sufficiently large range in some models in 3 and more dimensions.
We are also working on models for temperature-dependence of n−vector models, on diffraction theory
with M. Baake (Bielefeld) and D. Lenz (Jena), on the theory of disordered systems and on models for
metastability such as bootstrap percolation and in general on examples of phase transitions of physical
and conceptual interest. We are also starting to develop the theory in relationship with the theory of
networks.
Finally, we have conducted research on the statistical mechanics of systems that are out of equilib-
rium. Metastability is an ubiquitous phenomenon involving systems whose transition to equilibrium is
hindered by the presence of energy barriers or “traps”. We are conducting research on the metastable
behavior of a model called the contact process, which can both be taken as a toy model for out-of-
equilibrium dynamics and as a model for the evolution of an infection in a biological population. We
consider this model on different classes of random networks and study how the topological properties
of the network affect the transition to equilibrium.
The work is done in various collaborations, including in the last years M. Baake (Bielefeld), J.-R. Cha-
zottes (Paris), P. Collet (Paris), H. Duminil-Copin (Genève), R. Fernández (Utrecht), A.Fey (Delft) F.
Redig (Nijmegen-Delft), A. Le Ny (Orsay), W.Th.F. den Hollander (Leiden), C. Külske (Bochum),
R. Morris (IMPA, Rio de Janeiro), A.A. Opoku (Sunyani, Ghana), E. Orlandi (Rome), R. van der
Hofstad (Eindhoven), H.G. Dehling (Bochum), S. Shlosman (Marseille), V. Zagrebnov (Marseille),
M. Formentin (Padova), S. Romano (Pavia), K. Netocný (Prague), S. Roelly (Potsdam), D. Lenz
(Jena), T. Hulshof (Eindhoven), J-C. Mourrat (ENS Lyon), T. Mountford (EPFL Lausanne), Balázs
Ráth (BME Budapest), B.N.B. de Lima (Belo Horizonte, E.Saada(CNRS and Paris-Descartes), M.
Mourragui (Rouen), Anna Levit (Vancouver), Bernardo de Lima (Belo Horizonte), Bruno Schapira
(Marseille).
Some of the more specific directions studied under the umbrella of the two main themes mentioned
above are the following.
Classical and Quantum Transport
Many questions in dynamical systems theory can be phrased as transport problems. The research of
H. Waalkens concerns the study of reaction type dynamics which is associated with the phase space
transport across certain types of saddle equilibrium points. A general theory has been developed
which describes how this transport is controlled by various high-dimensional invariant manifolds.
The manifolds can be explicitly constructed from normal forms. This opens the way to understand
many key problems in reaction dynamics like the realization of Wigner’s transition state theory for
multidimensional systems. The research has a wide range of applications ranging from chemical
reactions to ballistic electron transport problems and even capture and escape problems in celestial
mechanics. Using methods from semiclassical analysis like the Weyl symbol calculus the theory
can be carried over to quantum transport problems. Based on a quantum normal form an efficient
32
JBI Annual Report
algorithm has been developed to compute quantum reaction rates. This research is of central interest
for recent spectroscopic results in molecular collision experiments. The research is carried out in
collaboration with Ü. Çiftçi (Namık Kemal University), H. R. Dullin (Sydney University), R. Schubert
and S. Wiggins (both Bristol University) and G. Ezra (Cornell University).
Optics
New fabrication techniques allow one to build lasers and optical resonators on a microscopic scales.
Here the light is trapped in micro-scale cavities utilizing the principle of total internal reflection. Such
micro resonators have great potential for miniaturing spectroscopic devices and diagnostic tools. For
many applications, it is of crucial importance to optimize the quality factors of these devices to-
gether with the directionality of the optical output. This can be achieved by, e.g., a suitable choice of
the morphology of the cavity boundary. Significant insight into the output directionality for a given
cavity shape can be obtained on the level of the ray dynamics from studying the corresponding bil-
liard map. Combining this with techniques from semiclassical quantum mechanics (short wavelength
asymptotic) leads to the design of cavities with laser modes which are both long lived and directional.
Further ideas like perturbing circular disk cavities by a point scatterer are also exploited. This research
is carried out by H. Waalkens in collaboration with C. Dettmann, M. Sieber (both Bristol University)
and G. Morozov (University of the West of Scotland).
Hamiltonian Systems
In the theory of Hamiltonian dynamics the geometry of the phase space plays an important role, in
particular the bundle structure of invariant tori in integrable systems. The nontriviality of such bundles
is studied by methods from differential geometry and algebraic topology, where this has led to the
development of monodromy and Chern classes. These results have a counterpart in semi-classical
quantum theoretical approximations where quantum monodromy helps to explain certain spectral
defects. Molecular and atomic systems are also studied from this point of view. This research is carried
out in cooperation with various groups like the Université du Littoral, Dunkerque (B. Zhilinskiı́, D.
Sadovskiı́), University of Calgary (R.H. Cushman), Utrecht University (H. Hanßmann), the University
of Padova (F. Fassò, A. Giacobbe), Université de Bourgogne, Dijon (D. Sugny, P. Mardešić), Sydney
University (H.R. Dullin).
Earth and Life Science
Applications of dynamical systems theory to biology provide new insights into the behaviour of bi-
ological systems. Continuing previous work on synchronization in coupled cell networks, we study
in collaboration with the Chronobiology Department (D. Beersma, R. Hut, I. Hoveijn) the circadian
rhythms of organisms through the use of appropriate mathematical models.
A.E. Sterk maintains collaborations with M.P. Holland and D.B. Stephenson (both at University of Ex-
eter) on Extreme Weather Events. This collaboration has grown of out of the EU network Complexity-
NET which concluded in 2013.
33
JBI Annual Report
Analysis – Operator Theory
The central theme is the extension theory of symmetric and sectorial operators in Hilbert spaces
and in spaces with an indefinite metric. This extension theory is closely connected to mathemati-
cal physics (explicitly solvable models, singular perturbations), to system theory (the realization in
terms of transfer functions) and to analysis (moment problems, interpolation problems, differential
operators, canonical systems).
The research is concerned with the development of the general theory and the applications to the above
mentioned fields. This is done in collaboration with the following group of mathematicians: J. Behrndt
(Graz), A. Fleige (Dortmund), S. Hassi (Vaasa), J.Ph. Labrousse (Nice), M. Möller (Johannesburg), A.
Sandovici (Iasi), Z. Sebestyén (Budapest), F.H. Szafraniec (Krakow), C. Trunk (Ilmenau), H. Winkler
(Ilmenau), H. Woracek (Wien).
3.2 Overview of scientific results
KAM theory
In KAM theory several projects are running in cooperation with Broer. A monograph entitled ‘Quasi-
periodic bifurcation theory: the geometry of KAM’, co-authored by Hanßmann and F.O.O. Wagener
(UvA) is in preparation. The postdoc Lei ZHAO started working end 2013 on De Sitter’s work on the
Galilean satellites of Jupiter that exhibit a 1 : 2 : 4 orbital resonance. De Sitter found an approximating
periodic solution along which the system seems to librate. This work was published in the early 20th
century and deserves retelling also in terms of the KAM theory. We reconstruct and update De Sitters
work and add the KAM theoretical part. One paper has been submitted to Celestial Mechanics,
another is still in preparation and will be submitted to the special issue Geometry and Dynamics of
Indagationes Mathematicæ. In 2015 also Heinz Hanßmann from Utrecht joined the project.
Slow Fast Systems
The PhD project of H. Jardon-Kojakhmetov concerns the geometric regularization in terms of slow-
fast dynamics of the constrained differential equation paper by Takens in the LNM 525. This research
involves a collaboration with G. Vegter (Groningen), F. Dumortier (Hasselt) and R. Roussarie (Dijon).
Geometry
Vegter, together with his PhD student Wintraecken and postdoc Dyer, studied a natural intrinsic defi-
nition of geometric simplices in Riemannian manifolds of arbitrary finite dimension, and exploit these
simplices to obtain criteria for triangulating compact Riemannian manifolds. A Riemannian simplex
is defined as the image of the barycentric coordinate map associated with a finite set of vertices on
the manifold, defined using so-called Karcher means. We articulate criteria that guarantee that the
barycentric coordinate map is a smooth embedding. If it is not, we say the Riemannian simplex is de-
generate. Quality measures for the thickness or fatness of Euclidean simplices can be adapted to apply
34
JBI Annual Report
to these Riemannian simplices. For manifolds of dimension 2, the simplex is non-degenerate if it has
a positive quality measure, as in the Euclidean case. However, when the dimension is greater than
two, non-degeneracy can be guaranteed only when the quality exceeds a positive bound that depends
on the size of the simplex and local bounds on the absolute values of the sectional curvatures of the
manifold. An analysis of the geometry of non-degenerate Riemannian simplices leads to conditions
which guarantee that a simplicial complex is homeomorphic to the manifold.
This work has been published in Geometriae Dedicata, and has been presented at the 31st Symposium
on Computational Geometry. It is also part of Wintraecken’s PhD thesis, defended successfully in
September 2015.
In joint PhD projects with Van de Weygaert of the Kapteyn Astronomical Institute we are apply-
ing topological methods to detect one- and two-dimensional structures in large cosmological data
sets, representing the distribution and evolution of cosmic matter. Together with our PhD students
P. Pranav and J. Hidding at the Kapteyn Astronomical Institute have developed methods to detect ge-
ometric patterns in the large scale structure of the universe. These methods are based on topological
persistence, a topological framework that distinguishes essential topological features from topologi-
cal noise. Part of this work forms the contents of Pranav’s thesis, defended successfully in December
2015.
Chattopadhyay, Vegter and Yap have completed earlier work on certified computation of the Morse-
Smale complex of two-dimensional gradient systems in the plane. This Morse-Smale complex is an
important tool for global topological analysis in various problems of computational geometry and
topology. We developed certified algorithmic methods, based on interval arithmetic, for the topologi-
cally correct computation of such complexes for systems satisfying mild non-degeneracy conditions.
This work has been accepted for publication in the Journal of Symbolic Computation.
Statistical Mechanics
About the Gibbsian-non-Gibbsian program, around which the previous PhD projects of Iacobelli,
Ermolaev, Opoku and Ruszel were centered there were a number of developments. In this program one
studies which measures can and cannot be written as a Gibbs measure for an effective Hamiltonian.
This is often done in physics, although it turns out to be not always mathematically justified. Various
examples of physical interest occur, e.g., in Renormalization Group theory, in the theory of disordered
systems and in the study of non-equilibrium problems, and in the theory of discrete approximations.
A study by van Enter, with Baake and D. Lenz (Jena) on diffraction and factors appeared in Ergodic
Theory and Dynamical Systems.
On bootstrap percolation, a paper by van Enter was accepted for a conference proceedings. This was
based on a follow-up paper by Van Enter, Duminil-Copin, Hulshof and Morris which is in prepara-
tion. K. Kuoch (postdoc under van Enter and Redig, NWO-STAR) worked on contact processes with
Mourragui (Rouen) and Saada (Paris) and on inclusion processes with Redig. Two papers have been
submitted.
35
JBI Annual Report
In 2015 Verbitskiy continued the study of renormalized Gibbs states and algebraic properties of dy-
namical systems. M. Göll (a PhD student under the supervision of E. Verbitskiy) successfully de-
fended the PhD thesis Principal algebraic actions of the discrete Heisenberg group in June 2015.
E. Verbitskiy was a visiting professor at the Institute of Mathematics for Industry, Kyushu University,
Japan. He taught a graduate course on Hidden Gibbs Processes, and established collaboration with T.
Shirai and M. Tsujii.
With H. Duminil-Copin (Genève), T. Hulshof (Vancouver) and R. Morris (Rio de Janeiro) van En-
ter studied the existence of correction terms to sharp thresholds in anisotropic bootstrap percolation
models. With S. Taati and R. Fernández he continued the study of the nematic transition for hard-rod
models. With Valesin and B.N.B. de Lima (Belo Horizonte) he studied the stability of long-range
oriented percolation models. A paper has been submitted. With E. Endo who is visiting Groningen
for a year and R. Bissacot he started working on systems in inhomogeneous external fields.
In collaboration with Bruno Schapira (Université Aix-Marseille), Valesin has shown that the contact
process exhibits metastable behavior on arbitrary graphs. A paper has been submitted.
In Percolation, together with Bernardo de Lima (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais), van Enter
and Valesin have proved a result about phase transition of truncated long-range percolation on oriented
graphs. The corresponding publication has been submitted.
In Interacting Particle Systems, D. Valesin has collaborated with Anna Levit (University of Columbia)
to study the contact process with exclusion-type dynamics on d-dimensional lattices. A paper has been
submitted and will appear in the Proceedings of the Brazilian School of Probability. Additionally, in
collaboration with Tom Mountford (EPFL), D. Valesin has studied a competition model defined as a
modification of the contact process, and proved a convergence result about the interface of this model.
A paper has been submitted.
Algebraic Dynamical Systems
Papers by Verbitskiy jointly with collaborators on algebraic dynamics has been accepted for publica-
tion in Indagationes Mathematicae, Monatshefte für Mathematik, Springer Lecture Notes in Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics, and will appear shortly. Jointly with T. Shirai (Fukuoka, Japan), Verbit-
skiy is studying probabilistic properties of spanning trees on infinite graphs, and their link to algebraic
systems. In collaboration with C. Kalle (Leiden) and in M. Tsujii (Fukuoka, Japan), he investigated
existence of smooth invariant densities for random continued fraction transformations. The paper is
currently being finalized. Verbitskiy started a new project on renormalization of algebraic dynamical
systems in collaboration with K. Schmidt (Vienna) and D. Lind (Seattle).
Hamiltonian Systems
H. Waalkens continued his work on monodromy in scattering problems with H. Dullin (Sydney).
Results on scattering monodromy in the two-center problem were presented at a conference in Trento
36
JBI Annual Report
(Italy). A paper is in preparation. In a collaboration with the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials
(W. H. Broer, G. Palasantzas, J. Knoester) H. Waalkens studies the influence of surface roughness on
the actuation dynamics of driven Casimir ocillators. A paper has been published in Physical Review
Applied.
K. Efstathiou continued his work on monodromy together with A. Giacobbe (Padova) and P. Mardešić
(Dijon). A paper is in preparation. Efstathiou is also working with H. Hanßmann (Utrecht) and A.
Marchesiello (Prague) on the bifurcations and geometry of 3-DOF oscillator systems with resonance
1:1:-2. A paper is in preparation. Efstathiou is working on the geometry of integrable Hamiltonian
systems and, together with Martynchuk, has submitted a paper while a second one is near completion.
Classical and Quantum Transport
In collaboration with R. Schubert (Bristol University), A. Goussev (MPI Dresden/Northumbria Uni-
versity) and S. Wiggins (Bristol University), Waalkens is working on a uniformization of the periodic
orbit formula for quantum reaction through transition states they developed earlier. A paper is in
preparation. Together with Ünver Çiftçi Waalkens has been studying reaction type dynamics induced
by saddle type relative equilibria in rotational symmetry reduced N-body systems. A paper in col-
laboration with G. Ezra (Cornell) and S. Wiggins (Bristol) concerning the application to the HCN
isomerization problem is in preparation. Waalkens has started a collaboration on Morse bifurcations
of transition states and its application to roaming reaction dynamics with D. Strub from Warwick
University. A paper also involving V. Krajňák is in preparation.
Optics
Waalkens continued his collaboration with C. Dettmann, M. Sieber (both Bristol University) and G.
Morozov (University of the West of Scotland) on optical micro cavities with point scatterers. A paper
is in preparation.
Extension theory
The Lebesgue decomposition and Radon-Nikodym derivatives in the context of relations are being
studied with Hassi and Sebestyén; abstract operator decompositions are worked on with Labrousse,
Sandovici, and Winkler. Normal intermediate extensions of symmetric operators are being studied
with Hassi and Szafraniec. A survey of sectorial relations and their factorizations is in preparation
with Hassi, Sandovici, and Winkler. The decomposition of linear relations in a finite-dimensional
space is a project with Trunk and Winkler. Almost Pontryagin spaces and the operators in them are
being studied with Woracek. A monograph on boundary value problems is in preparation with Behrndt
and Hassi.
Extreme events
A paper by Sterk in collaboration with D.B. Stephenson, M.P. Holland (University of Exeter) and K.R.
Mylne (Met Office) was accepted by the Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society. The
37
JBI Annual Report
paper, investigating the predictability of extreme wind speeds, will be published in early 2016.
PhD research
Jardon-Kojakhmetov completed his research on the Takens list of constrained differential equations.
This project was supervised by Broer and Vegter. One paper has been published in the Journal of
Differential Equations, other papers are in preparation. The thesis was defended successfully in June
2015. Afterwards he moved to the ENgineering and TEchnology Institute Groningen for a postdoc-
toral position. Krajňák follows various projects on transport in Hamiltonian systems. A paper with
his supervisor H. Waalkens on the Hydrogen exchange reaction is about to be completed. Another
paper involving a collaboration with D. Strub (Warwick) concerning Morse bifurcations of transition
states is in preparation. Zaman is studying the integral manifolds of 3-body problems. His research
involves a collaboration with his supervisor H. Waalkens and I. Hoveijn and L. Zhao. Martynchuk
is studying the geometry of integrable Hamiltonian systems under the supervision of K. Efstathiou.
He has submitted one paper while a second one is near completion. Li started his research on the
bifurcations of pulse-coupled oscillator networks with delay in November 2015. He has a research
position supported by the China Scholarship Council as part of his PhD study. In September 2014
Dirk van Kekem joined the group as a PhD student under the supervision of A.E. Sterk. Presently, we
studies bifurcations in the Lorenz–96 model. He is making good progress: one paper is ready to be
submitted and a second paper is in preparation.
3.3 Research subjects
H.W. Broer: perturbation and KAM-theory, bifurcation theory, non-integrable and resonance phe-
nomena, applications of singularity theory, exploration of complicated systems.
A.C.D. van Enter: lattice statistical mechanics and thermodynamic formalism, Gibbs-non-Gibbs
transitions, bootstrap percolation, nonlinear vector models, disordered systems and spin-glasses, metas-
tates and chaotic size-dependence, non-crystalline long-range order.
K. Efstathiou: integrable and near-integrable Hamiltonian systems, applications of Hamiltonian me-
chanics in physical systems, generalized monodromy, network dynamics with applications to biology
and engineering.
J. Hidding (Kapteyn Institute/RuG): Mathematical simulation of cosmic structure formation.
H. Jardon-Kojakhmetov: geometric regularization in terms of slow-fast dynamics of constrained
equations, applications of catastrophe theory to Hodgkin–Huxley like systems.
D.L. van Kekem: bifurcation analysis of large-scale systems, such as the Lorenz-96 system.
V. Krajňák: transport in Hamiltonian systems; reaction type dynamics.
K. Kuoch: probability theory, interacting particle systems.
P. Li: bifurcations in pulse-coupled oscillator networks with delay.
N. Martynchuk: geometry of integrable Hamiltonian systems.
P. Pranav (Kapteyn Institute/RuG): geometry and topology of the cosmic web.
H.S.V. de Snoo: extension and realization theory with their applications to analytical problems.
A.E. Sterk: numerical exploration of dynamical systems, extreme value statistics of dynamical sys-
38
JBI Annual Report
tems, applications to climate models and analysis in infinite-dimensional spaces; in particular related
with (partial) differential equations.
D. Valesin: interacting particle systems, percolation theory, metastability
G. Vegter: certified geometric approximation, computational topology, computational differential ge-
ometry, singularity theory and its applications, dynamical systems.
E. Verbitskiy: lattice statistical mechanics, thermodynamic formalism, Gibbs-non-Gibbs transitions,
dynamical systems and time-series prediction.
H. Waalkens: theoretical and application oriented aspects of Hamiltonian systems including inte-
grable systems, monodromy, reaction type dynamics, invariant manifolds, normal forms, and semi-
classical quantum mechanics (short wavelength asymptotics) with applications to micro lasers and
quantum reaction dynamics.
M. Wintraecken: Sampling and approximation of manifolds of high dimension and high codimen-
sion.
M. Zaman: N -body systems.
L. Zhao: celestial mechanics and Hamiltonian systems.
3.4 Publications
Dissertations
– H. Jardón Kojakhmetov, Classification of constrained differential equations embedded in the
theory of slow fast systems: Ak singularities and geometric desingularization, Promoter: H.W.
Broer, Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Gronin-
gen, 12 June 2015, 164 pages.
– M.H.M.J. Wintraecken, Ambient and intrinsic triangulations, and topological methods in cos-
mology, Promoters: G. Vegter and M. van de Weijgaert, Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathe-
matics and Computer Science and Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, 4
September 2015, 332 pages.
– P. Pranav, Persistent holes in the Universe: A hierarchical topology of the cosmic mass dis-
tribution, Promoters: M. van de Weijgaert and G. Vegter, Kapteyn Astronomical Institute and
Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Groningen,
18 December 2015, 298 pages.
39
JBI Annual Report
Articles in scientific journals
– M. Baake, D. Lenz, and A. C. D. van Enter, Dynamical versus diffraction spectrum for struc-
tures with finite local complexity, Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 35, 2015, 2017–
2043.
– H. W. Broer, Near-horizon celestial phenomena, a study in geometric optics, Acta Applicandae
Mathematicae, 137, 2015, 17–39.
– H.W. Broer, H. Waalkens, V.B. Svetovoy, J. Knoester, and G. Palasantzas, Nonlinear actuation
dynamics of casimir oscillators in the presence of surface roughness, Phys. Rev. Applied, 4,
2015, 054016.
– R. Dyer, G. Vegter, and M.H.M.J. Wintraecken, Riemannian simplices and triangulations, Ge-
ometriae Dedicata, 179 (1), 2015, 1–48.
– K. Efstathiou, Xia Liu, and Henk W. Broer, The Boundary-Hopf-Fold bifurcation in Filippov
systems, SIAM J. Applied Dynamical Systems, 14 (2), 2015, 914–941.
– M.H.M.J. Wintraecken and G. Vegter, On the optimal triangulation of convex hypersurfaces,
whose vertices lie in ambient space, Mathematics in Computer Science, 9 (3), 2015, 345–353.
Articles in conference proceedings
– R Dyer, G Vegter, and M.H.M.J. Wintraecken, Riemannian simplices and triangulations, Proc.
31st Int. Symp. Computational Geometry (SOCG 2015), Leibniz Int. Proc. Informatics, 2015,
255–269.
– S. Fleurke and A. C. D. van Enter, Multiple-layer parking with screening, Proc. 2015 Int. Conf.
on Pure Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Computational Methods (PMAMCM 2015),
RECENT ADVANCES in MATHEMATICS, 2015, 22–26.
– S. Gugushvili, J. Nowotarski, C. W. Oosterlee, L. Ortiz-Garcia, E. Verbitskiy, Value-at-Risk of
coffee portfolios, Proc. 90th European Study Group Mathematics with Industry, 2015, 51-58.
– G.V. Morozov, M. Sieber, and H. Waalkens, Resonances and emission patterns of optical mi-
crodisk resonators with scatterers, 17th Int. Conf. Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON),
2015, 1–4.
– E.Verbitskiy, Random Expansions of Numbers, Workshop on β-transformations and related
topics, ed. T. Shirai, IMI Lecture Notes Series, 62, 2015, 3-8.
40
JBI Annual Report
– E.Verbitskiy, Spanning Trees, Abelian Sandpiles, and Algebraic Dynamical Systems, Workshop
on Probabilistic Models with Determinantal Structure, ed. T. Shirai, IMI Lecture Notes Series
63, 2015, 1-16.
Other publications
– M. Heydenreich, Sander Hille, Vivi Rottschäfer, Flora Spieksma, Evgeny Verbitskiy (Editors),
Proc. 90th European Study Group Mathematics with Industry, 2015.
– A.E. Sterk, De voorspelbaarheid van weersextremen, De Physicus, 26, 2015, 44–46.
3.5 External funding and collaboration
External funding
PhD grants (supervisor Broer): Hildeberto Jardon-Kojakhmetov was appointed in September 2011
as a PhD student on a Mexican scholarship. The research concerns the geometric regularization of
constrained differential equations following a classification by Takens. The supervision is jointly with
G. Vegter.
NWO/STAR funding was obtained for a joint project with F. Redig (Delft). On this project Dr. K.
Kuoch was appointed.
The PhD position of J. Hiddink (PI: R. van de Weygaert, Kapteyn Institute) is funded by NWO.
The PhD position of M. Wintraecken is funded by the European Commission in the Information
Society Technologies (IST) program, funded under the 7th Framework Program of the European
Commission, project Computational Geometric Learning (CGL).
PhD grant (supervisor H. Waalkens ): Drs M. Zaman has a HEC Pakistan grant and was appointed on
October 1, 2012.
PhD grant (supervisor H.W. Broer, co-supervisor K. Efstathiou): Drs P. Li has a China Scholarship
Council grant for a research position as part of his PhD study at Fudan University, Shanghai, and has
started working in Groningen on 1 November, 2015.
The nation wide NWO-cluster NDNS+ that has supported the Groningen infrastructure from 2005–
2011 was extended in 2011 and the management has been transferred to the VU University in Ams-
41
JBI Annual Report
terdam. End 2013 by this cluster a 3-year NWO prefinancing of a tenure track UD was obtained for
the JBI, which involves an amount of 240.000 EURO.
External collaboration
E. Verbitskiy collaborates with the graduate program Math-for-Industry, Kyushu University, Japan.
3.6 Further information
H.W. Broer is a member of the Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), afdeling Natuurkunde,
sectie Wiskunde. He is acting chairman of this sectie. He is Editor-in-Chief of Indagationes Mathe-
maticæ, which forms the Proceedings of the KNAW. Broer moreover is ŁAssociate Editor of Discrete
and Continuous Dynamical Systems – Series S and he chairs the jury of the NG de Bruijn prize. This
is a bi-annual prize handed out on behalf of the KWG (the Royal Dutch Math Society); the funding is
made available by Elsevier.
Broer participated in a conference in the Pyrenees where he gave an invited lecture. In May he retired
and became an honorary professor and the Lorentz Center workshop Geometry and Dynamics was
dedicated to this event. Also Broer gave a farewell lecture in November and was decorated as Knight
in the Order of Lion of the Netherlands.
K.Efstathiou gave invited talks at the Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics Seminar at University of
Illinois at Chicago, at the Dynamical Systems Seminar at Kyoto University, at the Dalian Nationalities
University, and at the Lorentz Center workshop “Dynamics and Geometry”. He also made a 1-month
research visit at Fudan University as Senior Visiting Scientist at the Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Contemporary Applied Mathematics.
A.C.D. van Enter gave invited talks at the May and December Rutgers Statistical Mechanics Meetings,
at meetings at Marseille and Utrecht University, and at Bell Labs, at Bristol University and at the
Dublin Institute of Advanced Studies. He also visited Princeton University.
Van Enter is editor of Markov Proc. Rel. Fields , Braz. J. Prob. Stat., J. Stat. Phys., Stoch.Proc. Appl.
and of Het Nederlands tijdschrift voor Natuurkunde. He is member of the steering committee of the
Eurandom RSS programme. He was a member of the jury of the thesis of S. Ramawhad (Utrecht) and
of R. Conijn (VU Amsterdam). He was a member of the committee awarding the Stieltjesprize for the
best thesis of 2014 in mathematics in the Netherlands.
K. Kuoch gave a talk at the probability days in Rouen.
H.S.V. de Snoo was a guest professor at the Technische Universität Graz (Jussi Behrndt). There were
visits to the University of Vaasa (Seppo Hassi) and the Technische Universität Ilmenau (Henrik Win-
42
JBI Annual Report
kler). He attented a conference on spectral theory for differential operators in Oberwolfach and gave
a talk at the Gamm Tagung in Lecce.
A.E. Sterk gave a presentation about the predictability of extreme weather events at conference Bifur-
cations & Instabilities in Fluid Dynamics in Paris, France. He also gave a presentation about extreme
value statistics in deterministic systems at the Lorentz Center workshop “Dynamics and Geometry”.
He maintains collaborations with Mark Holland and David Stephenson at the University of Exeter.
D. Valesin gave invited talks at Leiden University, TU Eindhoven, ENS Lyon, Université Aix-Marseille
and Université de Genève. He was also a plenary speaker at the Brazilian School of Probability.
G. Vegter co-organized the Fifth Quantum Universe Symposium (April 12, 2015, University of Gronin-
gen, The Netherlands) the workshop Dynamics and Geometry (June 1519, 2015, Lorentz Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands), and the conference The Information Universe (October 79, 2015, Infover-
sum/University of Groningen,The Netherlands). He also gave a lecture on The History of Space and
Time (Geschiedenis van het ruimtebegrip in de loop van de tijd), for participants of the Senioren
Academie (Hoger Onderwijs Voor Ouderen in Groningen en Drenthe) in March 2015.
E. Verbitskiy presented his research results the following international workshops and conferences: β-
transformations and related topics (Fukuoka, Japan), Probabilistic models with determinantal structure
(Fukuoka, Japan), Dynamics and Geometry (Leiden, Netherlands) and Dynamics, Combinatorics,
Representations (St. Petersburg, Russia).
Verbitskiy serves as a chairman of the Committee for Innovation of the national platform for Mathe-
matics (Platform Wiskunde Nederland), editor of the Pacific Journal of Mathematics for Industry, and
as a member of the editorial board of Springer series Mathematics for Industry. In 2015 he served as
a (co-)chair of the 51st Netherlands Mathematical Congress.
H. Waalkens has coorganized two international workshops: the workshop Dynamics and Geometry
at the Lorentz Center (together with H. Hanßmann, I. Hoveijn, S. van Strien and G. Vegter) and
the workshop Geometry of Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Gas and Condensed Phases in Telluride
(Colorado, US). He has given invited talks at the conference ICTON 2015 in Budapest (Hungary),
the ECT* workshop Excited-State Quantum Phase Transitions in Trento (Italy) and the University of
Marburg (Germany). H. Waalkens has given a plenary talk at the inauguration of the Research Center
of Mathematics for Social Creativity (Math. for Social Creativity), Research Institute for Electronic
Science at Hokkaido University, Japan. He has served in the reading committees for PhD theses at the
University of Marburg (Germany) and University of Sydney (Australia).
43
JBI Annual Report
44
JBI Annual Report
4. Probability and Statistics
Group leader: Prof.dr. E.C. Wit
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof. dr. E.C. Wit RuG 1.0
Prof. dr. E.R. van den Heuvel RuG 0.0
Dr. W.P. Krijnen RuG 0.5
Tenure track source fte
Dr. M.A. Grzegorczyk RuG 1.0
Temporary staff (JBI members)
Dr. F. Abegaz RuG 1.0
Emeritus source fte
Prof.dr. W. Schaafsma RuG 0.0
PhD students
P. Behrouzi RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Wit)
N. Demetrashvili UMCG 1.0
(supervisor: Van den Heuvel, Wit)
N.P. Gill HEC Pakistan 1.0
(supervisor: Wit)
S.M. Mahmoudi ME Iran 1.0
(supervisor: Wit)
A. Mohammadi NWO & RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Wit)
H. Pazira Self-funded 1.0
(supervisor: Wit)
D. Pellin DD San Raffaele 1.0
(supervisors: Wit, Di Serio – San Raffaele)
S. Ranciati DD Bologna 1.0
(supervisors: Wit, Viroli – Bologna)
F. Richter-Mendoza NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Wit)
M. Shafiee-Kamalabad RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Grzegorczyk)
M. Signorelli DD Padova 1.0
(supervisors: Wit, Chiogna – Padova)
45
JBI Annual Report
Guests
M. Girolami, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
V. Vinciotti, Brunel University, London, UK
A. Abbruzzo, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy
L. Augugliaro, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy
46
JBI Annual Report
4.1 Research program
The Statistics and Probability research programme spans the wide range of methodological devel-
opments and applied projects, from sparse network model inference and systems biology, high-
dimensional inference and inference of ODEs, to consultation for statistical safeguards in electronic
voting.
4.1.1 Network modelling and inference
Modern computational biology is caught between a rock and a hard place: simple models cannot
capture the true underlying biology, while more sophisticated ones cannot be inferred properly from
the available data. Especially in the topical field of systems biology, where one of the major goals
is to infer large gene regulatory networks from high-throughput post-genomic data, more advanced
statistical methodologies are required. Recent developments
Bayesian networks. In many biological applications the underlying biological systems, including
several key regulatory parameters, change dynamically. The Wit-Grzegorczyk group has pursued
various efforts to relax the traditional homogeneity assumptions. Grzegorczyk introduced a popular
approach to complement graphical models with multiple change-point processs. The changepoints
divide the time series into segments, where each segment is associated with different regulatory pro-
cesses. However, for sparse data these non-homogeneous graphical models are suspicious to over-
fitting and inflated inference uncertainty.
Penalized graphical models. One of the major goals of our research is therefore to address those
over-fitting problems without losing too much modelling flexibility. To this end, our research focus is
on developing novel regularized statistical methodologies and information-coupling schemes, which
infer the right trade-off between flexibility and inference accuracy automatically from the available
data. Our advanced methods offer maximal flexibility along with various possibilities for learning and
tuning coupling strengths in light of the data, such that features which are not supported by the data
are automatically down-rated. This maximizes inferential certainty for better-fitting model features.
An example of such regularized inference is in Figure 2.
ODE inference. Differential equations are the bread and butter of many quantitative sciences, from
climate studies to genomics. Often the aim is to match systems of ordinary differential equations
(ODE) with data observed on the real-life process. Two important questions are (i) how to match the
ODE to the data by varying various parameters and (ii) how to choose between alternative descriptions
47
JBI Annual Report
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 1011
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
2021 22
23
24
25
2627
28
2930
31
32
3334
35
36
37
38
39 40
41
42
43
44
45
46 47
48 49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59 60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
7475
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
8889
90
Chromosome
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 2: Reconstructed genomic map for Arabidopsis thaliana using penalized graphical models,
clearly showing its 5 chromosomes and potential “chromosomal interactions”’ or epistasis.
of the system based on the data. We have expanded our previous approaches to a more general
Tychonov regularization setting, where the aim is to also allow for only partially observed systems.
4.1.2 High-dimensional inference
Traditional statistical model, such as linear regression, considered a small number of covariates rel-
ative to the number of observations. With the advent of high-throughput and sensing technology, in
many areas the data situation has reversed. Although the typical number of independent observations
has not changed, the potential number of features has exploded. The field of high-dimensional infer-
ence is concerned with discovering and estimating the effect of true features that are hidden as needles
in a haystack. Together with collaborators from Palermo, Wit has worked on differential geometric
extensions of the least angle regression method for generalized linear models.
4.1.3 Electronic voting and statistics
In the fall of 2014 Wit has been approached by the Van Beek Committee, who has been asked by the
minister of Internal Affairs to study the reintroduction of electronic voting in the Netherlands. The Van
48
JBI Annual Report
Beek committee concluded in its report “Every vote counts” in December 2013 that the time is right
to start using again electronic equipment in the voting and counting process. It formulated essential
guidelines to guarantee the proper functioning of the vote counter. On top of this, the committee
wanted a transparent way of checking the process in order to guarantee trust in the proper functioning
of the counting of the votes. Wit was asked to write a report to advise on the feasibility of statistical
control of the electronic vote counting process. The Wit report was sent to the Parliament in early
March 2015. In the course of 2015, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has been implementing the Wit
method and further consultation has been provided to aid this process.
4.1.4 Statistics for measurement reliability
Edwin van den Heuvel is associated with the research unit through a zero appointment. His work
is a welcome addition to research lines within the group. Van den Heuvel is working on various
aspects of statistics for measurement reliability, specifically in the context of mixed models. A mea-
surement system quantifies or identifies one or more characteristics of an object. There are many
types of measurement systems for measuring biological, medical, chemical and physical phenomena,
including sensory measurements. In 2015 Wit and Van den Heuvel have worked together on a number
of projects, involving a number of PhD students and a postdoc, focussing on intraclass correlation
coefficients (N. Demetrashvili) and modelling longitudinal ordinal data (N. Nooraee, F. Abegaz).
4.2 Overview of scientific results
In 2015, the research group has obtained the following scientific results:
Penalized graphical models. The graphical lasso has proven an important tool to infer parsimo-
nious networks from normally distributed data on the nodes of the network. However, the normality
assumption and the lack of structure within the network, means that it is appropriate for only ex-
ploratory purposes. In 2015, we have published a number of extensions:
– Wit and Abbruzzo have considered time-course extensions of the traditional graphical model,
through partitioning the precision matrix. The general theory of such factorial graphical models
has been described in a Network Science paper, whereas an extension to systems biology was
published in a BMC Bioinformatics paper.
– Abegaz and Wit extended the graphical lasso to non-Gaussian data via a Gaussian copula ap-
proach. The method was published in Statistica Neerlandica.
– Vujacic, Abbruzzo and Wit considered the issue of model selection in graphical lasso. Tradi-
tional methods ignored the penalized nature of the likelihood would typicaly underpenalize the
49
JBI Annual Report
network, resulting in too many edges. By going back to first principles, a cross-validation based
way of estimating the Kulback-Leibler divergence turns out to be much more accurate. This
research was published in Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation.
ODE inference. Inferring the parameters in a ODE can be computationally very involved. Vujacic,
Wit, Dattner and Gonzalez published a computationally efficient algorithm with proven theoretical
properties in Statistics and Computing.
Bayesian networks. Grzegorczyk and collaborators extended their non-homogeneous dynamic Bayesian
network inference and published the results in Machine Learning and Proceedings of the IWSM2015.
An in-depth study of inferring bi-directional interactions of circadian clock genes was published in
SAGMB.
Other. ChIP-Seq data measures the temporal binding of proteins to certain DNA sequences. Ran-
ciati, Viroli and Wit published a Bayesian method to detect such binding pattern in Statistical applica-
tions in genetics and molecular biology. Wit was involved in a publication in BMC medical research
methodology that compared various methods to detect networks of symptoms in depression patients.
Abegaz and Wit were involved in the methodological set-up of a simplified way of estimating the
effects in a mixed treatment comparison, which was published in Pharmaceutical Statistics.
PhD research. During 2015 two PhD students graduated and obtained their PhD degree. In April
2015 Abdolreza Mohammadi defended his PhD thesis, entitled “Bayesian Model Determination in
Complex Systems”. In June 2015 Nino Demetrashvili defended her PhD thesis, entitled “Statistical
inference in variance components models for biomedical applications”.
During 2015 three new PhD students were appointed: as of 1 Februari 2015 Mirko Signorelli started
to work on a Double PhD degree in collaboration with the University of Padova, entitled “Mod-
elling the underlying genomic causes of replicative ageing in yeast”. In November 2015 Francisco
Richter-Mendoza started his PhD project, in collaboration with Rampal Etienne (GELIFES), entitled
“Simultaneous estimation and selection of species diversification models.” Both students are under
the supervision of Prof. Ernst Wit. Furthermore, in January 2015 Mahdi Shafiee started his PhD with
Dr. Marco Grzegorczyk, entitled “Development of advanced dynamic Bayesian network models for
systems biology”.
50
JBI Annual Report
4.3 Research subjects
F. Abegaz: Copulas, Chain graphical models
P. Behrouzi: Sparse Gaussian copula graphical models
N. Demetrashvili: Variance component models
N. Gill: Generalized additive models
M. Grzegorczyk: Dynamic Bayesian networks
E. van den Heuvel: Measurement reliability inference
M. Mahmoudi: Causal inference, ODE inference
R. Mohammadi: Bayesian graphical models
H. Pazira: Differential geometric least angle regression
D. Pellin: Sparse stochastic differential equation modelling
S. Ranciati: Bayesian inference for biomedical applications
F. Richter: Inference of species diversification models
M. Shafiee: dynamic Bayesian network inference
M. Signorelli: Inference of stochastic block models
E. Wit: network inference, high-dimensional inference, biostatistics
4.4 Publications
Articles in scientific journals
– F. Abegaz, E. Wit, Copula Gaussian graphical models with penalized ascent Monte Carlo EM
algorithm, Statistica Neerlandica, 69 (4), 2015, 419-441.
– L.C. van Balen, and L.J. Dijkstra, and A.F. Bos, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and M. Hadders-
Algra, Development of postural adjustments during reaching in infants at risk for cerebral palsy
from 4 to 18 months, Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 57 (7), 2015, 668–676.
– D.C. Broekstra, and R. Lanting, and P.M.N. Werker, and E.R. van den Heuvel, , Intra-and
inter-observer agreement on diagnosis of Dupuytren disease, measurements of severity of con-
tracture, and disease extent, Manual therapy, 20 (4), 2015, 580–586.
– A. di Bucchianico, and E.R van den Heuvel, Shewharts Idea of Predictability and Modern
Statistics, Frontiers in Statistical Quality Control, 11, 2015, 237–248.
– M.A.M. den Dekker, and G.J. Pelgrim, and G. Pundziute, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and M.
Oudkerk, and R. Vliegenthart, Hemodynamic significance of coronary stenosis by vessel at-
tenuation measurement on CT compared with adenosine perfusion MRI, European Journal of
Radiology, 84 (1), 2015, 92–99.
51
JBI Annual Report
– N. Demetrashvili, and E.R. van den Heuvel, Confidence intervals for intraclass correlation co-
efficients in a nonlinear dose–response meta-analysis, Biometrics, 71 (2), 2015, 548–555.
– B.G. Demissei, and D. Postmus, and M.A. Valente, and P. van der Harst, and W.H. van Gilst,
and E.R. van den Heuvel, and H.L. Hillege, Should non-cardiovascular mortality be considered
in the SCORE model? Findings from the Prevention of Renal and Vascular End-stage Disease
(PREVEND) cohort, European Journal of epidemiology, 30 (1), 2015, 47–56.
– K.C.M. van der Elst, and C.H.S. Brouwers, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and M.J.P. van Wanrooy,
and D.R.A. Uges, and T.S. van der Werf, and J.G.W. Kosterink, and L.F.R. Span, and J.W.C.
Alffenaar, Subtherapeutic Posaconazole Exposure and Treatment Outcome in Patients With
Invasive Fungal Disease, Therapeutic drug monitoring, 37 (6), 2015, 766–771.
– J. Gerretzen, and E. Szymanska, and J.J. Jansen, and J. Bart, and H.J. van Manen, and E.R. van
den Heuvel, and L.M.C. Buydens, Simple and Effective Way for Data Preprocessing Selection
Based on Design of Experiments, Analytical chemistry, 87 (24), 2015, 12096–12103.
– T.P. Gi, and E.A. Robin, and M.R.M. San Giorgi, and L. Slagter–Menkema, and B.M. van
Hemel, and B.F.A.M. van der Laan, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and F.G. Dikkers, E. and Schu-
uring, Clinical course of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: Comparison between aggressive-
ness of human papillomavirus-6 and human papillomavirus-11, Head & Neck, 37 (11), 2015,
1625–1632.
– L.E. Griffith, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and I. Fortier, and N. Sohel, and S.M. Hofer, and H.
Payette, and C. Wolfson, and S. Belleville, and M. Kenny, and D. Doiron, and others, Statistical
approaches to harmonize data on cognitive measures in systematic reviews are rarely reported,
J. clinical epidemiology, 68 (2), 2015, 154–162.
– M. Grzegorczyk, A non-homogeneous dynamic Bayesian network with a hidden Markov model
dependency structure among the temporal data points, Machine Learning, 2015.
– M. Grzegorczyk, A. Aderhold, and D. Husmeier, Network reconstruction with realistic models,
Proc. IWSM2015, 2015.
– M. Grzegorczyk, A. Aderhold, and D. Husmeier, Inferring bi-directional interactions between
circadian clock genes and metabolism with model ensembles, Statistical Application in Genet-
ics and Molecular Biology, 2015.
– M.A. Islam, and B.Z. Alizadeh, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and R. Bruggeman, and W. Cahn,
and L. de Haan, and R.S. Kahn, and C. Meijer, and I. Myin-Germeys, and J. van Os, and others,
A comparison of indices for identifying the number of clusters in hierarchical clustering: A
study on cognition in schizophrenia patients, Communications in Statistics: Case Studies, Data
Analysis and Applications, 1 (2), 2015, 98–113.
52
JBI Annual Report
– J.S. Kuiper, and M. Zuidersma, and R.C. Voshaar, Oude and S.U. Zuidema, and E.R. van den
Heuvel, and R.P. Stolk, and N. Smidt, Social relationships and risk of dementia: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of longitudinal cohort studies, Ageing research reviews, 22, 2015,
39–57.
– J. Kuiper, and E.R. van den Heuvel, M.A. and Swertz, The Hybrid Synthetic Microdata Plat-
form: A Method for Statistical Disclosure Control, Biopreservation and biobanking, 13 (3),
2015, 178–182.
– T. Mzolo, and G. Goris, and E. Talens, and A. di Bucchianico, and E.R. van den Heuvel, Sta-
tistical Process Control Methods for Monitoring In-House Reference Standards, Statistics in
Biopharmaceutical Research, 7 (1), 2015, 55–65.
– H.T. Nguyen, and T.D. Nguyen, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and F.M. Haaijer-Ruskamp, and K.
Taxis, Medication Errors in Vietnamese Hospitals: Prevalence, Potential Outcome and Associ-
ated Factors, PloS One, 10 (9), 2015, e0138284.
– K. Papageorgiou, and K.M. Vermeulen, and M.J. Schroevers, A.M. and Stiggelbout, and E.
Buskens, and P.F.M. Krabbe, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and A.V. Ranchor, Do individuals with
and without depression value depression differently? And if so, why?, Quality of Life Research,
24 (11), 2015, 2565–2575.
– P. Pechlivanoglou, F. Abegaz, M.J. Postma, E. Wit, An alternative parameterization of Bayesian
logistic hierarchical models for mixed treatment comparisons, Pharmaceutical statistics, 14 (4),
2015 322-331.
– S. Ranciati, C. Viroli, E. Wit, Spatio-temporal model for multiple ChIP-seq experiments, Sta-
tistical applications in genetics and molecular biology, 14 (2), 2015, 211-219.
– S. Sobhani, and J. Zwerver, and E.R. van den Heuvel, K. and Postema, and R. Dekker, and J.M.
Hijmans, Rocker shoes reduce Achilles tendon load in running and walking in patients with
chronic Achilles tendinopathy, J. Science and Medicine in Sport, 18 (2), 2015, 133–138.
– A.P.M. Stiekema, P.J. and Quee, and M. Dethmers, and E.R. van den Heuvel, J.E. and Red-
meijer, and K. Rietberg, and A.D. Stant, and M. Swart, and J. van Weeghel, and A. Aleman,
and others, Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of cognitive adaptation training as a nursing
intervention in long-term residential patients with severe mental illness: study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial,Trials, 16 (1), 2015, 49.
– E. Visser, and G.H. de Bock, and E.J. Messelink, and A.J. Schram, and B.J. Kollen, and S.
la Bastide-van Gemert, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and M.Y. Berger, and J.H. Dekker, Active
encouragement of older women with urinary incontinence in primary care to undergo diagnosis
53
JBI Annual Report
and treatment: A matched-pair cluster randomized controlled trial, Maturitas, 80 (2), 2015,
212–219.
– S. de Vos, K.J. Wardenaar, E.H. Bos, E.C. Wit, P. de Jonge, Decomposing the heterogeneity of
depression at the person-, symptom-, and time-level: latent variable models versus multimode
principal component analysis, BMC medical research methodology, 15 (1), 2015, 1.
– I. Vujai, A. Abbruzzo, E Wit, A computationally fast alternative to cross-validation in penalized
Gaussian graphical models, J. Statistical Computation and Simulation, 85 (18), 2015, 3628-
3640.
– I. Vujai, I. Dattner, J. Gonzlez, E. Wit, Time-course window estimator for ordinary differential
equations linear in the parameters, Statistics and Computing, 25 (6), 2015, 1057-1070.
– E.C. Wit, A. Abbruzzo, Inferring slowly-changing dynamic gene-regulatory networks, BMC
bioinformatics, —bf 16 (Suppl 6), 2015, S5.
– E.C. Wit and A. Abbruzzo, Factorial graphical models for dynamic networks, Network Science,
3 (01), 2015, 37-57.
– P.C. IJzerman-Boon, and E.R. van den Heuvel, Validation of qualitative microbiological test
methods, Pharmaceutical statistics, 14 (2), 2015, 120–128.
– A.R.E. Zandstra, and C.A. Hartman, and E. Nederhof, and E.R. van den Heuvel, and A. Diet-
rich, and P.J. Hoekstra, and J. Ormel, Chronic Stress and Adolescents Mental Health: Modify-
ing Effects of Basal Cortisol and Parental Psychiatric History. The TRAILS Study, J. abnormal
child psychology, 43 (6), 2015, 1119–1130.
4.5 Research indicators
4.5.1 External funding
During this year, the group has been involved in a successful grant proposal:
– CA15109. “European Cooperation in Statistics for Network Data Science (COSTNET)”, COST,
European Union: 504K euro. PI: Ernst Wit.
The members of the group are supported in a number of ways. Reza Mohammadi and Francisco
Richter are funded by NWO grants (STAR and MPE, respectively). Nazia Gill and Mahdi Mahmoudi
are funded by their home governments in Pakistan and Iran, respectively. Danilo Pellin, Saverio Ran-
ciati and Mirko Signorelli are funded by their home institutions in Italy (San Raffaele Milano, Bologna
54
JBI Annual Report
and Padova, respectively) and the Statistics and Probability unit for conference travel. Fentaw Abegaz,
Pariya Behrouzi and Mahdi Shafiee are funded in various ways by the RuG. Nino Demestrashvili is
funded by the UMCG. Hassan Pazira is self-funded.
4.5.2 External collaboration
– Wit is leading the EU-funded Cooperation in Science and Technology (COST) project on sta-
tistical network science. The collaboration involves some 100 people across Europe and will be
funded for 4 years.
– Wit is collaborating with L. Augugliaro and A. Abbruzzo (University of Palermo), C. Viroli
(University of Bologna), M.C. di Serio (University of San Raffaele Milano) and V. Vinciotti
(Brunel University).
– Grzegorczyk is collaborating with D. Husmeier and Dr. Andrej Aderhold (University of Glas-
gow) and with plant biologist Prof. Andrew Millar (Edinburgh University) on Arabdiopsis gene
expression in the context of the EU-funded “Timing Metabolism” (TiMet) research project.
4.6 Futher information
Wit is an associate editor of Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology and Bio-
metrics. He is member of the Board of Directors of the International Biometrics Society. He is
vice-president of the Dutch Biostatistics Society (BMS-ANed). In 2015 he was nvited to the Interna-
tional Mathematics Institute, Singapore (1 June 31 July 2015) for the special programme Networks in
Biological Sciences and he received an invitation to the Isaac Newton Institute Cambridge (July 2016
December 2016) for the special programme Theoretical Foundations for Statistical Network Analy-
sis. Besides giving seminars in Amsterdam (UvA), Bologna, Montpellier, Milan and London, he was
invited speaker at the STAR Outreach day (12 December 2014, Eindhoven), Networks in Biological
Sciences workshop (11 June 2015, Singapore), Workshop ”Dynamical processes on networks - theory
and applications in social sciences and biology” (19 June 2015, Sigtuna, Sweden), European Meeting
of Statisticians (9 July 2015, Amsterdam), International Statistics Institute World Congress (26 July
2015, Rio de Janiero, Brazil), ECAS (1 October, Munich) and at the 8th International Conference
of the ERCIM (14 December 2015, London). He also was the keynote speaker at the 12th Applied
Statistics Conference, 22 September 2015, Ribno, Slovenia.
Grzegorczyk is an associate editor of Computational Statistics. He was successfully elected to
chair the 32nd International Workshop on Statistical Modelling (IWSM) at the IWSM 2015 in Linz,
Austria. As a consequence, the IWSM in 2017 will take place in Groningen. Grzegorczyk is now
55
JBI Annual Report
chairing the Local Organizing Committee and a Scientific Programme Committee and an excellent
range of international invited speakers have been selected.
56
JBI Annual Report
5. Systems, Control and Applied Analysis
Group leader: Prof.dr. A.J. van der Schaft
Tenured and tenure-track staff (JBI members) source fte
Dr. M.K. Camlibel RuG 1.0
Prof.dr. H.L. Trentelman RuG 1.0
Prof.dr. A.J. van der Schaft RuG 1.0
Prof.dr. M.E. Dür RuG 0.0
PhD students
A. Everts NWO 1.0
(supervisor: M.K. Camlibel)
L. Gijben NWO 1.0
(supervisor: M.E. Dür)
O. Ivanov NWO 0.5
(supervisors: A.J. van der Schaft, F.J. Weissing
(CEES))
B. Jargalsaikhan NWO 1.0
(supervisor: M.E. Dür)
H-J. Jongsma NWO 1.0
(supervisors: H.L. Trentelman)
M. Josza (from September) JBI/Armines 1.0
(supervisors: M.K. Camlibel)
F. Koerts (from October) NWO 1.0
(supervisors: M.K. Camlibel)
N. Megawati DIKTI 1.0
(supervisors: A.J. van der Schaft))
P. Monshizadeh STW 1.0
(supervisor: H.L. Trentelman)
F. Veldman-de Roo(until June) external INCAS 0.5
(supervisor: H.L. Trentelman, co-supervisor: C.
de Persis)
T. Stegink (from September) NWO 0.5
(supervisors: A.J. van der Schaft, J.M.A. Scher-
pen (ITM))
E. Vos STW 0.5
(supervisors: A.J. van der Schaft, J.M.A. Scher-
pen (ITM))
57
JBI Annual Report
J. Wei CSC 1.0
(supervisor: A.J. van der Schaft)
S. Zhang CSC 0.5
(supervisor: M.K. Camlibel, M. Cao (ITM))
F. Zhang CSC 0.5
(supervisor: J.M.A. Scherpen (ITM), H.L.
Trentelman)
External PhD students
G.A. Folkertsma University of Twente
(supervisor: A.J. van der Schaft)
L. Wang Ubbo Emmius Sandwich
(supervisor: A.J. van der Schaft )
Guests
G. Como, Lund University, Sweden
L. Lapichino, University of Koqnstanz, Germany
G. Xie, Peking University, China
A. Medvedev, Uppsala University, Sweden
G. Stacey, Australian National University, Australia
M. Ilic, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Y. Kawano, Kyoto University, Japan
P. Rapisarda, University of Southhampton UK
D. Siegel-Gaskins, California Institute of Technology, USA
A. Sarlet, University of Ghent, Belgium
A. Rantzer, Lund University, Sweden
R. Mahony, Australian National University, Australia
H. Cendra, Universidad Nacional del Sur en Conicet, Argentinië
S. Stramigioli, University Twente
C. Hadjicostis, University of Cyprus, Greece
G. Notarstefano, University del Salento, Italy
58
JBI Annual Report
5.1 Research Program
The research program Systems, Control and Applied Analysis (SCAA) is devoted to the analysis,
control and optimization of complex systems. The mathematical research in this program is motivated
by a wide range of applications in the engineering and natural sciences.
Mathematical systems and control theory deals with the mathematical modeling, analysis and control
of open systems evolving in time. The dynamics is typically described by ordinary or partial dif-
ferential equations, but can be also a mixture of continuous and discrete dynamics. This dynamical
behavior is not only sought to be analyzed, but to be influenced (’controlled’) and optimized as well;
by the addition of feedback loops, and by the interconnection to other dynamical systems (controller
design), or the optimal selection of parameters. Furthermore, dynamical data are used to identify the
underlying model, or to approximate it by a model of lower complexity.
Typically the system models under consideration are described by under-determined sets of differ-
ential equations. As a result, there are free variables in the system description (corresponding to
’inputs’), which together with information about the current state of the system (corresponding to
’outputs’) model the interaction with other systems or the environment. Furthermore, the systems
point of view is emphasized, in the sense that large-scale, possibly heterogeneous, dynamical systems
are viewed as networks of interconnected system components, where the overall dynamics is deter-
mined by the dynamics of the components plus the network and feedback structure. This point of
view is prevailing in many areas of engineering science and economics, and is receiving increasing
attention in the life sciences (systems and synthetic biology, biological feedback systems, etc.).
Mathematical optimization theory is concerned with the development of solution algorithms for opti-
mization problems involving under-determined algebraic equations. Special emphasis in the research
program is given to nonlinear quadratic problems which at the same time involve binary variables.
These problems have numerous applications in science, engineering and economics. They can be
modeled as linear problems over special matrix cones (semidefinite programming, copositive pro-
gramming), which permits a new approach to tackle these problems.
The members of the program have close collaboration with colleagues working in other scientific dis-
ciplines such as control engineering, smart energy systems, sensor networks, robotics, management
science, and systems biology. In particular, there is a close collaboration with the control engineering
groups at the neighboring Engineering and Technology Institute (ENTEG), under the umbrella of the
Jan C. Willems Center for Systems and Control.
59
JBI Annual Report
Structure of the program
The main lines of research in the program are:
1. Network dynamics (Kanat Camlibel, Harry Trentelman, Arjan van der Schaft, Jieqiang Wei,
Nima Monshizadeh, Fan Zhang, Hidde Jan Jongsma, Monika Jozsa, Oleksandr Ivanov)
Network dynamics and dynamical multi-agent systems arise in many fields of engineering and
science. Systems and control theory contributes to this area by providing concepts and tools for
the study of structural properties such as controllability (leader-follower networks) and model
reduction, and for their control including synchronization and consensus dynamics. This entails
a close interplay between geometric systems and control theory on the one hand, and algebraic
graph theory, as well as convex analysis, on the other. Applications include power and sensor
networks, dynamical distribution networks, as well as large-scale chemical reaction networks
as arising in systems biology.
2. Modeling and control of multi-physics systems (Arjan van der Schaft, Jieqiang Wei, Filip
Koerts, Pooya Monshizadeh, Tjerk Stegink, Rodolfo Reyes Baez)
Port-Hamiltonian systems constitute an extension of Hamiltonian systems where external in-
teraction and energy-dissipating ports are taken into account. Furthermore, the underlying ge-
ometric structure is derived from the interconnection structure of the complex system. The
aim of this research is to provide a systematic geometric theory for the modeling, analysis
and simulation of multi-physics, mixed lumped- and distributed parameter, systems. Current
research themes include model reduction, and modeling and analysis of power systems and dy-
namical distribution networks. Furthermore, the port-Hamiltonian framework is employed for
controller design, by attaching controller port-Hamiltonian systems and shaping the Hamilto-
nian and other conserved quantities to a desired Lyapunov function for the controlled system,
leading to physically inspired and robust control strategies. Applications include stabilization
and demand-supply matching in power systems, mechatronic systems, and the control and op-
timization of distribution networks.
3. Mathematical systems theory (Kanat Camlibel, Harry Trentelman, Arjan van der Schaft, An-
neroos Everts, Hidde-Jan Jongsma, Nima Monshizadeh, Monika Jozsa, Noorma Yulia Megawati)
Physical systems in general do not exhibit an a priori fixed information flow direction. In the
behavioral approach, all external system variables are therefore in first instance treated on an
equal footing, while the mathematical model specifies a subset of the set in which the external
variables take their values as being possible. This subset is called the behavior of the system,
which is sought to be influenced by interconnection with a controller behaviour (’control by
interconnection’). Many modeling and control questions are fruitfully studied in this novel
setting. Furthermore, equivalence and approximate equivalence notions for linear systems are
60
JBI Annual Report
studied, with a view towards model reduction. Hybrid systems are a mixture of interacting con-
tinuous and discrete dynamics, and arise naturally in embedded systems and physical systems
modeling. Important research issues concern the analysis of hybrid systems and their solution
trajectories, the analysis of structural properties of controllability and stabilizability, and the de-
sign of controllers. The mathematical analysis of piecewise-affine and hybrid systems is heavily
intertwined with optimization theory and non-smooth analysis.
4. Modeling and control of power networks(Pooya Monshizadeh, Tjerk Stegink, Filip Koerts,
Arjan van der Schaft, Kanat Camlibel)
Power networks, from high-voltage distribution networks to AC or DC micro-grids, constitute
an application area of growing importance and interest. The aim of this theme is to develop a
sound mathematical framework for the modeling, analysis and control of power networks. This
includes the systematic modeling of components such as synchronous generators and convert-
ers, as well as the transmission line network structure, taking the theory of port-Hamiltonian
systems as a starting point. Based on these models fundamental problems of stability, power
sharing and optimization are addressed. Furthermore, problems of optimal demand-supply
matching are addressed by dynamic pricing algorithms, leading to the analysis of the cou-
pled physical and market dynamics. This research is carried out in a collaborative effort with
colleagues from ENTEG.
5. Mathematical optimization theory (Mirjam Dür, Luuk Gijben, Bolor Jargalsaikhan)
Mathematical optimization theory is concerned with studying structural properties of and devel-
oping solution methods for mathematical optimization problems. The focus is on combinatorial
problems and on nonconvex quadratic optimization problems. The studied methodology is to
transform the problem into a higher dimensional matrix space, permitting to move the diffi-
cult constraints (quadratic and/or binary) entirely into a certain cone constraint. This leads to
copositive and semidefinite programming.
5.2 Research subjects
M.K. Camlibel: analysis of piecewise affine dynamical systems, model reduction of switched linear
systems, controllability of multi-agent systems, optimisation of energy systems.
M. Dür: mixed-integer nonlinear optimization, optimization over convex matrix cones, copositive
programming, quadratic and binary optimization problems.
A. Everts: geometric control of differential-variational inequalities.
L. Gijben: quadratic programming problems.
O. Ivanov: chemical reaction networks in systems biology.
B. Jargalsaikhan: semi-infinite approaches to copositivity.
H.-J. Jongsma: analysis, robust control, and model reduction of linear multi-agent systems.
61
JBI Annual Report
M. Josza: input-output properties of interconnected systems, network structure and control and esti-
mation.
F. Koerts: optimization of dynamical models of power networks.
N. Monshizadeh: power networks, synchronization, consensus and model reduction of multi-agent
networks.
P. Monshizadeh: analysis of micro-grids; frequency and voltage regulation.
A.J. van der Schaft: geometric network modeling, analysis and control of complex engineering and
hybrid systems, nonlinear systems and control theory, network dynamics and model reduction, mod-
eling and analysis of chemical reaction networks and power systems.
R. Reyes Baez: port-Hamiltonian systems and incremental passivity.
T. Stegink: dynamic pricing methods for control of power networks.
H.L. Trentelman: network dynamics, model reduction of network dynamics, synchronization, con-
trol in a behavioral setting, robust stabilization.
J. Wei: analysis and control of dynamical distribution networks.
N. Yulia Megawati: bisimulation of linear systems and approximation theory.
Fan Zhang: robust synchronization of linear and nonlinear multi-agent systems.
5.3 Publications
Dissertations
– B. Jargalsaikhan, Linear conic programming: genericity and stability, Promotor: Mirjam Dür,
Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, Faculty of Mathematics and
Natural Sciences, University of Groningen, 2015, 118 pages.
– L. Gijben, On approximations, complexity and applications for copositive programming, Pro-
motor: Mirjam Dür, Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, Faculty
of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Groningen, 2015, 125 pages.
– F. Zhang, Distributed Control of Networked Lur’e Systems, Promotores: H.L. Trentelman and
J.M.A. Scherpen, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Groningen, 2015,
124 pages.
Edited Books
– M. Belur and M.K. Camlibel and P. Rapisarda and J.M.A. Scherpen (eds), Mathematical Con-
trol Theory II: Behavioral Systems and Robust Control, Springer, 2015.
62
JBI Annual Report
– M.K. Camlibel and A.A. Julius and R. Pasumarthy and J.M.A. Scherpen (eds), Mathematical
Control Theory I: Nonlinear and Hybrid Control Systems, Springer, 2015.
Chapters in books
– P.J. Antsakis and H.L. Trentelman, Sampled-data systems, J. Baillieul, T. Samad (eds), Ency-
clopedia of Systems and Control, Springer, London, 2015, 931 - 935.
– A. Dijksma, Schur analysis in an indefinite setting, Operator Theory, Daniel Alpay (ed.),
Springer Basel 2015, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-0348-0692-3, 2015, 46 pages.
– A.F. Everts and M.K. Camlibel, When is a linear complementarity system disturbance decou-
pled?, Mathematical Control Theory II: Behavioral Systems and Robust Control, M. Belur and
M.K. Camlibel and P. Rapisarda and J.M.A. Scherpen (eds), 2015, Springer, 243-255.
– A.J. van der Schaft, Physical network systems and model reduction, Mathematical Control The-
ory II, Behavioral Systems and Robust Control, eds. M.N. Belur, M.K. Camlibel, P. Rapisarda,
J.M.A. Scherpen, Springer Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences, 462, 2015, 199-
210.
– L.Q. Thuan and M.K. Camlibel, Controllability and stabilizability of discontinuous bimodal
piecewise linear systems, Mathematical Control Theory I: Nonlinear and Hybrid Control Sys-
tems, M.K. Camlibel and A.A. Julius and R. Pasumarthy and J.M.A. Scherpen (eds), Springer,
2015, 385-402.
– H.L. Trentelman, T.W. Stegink and S.V. Gottimukkala, A complement on elimination and real-
ization in rational representations, M.K. Camlibel, A. Agung Julius, R. Pasumarthy and J.M.A.
Scherpen (eds), Mathematical Control Theory I, Nonlinear and Hybrid Control Systems, Lec-
ture Notes in Control and Information Sciences, 461, Springer, 2015, 179 - 198.
– H.L. Trentelman, Controllability and observability, J. Baillieul, T. Samad (eds), Encyclopedia
of Systems and Control, Springer, London, 2015, 215 - 220.
– H.L. Trentelman, Linear quadratic optimal control, J. Baillieul, T. Samad (eds), Encyclopedia
of Systems and Control, Springer, London, 2015, 644 - 649.
– H.L. Trentelman and P.J. Antsakis ’Observer-based control, J. Baillieul, T. Samad (eds), Ency-
clopedia of Systems and Control, Springer, London, 2015, 1257 - 1261.
63
JBI Annual Report
Articles in scientific journals
– A. Berman, M. Dür, and Naomi Shaked-Monderer, Open problems in the theory of completely
positive and copositive matrices. Electronic Journal of Linear Algebra, 29, 2015, 46–58.
– D.A. Dirksz, J.M.A. Scherpen, A.J. van der Schaft, M. Steinbuch, Notch filters for port-Hamiltonian
systems, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 60 (9), 2015, 2440–2445.
– M. Dür, B. Jargalsaikhan, and G. Still, First order solutions in conic programming, Mathemati-
cal Methods of Operations Research, 82, 2015, 123–142.
– M. Jafarian, E. Vos, C. De Persis, A.J. van der Schaft, J.M.A. Scherpen, Formation control of a
multi-agent system subject to Coulomb friction, Automatica, 61, 2015, 253-262.
– M.D. Kaba and M.K. Camlibel, A spectral characterization of controllability for discrete-time
systems with conic constraints, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 53 (4), 2015, 2350-
2372.
– N. Monshizadeh, S. Zhang, and M.K. Camlibel, Disturbance decoupling problem for multi-
agent systems: a graph topological approach, Systems and Control Letters, 76, 2015, 35-41.
– A.J. van der Schaft, Modeling of physical network systems, Systems & Control Letters, 2015.
– A.J. van der Schaft, S. Rao, B. Jayawardhana, A network dynamics approach to chemical reac-
tion networks, Int. J. Control, DOI:10.1080/00207179.2015.1095353, 2015.
– A.J. van der Schaft, S. Rao, B. Jayawardhana, Complex and detailed balancing of chemical
reaction networks revisited, J. Mathematical Chemistry, 53 (6), 2015, 1445–1458.
– H.L. Trentelman, In Memoriam Jan C. Willems (1939 - 2013) Een diepe denker, Nieuw Archief
voor Wiskunde, vijfde serie, deel 16, nummer 1, 2015, 37 - 39.
Articles in refereed conference proceedings
– M. Dür and P. Groetzner, A factorization heuristic for completely positive matrices, Oberwol-
fach Reports 46, 2015, 21–23.
– G.A. Folkertsma, A.J. van der Schaft, S. Stramigioli, Morphological computation in a fast-
running quadruped with elastic spine, IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48 (13), 2015, 170-175.
– D. Jeltsema, A.J. van der Schaft, Complexification of Dirac structures and generalised Kirchhoff
operators, 4th IFAC Workshop on Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Methods in Nonlinear Control,
Lyon, 2015.
64
JBI Annual Report
– H.J. Jongsma, H.L. Trentelman and M.K. Camlibel, Model reduction of consensus networks by
graph simplification, Proc. 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Osaka, Japan, 2015.
– N. Monshizadeh, M.K. Camlibel and H.L. Trentelman, Strong targeted controllability of dy-
namical networks, Proc. 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Osaka, Japan, 2015.
– G. Pola, C. Manes, M.D. Di Benedetto, A.J. van der Schaft, On equivalence notions for discrete-
time stochastic control systems, Proc. 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Osaka, Japan,
Dec. 2015, 1180–1185.
– P. Rapisarda, A.R.F. Everts, and M.K. Camlibel, Fault detection and isolation for systems de-
fined over graphs, 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, 2015, Osaka, Japan.
– A. J. van der Schaft, A geometric approach to differential Hamiltonian and differential Riccati
equations, Proc. 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Osaka, Japan, Dec. 2015, 7151–7156.
– T.W. Stegink, C. De Persis, A.J. van der Schaft, Port-Hamiltonian formulation of the gradient
method applied to smart grids, 5th IFAC Workshop on Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Methods
for Non Linear Control, Lyon, France, July 2015.
– T. Stegink, C. De Persis, A.J. van der Schaft, A port-Hamiltonian approach to optimal frequency
regulation in power grids, Proc. 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Osaka, Japan, Dec.
2015, 3224–3229.
– F. Veldman-de Roo, A. Tejada, H. van Waarde and H.L. Trentelman, Towards observer-based
fault detection and isolation for branched water distribution networks without cycles, Proc.
European Control Conf. (ECC 2015), Linz, Austria, 2015.
– E. Vos, M. Jafarian, C. De Persis, J.M.A. Scherpen, A.J. van der Schaft, Formation control of
nonholonomic wheeled robots in the presence of matched input disturbances, 4th IFAC Work-
shop on Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Methods in Nonlinear Control, Lyon, 2015.
– Li Wang, B. Maschke, A.J. van der Schaft, Stabilization of control contact systems, 4th IFAC
Workshop on Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Methods in Nonlinear Control, Lyon, 2015.
– F. Zhang, H.L. Trentelman and J.M.A. Scherpen, Cooperative robust output regulation of het-
erogeneous Lur’e networks, Proc. 54th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, Osaka, Japan, 2015.
5.4 External funding
– M.K. Camlibel is co-principal applicant and investigator of the NWO ESI-project Hierarchical
and distributed optimal control of integrated energy systems.
65
JBI Annual Report
– M. Dür is co-Principal Investigator and vice speaker, DFG Research Training Group GK 2126
Algorithmic Optimization at the University of Trier, Germany. Joint project with colleagues
from the Departments of Mathematics and Economics at the University of Trier, funded by the
German Research Foundation DFG Duration: 2016–2020, Amount of funding: 4.200.000 Euro
5.5 Editorial activities
M.K. Camlibel:
Associate Editor for the journal IEEE Transactions on Automatica Control.
Associate Editor for the journal SIAM Journal of Control and Opimization.
Associate Editor for the journal Systems & Control Letters.
Member of the Conference Editorial Board of the IEEE Control Systems Society.
Member of the Conference Editorial Board of the European Control Association.
Conference Associate Editor for the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control.
Conference Associate Editor for the American Control Conference.
Conference Associate Editor for the European Control Conference.
M. Dür:
Editor of the book series SpringerBriefs in Optimization.
Member of the Editorial Board of the journal Optimization Methods and Software.
Member of the Editorial Board of the journal Mathematical Methods of Operations Research.
Member of the Editorial Board of the journal Journal of Global Optimization.
H.L. Trentelman:
Senior Editor for the journal IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control
Guest Editor for the journal Systems and Control Letters
A.J. van der Schaft:
Member of the Editorial Board for the journal Annual Reviews in Control
Member of the Editorial Board for the journal Journal of Geometric Mechanics.
5.6 Further signs of recognition and news items
– Kanat Camlibel is member of IFAC Technical Committee of Discrete Event and Hybrid Sys-
tems;
IFAC Technical Committee of Control Design;
IFAC Technical Committee of Linear Systems;
Subject Editor for International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control;
Conference Editorial Board Member of the IEEE Control Systems Society;
66
JBI Annual Report
Conference Associate Editor for the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control;
Conference Associate Editor for the American Control Conference;
Conference Editorial Board of the European Control Association;
Co-organizer of Mathematical systems theory: from behaviors to nonlinear control Workshop
dedicated to the 60th birthdays of Arjan van der Schaft and Harry Trentelman
International Program Committee 22st Int. Symp. Mathematical Theory of Networks and Sys-
tems (MTNS), Minneapolis, USA
International Program Committee Member 2nd Indian Control Conference, Hyderabad, India
– Mirjam Dür was a visiting researcher (1 week) at the Department of Mathematics, Technion
Haifa, Israel,
gave a plenary talk at MOPTA 2015 (Modeling and OPtimization: Theory and Applications),
Lehigh University in Bethlehem, PA, USA,
was a member of the jury for the JoGO Best Paper 2014 Award of the Journal of Global Opti-
mization.
– Harry Trentelman is a member of the IEEE Technical Committee on Behavioral Systems and
Control. He was an appointed member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Control Systems
Society, and a member of the advisory board of the Lorentz Center.
He is international Program Committee Member 22st Int. Symp. Mathematical Theory of Net-
works and Systems (MTNS), Minneapolis, USA
– Arjan van der Schaft is Chairman of the international Steering Committee of the International
Symposium on Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems (MTNS).
He is member of the
IFAC Technical Committee on Non-linear Control Systems;
IFAC Technical Committee on Distributed Parameter Systems;
IEEE Control Systems Society Technical Committee on Systems Biology.
He was long-term visitor (August 25 - October 31, 2015) of the Institute of Mathematics and
its Applications (IMA), University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
5.7 Further information
List of seminars 2015:
– 2015, December 3, 11:00-12:00
Luigi Iannelli (University of Sannio in Benevento)
The I3RES EU project: ICT based management for the smart grid optimal operation
– 2015, November 26, 11:00-12:00
67
JBI Annual Report
John W. Simpson-Porco (University of California, Santa Barbara)
Voltage control of micro and power grids
– 2015, November 25, 15:00-16:00
Luigi Iannelli (University of Sannio in Benevento)
A receding horizon approach for the optimal power flow in storage equipped electrical grids
– 2015, November 19, 11:00-12:00
Luigi Iannelli (University of Sannio in Benevento)
A colored Gauss-Seidel approach for the distributed network flow problem
– 2015, November 5, 11:00-12:00
Stephan Trenn (University of Kaiserslautern)
Funnel synchronization for multi agent systems
– 2015, November 4, 11:00-12:00
Aneel Tanwani (University of Kaiserslautern)
Using norm estimators for sampled-data control of nonlinear systems with dynamic output feed-
back
2015, July 9, 11:00-12:00
Serkan Gugercin (Virginia Tech)
Input-independent, optimal model reduction: Moving from linear to nonlinear dynamics
– 2015, June 25, 11:00-12:00
Matin Jafarian (University of Groningen)
Coordination with binary controllers: formation control and disturbance rejection
– 2015, June 12, 11:15-12:15
Mario Sznaier (Northeastern University)
The interplay between big data and sparsity in systems and control
– 2015, June 9, 16:00-17:00
Fan Zhang (University of Groningen)
Distributed control of networked Lur’e systems
– 2015, May 12, 16:00-17:00
Arjan van der Schaft (University of Groningen)
A network dynamics approach to chemical reaction networks
– 2015, April 24, 11:15-12:15
Alessandro Macchelli (University of Bologna)
Towards a port-based formulation of macro-economic systems
68
JBI Annual Report
– 2015, April 23, 16:00-17:00
Mauricio Munoz Arias (University of Groningen)
Energy-based control design for mechanical systems
– 2015, March 27, 11:00-12:00
Steffen Waldherr (University of Magdeburg)
Dynamic optimization of metabolic-genetic networks
– 2015, February 19, 11:00-12:00
Ewoud Vos (University of Groningen)
Formation control in the port-Hamiltonian framework
– 2015, February 3, 11:30-12:30
Jonathon Mayo Maldonado (University of Southampton)
Introduction to micro and smart grids
– 2015, January 28, 11:15-12:15
Jonathon Mayo Maldonado (University of Southampton)
Switched linear differential systems
– 2015, January 23, 14:00-15:00
Jonathon Mayo Maldonado (University of Southampton)
Introduction to power electronics
69
JBI Annual Report
70
JBI Annual Report
6. Distributed Systems
Group leader:
Prof. dr. ir. M. Aiello
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof. dr. ir. M. Aiello RuG 1.0
Prof. dr. A. Lazovik RuG 1.0
Non-tenured staff (JBI members)
Dr. D. Bucur RuG 1.0
Administrative staff
E.D. Elshof RuG 0.15
Postdocs
G.A. Pagani IBM/RUG 0.2
I. Georgievski NWO 0.2
T.A. Nguyen RuG 0.1
PhD students
F.A.S. AlSaif KKU-SA 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
F. Blauw Espria 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
I. Georgievski (Until September) NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
H. Groefsema NWO 0.5
(supervisor: Aiello)
T.A. Nguyen (Until November) V322 Vietnam 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
F. Nizamic JoinEU-SEE 1.0
(supervisor: Lazovik)
A. R. Pratama LPDP 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
A. Sha CSC 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
B. Setz NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Aiello)
71
JBI Annual Report
Guests
B. Rochdi, University of Skikda, Algeria
D. Amendola, La Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
E. Sosa, Universidad Nacional de Misiones, Argentina
72
JBI Annual Report
6.1 Research Program
Distributed Information Systems are concerned with the delocalization of computation on several
hosts and their coordination via message passing. Looking at today’s information systems, one no-
tices that most of them, if not all, have some form of distribution. The key issues that emerge for
research become those of addressing heterogeneity, scalability, and run-time adaptation. In the con-
text of distributed systems, the group focuses on a number of sub-areas: Service-Oriented and Cloud
Computing, Pervasive Computing and Sensor Networks. While interesting applications areas for the
group are: Health care, Domotics and Smart Energy Systems.
6.1.1 Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing
Service-Oriented Computing (SOC) is an emerging computing paradigm for building distributed in-
formation systems in which the concepts of distribution, openness, asynchronous messaging and loose
coupling take a leading role. In this context, applications are built out of individual services that ex-
pose functionalities by publishing their interfaces into appropriate repositories, abstracting entirely
from the underlying implementation. Published interfaces may be searched by other services or users
and subsequently be invoked. The interest in SOC is a consequence of the shift from a vision of a
Web based on the presentation of information to a vision of the Web as computational infrastructure,
where systems and services can interact in order to fulfill users’ requests. Web Services (WS), the
best-known example, are the realization of service-oriented systems based on open standards and in-
frastructures, extending the XML syntax. The ‘servicization’ of software envisioned with SOC has
brought to the idea of Cloud Computing. In the latter approach, services are further abstracted and
clustered in opaque and remote “clouds” of computational and storage services. This allows for vir-
tually infinite scalability from the service consumer perspective, while promoting the ‘offering’ of
underutilized resources on the producer’s side. Our group is active on three main lines of research:
(1) Artificial Intelligence (AI) planning for taking advantage of the dynamicity of SOC and Cloud
frameworks; (2) Cloud provisioning; and (3) Service-based business process management.
Automatic Service Composition
Service domains constitute an application field where automated planning can significantly contribute
towards achieving customizable and adaptable composition. In many cases, domains can be char-
acterised with composite services that describe more complex situations than basic services. The
composite services contain advice on how to perform efficient compositions. Among planning tech-
niques, Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning supports representing such composite information
and enables automatic service composition. HTN planning uses a domain description that contains
methods as possible ways of decomposing composite services. We investigated the use of HTN plan-
ning for service composition in the domains of ubiquitous computing and cloud computing.
73
JBI Annual Report
Automation and Decision Making in Buildings
The vision of a future in which environments support the people occupying them requires computing
facilities that could help evolve these environments. At the same time, the overall objective to save
energy as much as possible should be maintained. All this can be accomplished by bringing a degree
of sophistication to the processing of and reasoning over the information provided by a network of
diverse devices and sensors. The processing refers to the achievement of some goal (or performing a
task), and the selection and combination of tasks at run-time. In this way, the goal achievement can
result in different solutions depending on the current state of the environment.
Modern indoor spaces form an environment that is particularly suitable for the application of auto-
mated planning. While the environment is well structured and usually well defined, it is also partially
controllable, which makes the added value gained by non-trivial automated composition and moni-
toring of operations a feasible and realistic task. Given such setting, automated planning can perform
powerful reasoning for complex tasks which considerably advance the level of environment intelli-
gence. We have deployed our HTN planner in the restaurant of our own office building Bernoulliborg.
The planner computes a plan as a sequence of actions that control restaurant lamps in such a way that
lamps are turned on only if necessary with respect to the natural light level and the presence of people
in the restaurant. This enables us to achieve interesting results on energy saving.
Model Checking for Business Process Variability and Compliance
Business Process Management is deployed by organizations to support their main business goals.
When similar business processes are deployed in different organizations, one typically adapts a tem-
plate process manually to the different execution environments and organizational needs. In more ex-
treme cases, however, organizations are forced to adapt their methods to match the template process in
order to reduce initial development costs. However, throughout each process adaption, organizations
must also continue to adhere to governmental laws and international regulations to avoid large fines.
Current techniques verify such compliance either during or after process execution. Non-compliant
processes then need to be rolled back, either partially in the best case scenario, or entirely. How-
ever, by offering temporal logic based business process templates and a translation from a business
process to a Kripke structure, a process can be verified against its template specification using model
checking techniques pre-runtime. As a result, non-compliant processes can easily be detected prior to
process execution, avoiding process execution and roll-back costs. The research is focused on offering
model checking of business processes pre-runtime for compliance and variability needs. We propose
a translation from a business process to a Kripke structure through colored Petri net patterns such that
temporal logic formulas (e.g. CTL or LTL) can be verified using established model checkers. An
early prototype was developed to support the definition of template specifications, translate business
processes through Petri nets into Kripke structures, and subsequently call the NuXMV model checker
while interpreting its results to provide the user with visual feedback.
Data Centre
In “Metrics for Energy-aware and Sustainable Data Centers. V. Dinesh Reddy, B. Setz, G.R. Gangad-
haran, M. Aiello. To be published“, we look at the numerous metrics available for different aspects
74
JBI Annual Report
of data centers and analyse these metrics to discover relationships between different metrics. There
is still unfathomable information on the efficiency of the data centers. It is essential to have this in-
formation to predict the growth or set effective metrics and targets in Data Centers. With the rapid
growth of data center demands and environmental issues people have identified this as one of the
fastest rising sectors in this decade. Continuous monitoring and measuring will help the data center
operators pro-actively identify and resolve potential issues, serve the growing business demands and
thus improve the financial growth of an organization. This is a clear end goal for metrics development
work streams. In this work, we explore diverse metrics that are currently used in various data center
infrastructure components and propose a taxonomy of metrics based on various dimensions of a data
center. Based on our observations, we believe that new metrics should be developed considering dif-
ferent factors like age, location, type of data center and managerial issues.
6.1.2 Pervasive Computing and Sensor Networks
Pervasive computing envisions a future in which computers seamlessly blend into the fabric of daily
life and eventually “disappear” in the environment. Domotics and building automation consider in-
door environments daily used by humans where large numbers of small, inexpensive and networked
processing units are embedded into everyday objects. These units are organised and interoperate in
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs). Applications range from support for healthy aging, for people
needing medical assistance, or for saving energy by means of automatic control.
Sensor Networks
In “Characterizing Topological Bottlenecks for Data Delivery in CTP using Simulation-Based Stress
Testing with Natural Selection“ (Ad Hoc Networks) we analyze the performance of routing proto-
cols for ad-hoc networks. Protocols such as the Collection Tree Protocol (CTP) are designed with
simple node-local behaviour, but are deployed on testbeds with uncontrollable physical topology; ex-
haustively verifying the protocol on all possible topologies at design time is not tractable. We obtain
topological insights on CTP performance, to answer the question: Which topological patterns cause
CTP data routing to fail? We stress-test CTP with a quantitative testing method which searches for
topologies using evolutionary algorithms combined with protocol simulation. The method iteratively
generates new test topologies, such that the execution of the protocol over these topologies shows
increasingly worse data-delivery ratios (DDR). We obtain a large set of example topologies of dif-
ferent network sizes up to 50 nodes, network densities, data rates, table sizes, and radio-frequency
noise models, which, although connected, trigger a data delivery of nearly zero. We summarize these
topologies into three types of topological problems, the root cause of which is the presence of certain
asymmetric links and cycles, combined with a certain size of the routing table. We verify causality,
i.e., show that randomly generated topologies having these particular features do cause low DDR in
CTP. This testing methodology, while computationally intensive, is sound, fully automated and has
better coverage over the corner cases of protocol behaviour than testing a protocol over manually
75
JBI Annual Report
crafted or random topologies.
In “Black Holes and Revelations: Using Evolutionary Algorithms to Uncover Vulnerabilities in Disruption-
Tolerant Networks“ (Evo*) we do a security analysis of Disruption-Tolerant Networks. A challenging
aspect in open ad hoc networks is their resilience against malicious agents. This is especially true
in complex, urban-scale scenarios where numerous moving agents carry mobile devices that create
a peer-to-peer network without authentication. A requirement for the proper functioning of such
networks is that all the peers act legitimately, forwarding the needed messages, and concurring to
the maintenance of the network connectivity. However, few malicious agents may easily exploit the
movement patterns in the network to dramatically reduce its performance. We propose a methodol-
ogy where an evolutionary algorithm evolves the parameters of different malicious agents, determin-
ing their types and mobility patterns in order to minimize the data delivery rate and maximize the
latency of communication in the network. As a case study, we consider a fine-grained simulation of
a large-scale disruption-tolerant network in the city of Venice. By evolving malicious agents, we un-
cover situations where even a single attacker can hamper the network performance, and we correlate
the performance decay to the number of malicious agents. In future works, there will be included
a functional analysis of other types of networks, such as social networks, for relevant performance
factors.
Green Computing
In ”Power Management of Personal Computers based on User Behaviour. B. Setz, F. Nizamic, A. La-
zovik and M. Aiello. International Conference on Smart Cities and Green ICT Systems.”, we propose
a method to decrease the energy consumption of personal computers by learning the user’s behaviour.
It has been shown that up to 64 percent of personal computers in office buildings are left running dur-
ing after-hours. Enabling power management options such as sleep mode is a straightforward method
to reduce the energy consumption of computers. However, choosing the right timeout can be challeng-
ing. A sleep timeout which is too low leads to discomfort, whereas a timeout which is too high results
in poor energy saving efficiency. Having the users choose their own sleep timeout is not viable as
research shows that most users disable the sleep timeout completely, or choose a suboptimal timeout.
Unlike existing context based power management systems which use predefined rules, we propose a
solution which can determine a personalized sleep timeout for any point in time solely based on the
users behaviour. We propose multiple models which have the goal of maximizing the energy savings
while minimizing discomfort. The models are tested on the computers of employees of the University
of Groningen over several weeks. We analyse the results of the experiments and determine which
model performs best. We can potentially save between 4.02 and 17.17 kWh per computer per year,
depending on the model that used.
Online Fault Detection and Classification in WSNs
In pervasive computing environments, wireless sensor networks play an important infrastructure role,
collecting reliable and accurate context information so that applications are able to provide services to
users on demand. In such environments, sensors should be self-adaptive by taking correct decisions
based on sensed data in real-time in a decentralised manner; however, sensed data is often faulty. We
76
JBI Annual Report
thus design a decentralised scheme for fault detection and classification in sensor data in which each
sensor node does localised fault detection. The question we are trying to answer is how to process as
much data as possible while keeping the communication overhead, memory and computational cost
low.
Automation and Decision Making in Buildings
The vision of a future in which environments support the people occupying them requires computing
facilities that could help evolve these environments. At the same time, the overall objective to save
energy as much as possible should be maintained. All this can be accomplished by bringing a degree
of sophistication to the processing of and reasoning over the information provided by a network of
diverse devices and sensors. The processing refers to the achievement of some goal (or performing a
task), and the selection and combination of tasks at run-time. In this way, the goal achievement can
result in different solutions depending on the current state of the environment.
Modern indoor spaces form an environment that is particularly suitable for the application of auto-
mated planning. While the environment is well structured and usually well defined, it is also partially
controllable, which makes the added value gained by non-trivial automated composition and moni-
toring of operations a feasible and realistic task. Given such setting, automated planning can perform
powerful reasoning for complex tasks which considerably advance the level of environment intelli-
gence. We were working on applying HTN planning to the domain of office buildings. Future work
includes a deployment and testing of our planner in an actual environment.
WSNs Techniques for Energy Savings in Buildings
We strive to apply our smart solutions to new buildings to make them even more energy-efficient. To
realised such solutions, we believe that buildings should be able to understand not only their outside
and inside environment conditions (e.g., temperature, natural light, etc.) but also their occupants’
activity, thus they can adapt their operations in order to reduce their energy consumption while main-
taining the same level of service. For the sake of environment monitoring and context information
gathering, we rely on wireless sensor networks (WSNs) to monitor and collect context information as
well as for actuating and controlling the environment accordingly.
Existing buildings are responsible for more than 40% of the world’s total primary energy consumption.
Office buildings are responsible for a significant fraction of the energy consumption and greenhouse
gas emissions worldwide. Moreover, current building management systems fail to reduce unnecessary
energy consumption while preserving user comfort because they are unable to cope with dynamic
changes due to users’ interaction with the environment.Therefore, to cope with the dynamicity of
building’s environment and users’ activity, we study, both theoretically and practically, middleware for
sensing and controlling buildings with emphasis on human activity recognition and adaptive control to
reach savings of up to 30% in building energy consumption. As a future work, we focus on extending
our smart energy system to automated control of heating systems.
We developed a prototype that uses processes sensory and actuatory data and reasons over such context
77
JBI Annual Report
information to compute a plan. The plan is sequence of actions that control restaurant lamps in such a
way that lamps are turned on only if necessary with respect to the natural light level and the presence
of people in the restaurant.
6.1.3 Smart Energy Infrastructures
Energy markets are undergoing important changes in latest years, especially the unbundling tendency
in the energy sector is changing the rules of the game. In addition, at the same time, economies of
scale for technologies once unaffordable for the end user, are helping the spread of small-scale energy
generators (i.e., combined heat and power, photovoltaic panels, small-wind turbines) that allow even
the end user to produce its own energy. In this landscape we envision a future energy system in
which every user in the power-grid network becomes a peer who can either sell its own produced
energy surplus to everybody else in the network, or buy energy from someone else, at a give point
in time. The main research focus is to investigate how it is possible to exchange energy in a peer-
to-peer oriented network grid both from a network topology perspective and from a software service
perspective. Moreover, this approach can also be a good driver to the spread of renewable energies
generation, which is easier to implement at small and local scale, reduce losses and inefficiencies in
energy transmission and distribution and overall contribute to reach a zero-impact energy system on
the environment.
In 2015, the focus has been on collaboration with the industry and other institutions. Common ground
concerning network reliability in an attack-healing process have been evaluated. Another side of the
research has focused on the evaluation of failure conditions in complex network of electric assets and
data analytics on such assets. This last research topic was realized in collaboration with IBM Research
T.J. Watson. Together with University of Pisa and University of Modena, the optimal location of stage
resources in the power grid have been investigated during student exchange programs.
Future efforts will be devoted to go further in evaluating the economic relationships with evolved
distribution networks and on investigating new and additional services required in the Smart Grid
panorama.
6.1.4 Health Care
There is a paradigm shift in modern day health care towards a patient-centered approach, where pa-
tients are in control of managing their disease, often through the use of web applications. For patients
suffering from schizophrenia however, little has been done so far and this is often attributed to the
fact that these patients have different needs with respect to the structure, content, and user interface
of a web site. This is why the University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) and the University of
Groningen cooperate to design an intelligent web application specifically for this group of patients.
78
JBI Annual Report
By data mining patients’ questionnaire answers, test results, health records, and demographic infor-
mation, relevant information and intelligent suggestions can be offered, personalized and localized for
each patient.
Another project we are working on is based on automating vector autoregression (VAR) of patient
diary data. VAR techniques allow medical professionals to see, for individual patients, for example
whether depression causes a lack of activity, or whether a lack of activity causes depression. VAR
is a promising technique when applied in the analysis of patient diary data, but the construction of
VAR models requires expertise and time. Currently, vector autoregression on patient diary data is
strictly done manually by statisticians, which causes a delay of weeks between when patients enter
their data and when clinicians can interpret the results. In 2013, we have created a web application
that automates most parts of the VAR approach and can provide medical professionals with quick
results. This project is also in cooperation with the UMCG.
Each person is different and should be treated as such. Comparing personal data to group averages
can a give basic idea on how a person compares to the general population, but does not suffice for
providing ‘true personal feedback. In order to personalize feedback, measuring changes within the
person (e.g., over time) could be much more informative.
In psychopathology, a paradigm shift takes place towards a more person-centred approach. Healthcare
group Espria has set up a project to include a person-centred approach for assessing the well-being of
elderly people. Espria plans to measure a large group of elderly people by conducting questionnaires.
With these questionnaires we want to provide the participants with interesting feedback about their
well-being. Such feedback could provide insight into their well-being and help to sustain or even
enhance it. The University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) and the University of Groningen
(RuG) are collaborating on the development of a system to conduct these questionnaires, to analyse
the data, and to provide meaningful and personal feedback. The research in this project focuses on
novel and effective ways to analyse the collected data and to provide feedback. In the first phase the
research focussed on the general population of the Netherlands (i.e., all people aged 18 and above), in a
project known as HowNutsAreTheDutch? (www.hoegekis.nl). In the second phase (the current phase)
the focus shifts towards the elderly people in the Netherlands. For this second project we are applying
novel methods to analyse the data and provide feedback, but are also tailoring the questionnaires
conducted to the participants, by asking only the questions relevant to the person under study.
In the last phase of the project we will also research various machine learning techniques, and deter-
mine which of them could best be used for analysis in the field of mental health. For example, as a
means to determine response to treatment.
79
JBI Annual Report
6.1.5 Electronic Learning
Even though there are rubrics being utilized to evaluate quality in on-line course materials, so far, most
of the industries did not agree on the instruments being utilized to assess the information systems as-
pects on web-based learning programs. Many institutions profusely promote that they provide quality
on-line education yet they do not have a way to assess or benchmark their programs. Higher education
is in need of new ways to classify and evaluate the information systems for electronic learning. To
improve this situation, in 2013, we started the study by searching the literature, comparing, and noting
the most recently designed Web-based information systems models. The planned study outcome is to
compare different information systems models to identify and quantify quality aspects of Web-based
learning in comparison to its traditional and hybrid counterparts; what is in turn needed to support the
development of strategic planning and decision making.
6.2 Research subjects
M. Aiello: Service-Oriented Computing, Ubiquitous Computing, Smart Energy Systems.
F.A.S. AlSaif: Learning Platforms, eLearning Quality Assurance Models, Data Management and De-
cision Support Systems.
F. Blaauw: Time series analysis, e (mental) health, machine learning, self-tracking, personalized
medicine.
D. Bucur: Performance and Reliability, Software/Program verification, Stochastic optimization, Wire-
less networks, Network protocols.
A. Emerencia: Knowledge Management, Statistical Inference, Ontological Reasoning, Intelligent
Web Applications.
I. Georgievski: Automated planning, service composition, ubiquitous computing, energy-saving sys-
tems.
H. Groefsema: Business Process Management, Service Composition, Variability Management, Com-
pliance Verification, Model Checking.
A. Lazovik: Automated Service Composition, Monitoring and Repair, Automated Planning, Cloud
Computing.
T.A. Nguyen: Information Processing in Sensor Networks, Activity Recognition, Context-aware Sys-
tems, Energy-efficient Buildings.
F. Nizamic: Smart Energy Systems, Service-Oriented Computing, Software Testing, Cloud Comput-
ing.
G.A. Pagani: Complex Network Analysis, Power Systems, Smart Grid, Analytics.
A. Sha: Smart Grid, Smart Energy Systems, Peer-to-peer Network.
B. Setz: Internet of Things, Data Center, Cloud Computing, Green Computing, Machine Learning.
A.R. Pratama: Context-awareness, Pervasive Computing, Occupancy recognition.
80
JBI Annual Report
6.3 Publications
Patents
– G.A. Pagani, A. Raman, T. Kumar, M. Lavin, Y. Kim, A. Aggarwal, Network Management
based on Modeling of Cascading Effect of Failure, U.S. Patent pending YOR920150070US1
Filed March 31, 2015.
Dissertations
– T. A. Nguyen, Energy Adaptive Buildings: From Sensor Data to Being Aware of Users, Pro-
motor: M. Aiello, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Science, University of Groningen, 27
November 2015, 203 pages.
– I. Georgievski, Coordinating services embedded everywhere via hierarchical planning, Pro-
motor: M. Aiello, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Science, University of Groningen, 9
October 2015, 264 pages.
Articles in scientific journals
– D. Bucur, G. Iacca, P.-T. de Boer, Characterizing Topological Bottlenecks for Data Delivery in
CTP using Simulation-Based Stress Testing with Natural Selection, Elsevier Ad Hoc Networks,
2015, 22–45.
– N. Capodieci, G.A. Pagani, G. Cabri and M. Aiello, An adaptive agent-based system for dereg-
ulated smart grids, Service Oriented Computing and Applications, Springer, 2015, 1-21.
– A. Emerencia, L. van der Krieke, E.H. Bos, P. de Jonge, N. Petkov and M. Aiello, Automating
vector autoregression on electronic patient diary data, IEEE J. Biomedical and Health Infor-
matics, 2015, 631-634.
– I. Georgievski and M. Aiello, HTN planning: Overview, comparison, and beyond, Artificial
Intelligence, 222, 2015, 124-156.
– L. van der Krieke, B.F. Jeronimus, F.J. Blaauw, R.B.K. Wanders, A.C. Emerencia, H.M. Schenk,
V. de Stijn, E. Snippe, M. Wichers, J.T.W. Wigman, E.H. Bos, K.J. Wardenaar and P. de
Jonge, HowNutsAreTheDutch (HoeGekIsNL): A crowdsourcing study of mental symptoms
and strengths, Int. J. Methods in Psychiatric Research, 2015, 6-10.
– G. A. Pagani and M. Aiello, A complex network approach for identifying vulnerabilities of the
medium and low voltage grid, Int. J. Critical Infrastructures, 11 (1), 2015, 36-61.
81
JBI Annual Report
– M. Rosas-Casals, S. Bologna, E. Bompard, G. D’Agostino, W. Ellens, G.A. Pagani, A.Scala, T.
Verma, Knowing power grids and understanding complexity science, Int. J. Critical Infrastruc-
tures, Inderscience, 11 (1), 2015, 4-14.
– C. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Shang and M. Aiello, Integrating Transactions into BPEL Service Com-
positions: An Aspect-Based Approach, ACM Transactions on the Web, 2015. 9(2):9:1-9:31.
Articles in conference and workshop proceedings
– F. Blaauw and A. Emerencia, A Service-Oriented Architecture for Web Applications in e-
mental health: two case studies, IEEE Int. Conf. Service Oriented Computing & Applications,
2015, 131-138.
– D. Bucur, G. Iacca, G. Squillero and A. Tonda, Black Holes and Revelations: Using Evolution-
ary Algorithms to Uncover Vulnerabilities in Disruption-Tolerant Networks, European Conf.
Applications of Evolutionary and Bio-inspired Computation, track EvoComNet: Application of
Nature-inspired Techniques for Communication Networks and other Parallel and Distributed
Systems, 2015, 2941.
– H. Groefsema and N.R.T.P. van Beest, Design-time Compliance of Service Compositions in
Dynamic Service Environments, IEEE Int. Conf. Service Oriented Computing & Applications,
2015, 108-115.
– T.A. Nguyen, M. Aiello, T. Yonezawa and K. Tei, A Self-healing Framework for Online Sensor
Data, Int. Workshop Self-Aware Internet of Things, 2015, 295-300.
– R. Schoenmaker and G.A. Pagani, Simulating the Interaction with a Smart Grid with Real
Services, 8th IEEE Int. Conf. Service Oriented Computing & Applications, 2015, 36-42.
82
JBI Annual Report
6.4 External funding and collaborations
External funding: active large projects.
Acronym Name Funding
Agency
Programme PI
DEMRE Design Electricity Market
and Renewable Energy
NWO Responsible Infor-
mation
Aiello
BIGS Beijing Groningen Smart
energy cities
NWO JSTP Smart Energy
in Smart Cities
Aiello
NextGen
SmartDC
Next Generation Smart
Data Centers
NWO Indo Dutch Science
Industry Collabo-
ration in Computer
Science
Aiello
EnSO Energy Smart Offices NWO Smart Energy Sys-
tems
Aiello
EnS Energising Services: En-
ergy Aware Services and
Services for the Energy
Sector
NWO China Netherlands
Joint Scientific
Thematic Research
Programme
Aiello
Nerdalize Heating Houses with
Computing Power in the
Form of Radiators
STW STW Take-off
Grant
Lazovik
The DS group has active a number of research projects funded mostly by NWO in areas tied to smart
energy systems, sustainability, collaboration with industry (see Table External funding). A number of
PhD positions are also funded by foreign funding agencies (see Table PhD study Grants).
83
JBI Annual Report
External funding: PhD study grants.
Acronym Name Funding
Agency
Recipient PI
JoinEU-SEE Testing for Highly Dis-
tributed Service-Oriented
Systems
European
Commis-
sion
Nizamic Lazovik
V322 WSN for energy saving Vietnam Nguyen Aiello
CSC CSC-RUG joint scholar-
ships programme
China
Schol-
arship
Council
Sha Aiello
LPDP Indonesia Endowment
Fund for Education
Ministry
of Fi-
nance of
the Re-
public of
Indonesia
Pratama Aiello
External Collaborations
Most notable collaborations were active with the following individuals and institutions:
Robin Hagemans, Pieter den Hamer, and Floran Stuijt, Alliander N.V., Tarun Kumar, Aanchal Aggar-
wal, Mark Lavin, and Abhishek Raman all, IBM Research, Marti Rosas-Casals, Polytechnic Univer-
sity of Catalonia, Lingen Luo, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Prof. J. Slaets, Espria Academy, Prof.
P. de Jonge, UMCG, Ester Kuiper and Chantal Bosman, Lifely, Dr. Blagoj Ristevski, St. Kliment
Ohridski University in Bitola, V. Dinesh Reddy and Prof. G R Gangadharan, the Institute for Devel-
opment and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, India, A. Berfu Unal and Ellen
Van Der Werff, Environmental Psychology RUG, Giovanni Squillero, Politecnico di Torino, Alberto
Tonda, French National Institute for Agricultural Research, Giovanni Iacca, INCAS3, Dr. Guram Be-
shanshvili, New Mexico State University, Prof. Dr. Dustdar, Technical University of Vienna, Prof.
Dr. Wim van Gemert, Hanzehogeschool, Prof. Dr. Gottlob, Technical University of Vienna, Prof.
Dr. George Huitema, RUG and TNO, Peter Kamphuis, Hanzehogeschool, Groningen, Prof. Dr. Eiter,
Technical University of Vienna, Prof. Dr. Han Slootweg, TU/e and Enexis, Prof. Dr. Stefan Tai,
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Prof. Dr. Apt, Arbab CWI, Prof. Dr. Michael Beigl, KIT, Prof. Dr.
Daniele Nardi, UoR, Prof. Dr. Bernhard Nebel, FU, Prof. Dr. Roberto Baldoni, UoR, Dr. Massimo
Mecella, UoR, Prof. Dr. HT Yang, National Cheng Kung University, Dr. Rix Groenboem, Parasoft,
Hemmo Halzebos, Enexis, Dr. Heiko Ludwig, IBM, Wico Mulder, Logica, H. Zwaal, TenneT, Emil-
84
JBI Annual Report
iano Binotti, Fluid Solutions, Dr. Paul Shrubsole, Philips Research Laboratories, Dr. Chun Yu Chen,
ITRI, Jose J de las Heras, Advantic Sistemas Y Servicios S.L., Prof Dr. Marti Rosas-Casals, Poly-
technic University of Catalonia, Will West Control4 Corporation, Prof. Dr. Christian Claudel, King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Prof. Dr. Kenji Tei, Japanese National Institute of
Informatics.
6.5 Further activities
Aiello is an honorary professor at Bournemouth University, UK. Aiello is the Information Director
of the Transactions on Computational Logic of the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM).
He is a member of the reviewing board of Frontiers in Energy Systems and Policy. He is a member
of the editorial board of the Journal on Service Oriented Computing and Applications, Springer;
International Journal of Web Services Research, IGI-Global; and a member of the senior editorial
board of Annals of Computer Science and Information Systems of the Polish Information Processing
Society. He has been in the programme committee of more than 30 international conferences and
workshops. Since 2014, he sits on the board of the startup Nerdalize BV as representative of the
crowd-funders coop.
Georgievski was a member of the editorial board of the Journal of Emerging Research and Solutions
in ICT
6.6 Awards
B. Setz has been awarded SURFSara Duurzaamheid & ICT innovatieregeling 2015: 10.000 Euro
grant for the project ”Sustainable Buildings Competition”. F. Nizamic has been awarded some pres-
tigious awards: Best business model and pitch in Startup FastTrack weekend, Community Award at
the Pioneers Festival 2015, Energy Academy Europe for Startup FastTrack competition: 10.000 Euro
grant, Sustainable Campus International Competition 2015: 3,000 $ grant, and Top 100 out of 2300
competing startups at the Hello tomorrow 2015 startup conference.
85
JBI Annual Report
86
JBI Annual Report
7. Fundamental Computing Science
Group leader: Prof.dr. G.R. Renardel de Lavalette
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof.dr. G.R. Renardel de Lavalette RUG 1.0
Tenure track source fte
Dr. J.A. Pérez Parra RUG 1.0
Emeritus
Prof.dr. W.H. Hesselink
PhD student
M. Cano RUG
Drs. P. Dykstra Hanzehogeschool external
(supervisor: Renardel de Lavalette and Verbrugge
(AI))
Guest
J. Dedeić, University of Novi Sad, Serbia
87
JBI Annual Report
7.1 Research Program
The objective of this programme is to contribute to the understanding of the logical and mathemat-
ical foundations of computing science and to realize a two-way transfer between this fundamental
research and more applied subdisciplines of computing science. Our research focuses on formal
methods, which are based on concepts and theories from discrete mathematics and logic. They are
applied to enhance the reliability of computer systems and computer software, and also to further the
understanding of the possibilities of computing in general. The following themes are studied: for-
mal methods for concurrent systems, programming methodology, multi-agent systems, mathematical
logic.
In formal methods for concurrent systems, the main issues are specification and analysis. The research
for specification focuses on process calculi, formal languages that express the interaction of concur-
rent processes in a compositional style, while the research for analysis focuses on type systems for
process calculi, often referred to as behavioral type systems. Intuitively, types represent the structured
protocols that a process specification should implement. By coupling process calculi with behavioral
types, we obtain a compositional approach to the validation of safety and liveness properties on spec-
ifications of communicating systems. A particular class of behavioral types is session types, and thus
one talks of session-typed concurrency to refer to concurrent processes which adhere to protocols
specified as session types.
For programming methodology, the aim is to contribute to the design, specification, and verification
of sequential, parallel and distributed algorithms, programs, and systems. We prove properties of such
algorithms or systems by assertional means, i.e., by reasoning about individual states and computation
steps, rather than considering entire execution sequences. Even so, seemingly modest algorithms may
require a host of case distinctions that a human prover finds difficult to control. In such situations, we
use mechanical theorem provers for the administration of proof obligations.
Multi-agent systems is a subdiscipline of both Computing Science and Artificial Intelligence. Agents
are intelligent, possibly mobile processes to which intentions can be attributed: beliefs, desires and
commitments. A multi-agent system consists of agents that cooperate to perform a task. We focus on
social simulation with reasoning and communicating agents, for which we build agent communication
models based on dialogues, involving dialogical and fuzzy logic. We aim to apply our techniques and
result to better understanding of the emergence of extreme opinions in groups.
In mathematical logic, we focus on the proof theory of equational logic and Horn logic, and on in-
tuitionistic logic. Intuitionism was created by L.E.J. Brouwer; its logic, formalized by A. Heyting,
reappeared as the foundation of type theory with applications in programming and theorem proving.
Equational logic is the formalization of algebraic equational reasoning, used in tools like Mathemat-
ica. Horn logic is the logic of formulae of the form A1 ∧ · · · ∧ An → B; it is the basis of the
logic programming language Prolog. We focus on fundamental properties like completeness (is a
given proof system strong enough to prove all true statements?) and exactness (does a certain model
88
JBI Annual Report
correspond to the structure of a logic?).
7.2 Research subjects
Cano: session-typed concurrency, behavioural types, sychronous programming.
Dykstra: simulation of social and mobile agents, involving dialogues and group forming.
Hesselink: design and verification of concurrent and geometric algorithms.
Pérez: process calculi, type systems, session-typed concurrency.
Renardel: proof theory of equational logic and Horn logic; intuitionistic logic.
7.3 Publications
Chapters in books
– Gerard R. Renardel de Lavalette, Infinitary hybrid logic and the Lindelöf property, The Facts
Matter, Essays on Logic and Cognition in Honour of Rineke Verbrugge(Sujata Ghosh and Jakub
Szymanik, eds.), Tributes, 25, College Publications, 2015, 113-120.
Articles in scientific journals
– M. Bartoletti, I. Castellani, P.-M. Deniélou, M. Dezani-Ciancaglini, S. Ghilezan, J. Pantovic,
J.A. Pérez, P. Thiemann, B. Toninho, H. Torres Vieira, Combining behavioural types with se-
curity analysis, J. Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming, 84, 2015, 763-780.
– P.A. Buhr, D. Dice, and W.H. Hesselink, High-performance N-thread software solutions for
mutual exclusion, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 27, 2015, 651-
701.
– C. Di Giusto, J.A. Pérez, Disciplined structured communications with disciplined runtime adap-
tation, Science of Computer Programming, 97, 2015, 235-265.
– P. Dykstra, W. Jager, C. Elsenbroich, R. Verbrugge, G. Renardel de Lavalette, An Agent-Based
Dialogical Model with Fuzzy Attitudes, J. Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 18 (3),
2015, 3 pages. <http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/18/3/3.html>
– W.H. Hesselink, Mutual exclusion by four shared bits with not more than quadratic complexity,
Science of Computer Programming, 102, 2015, 57-75.
89
JBI Annual Report
Articles in conference proceedings
– M. Cano, C. Rueda, H.A. López, J.A. Pérez, Declarative interpretations of session-based con-
currency, Proc. 17th Int. Symp. Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming (Moreno
Falaschi and Elvira Albert, eds.), ACM, 2015, 67-78.
– O. Dardha, J.A. Pérez, Comparing Deadlock-Free Session Typed Processes, Proc. Combined
22th Int. Workshop on Expressiveness in Concurrency and 12th Workshop on Structural Op-
erational Semantics, and 12th Workshop on Structural Operational Semantics, EXPRESS/SOS
2015 (Silvia Crafa and Daniel Gebler, eds.), Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer
Science, 190, 2015, 1-15.
– J. Dedeić, J. Pantović, J.A. Pérez, On Compensation Primitives as Adaptable Processes, Proc.
Combined 22th Int. Workshop on Expressiveness in Concurrency and 12th Workshop on Struc-
tural Operational Semantics, and 12th Workshop on Structural Operational Semantics, EX-
PRESS/SOS 2015 (Silvia Crafa and Daniel Gebler, eds.), Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical
Computer Science, 190, 2015, 16-30.
– S. Ghilezan, S. Jaksić, J. Pantović, J.A. Pérez, H. Torres Vieira, A Typed Model for Dy-
namic Authorizations, Proc. Eighth Int. Workshop on Programming Language Approaches
to Concurrency- and Communication- cEntric Software, PLACES 2015 (Simon Gay and Jade
Alglave, eds.), Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, 203, 2015, 73-84.
– D. Kouzapas, J.A.Pérez, N. Yoshida, Characteristic Bisimulation for Higher-Order Session Pro-
cesses, 26th Int. Conf. Concurrency Theory CONCUR 2015 (Luca Aceto and David de Frutos-
Escrig, eds.), 42, LIPIcs, 2015, 398-411.
7.4 External funding, collaboration and internationalization
Dykstra and Renardel collaborate with R. Verbrugge (RUG, Artificial Intelligence), W. Jager (RUG,
Faculty of Economics and Business Sciences) and C. Elsenbroich (University of Surrey, Guildford,
U.K.) on multi-agent based social simulation.
Hesselink collaborates with P.A. Buhr (University of Waterloo, Canada) and D. Dice (Oracle Labs,
Burlington, USA) on design and verification of mutual exclusion algorithms for shared memory sys-
tems, and with Alex Aravind (University of Northern British Columbia) on algorithms for group
mutual exclusion.
Pérez is a member of the management committees of the EU COST Actions IC1201 (BETTY: Be-
havioral Types for Reliable LargeScale Software Systems) and IC1402 (ARVI: Runtime Verification
Beyond Monitoring).
Pérez collaborates with L. Caires and B. Toninho (University NOVA of Lisbon, Portugal), M. Cano
90
JBI Annual Report
and C. Rueda (Universidad Javeriana, Colombia), I. Castellani (INRIA, France), M. Dezani-Ciancaglini
(University of Turin, Italy), C. Di Giusto (University of Nice, France), O. Dardha (University of
Glasgow, UK), N. Yoshida and D. Kouzapas (Imperial College London, UK) on diverse aspects of
session-typed concurrency.
7.5 Further information
Hesselink is a member of the Editorial Board of the international scientific journal Science of Com-
puter Programming.
91
JBI Annual Report
92
JBI Annual Report
8. Intelligent Systems
Group leader: Prof.dr.sc.techn. N. Petkov
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof. dr. M. Biehl RuG 1.0
Prof.dr.sc.techn. N. Petkov RuG 1.0
Dr. M.H.F. Wilkinson RuG 1.0
Researchers source fte
G. Azzopardi TNO, RuG 0.2
PhD students
K. Domaschke HS Mittweida external
(supervisor: Biehl, Villmann)
M. Gay HS Mittweida external
(supervisor: Biehl, Lampe)
M. Lange HS Mittweida external
(supervisor: Biehl, Villmann)
F. Melchert IFF Magdeburg, RUG UE
(supervisor: Biehl, Seiffert)
D. Nebel HS Mittweida external
(supervisor: Biehl, Villmann)
G. Owomugisha Makerere University external
(supervisor: Biehl, Mwebaze)
A.C. Emerencia NWO 1.0
(supervisors: Aiello, Petkov)
L. Fernandez Robles Univ. Leon external
(supervisors: Petkov, Alegre)
J. Guo PR China 1.0
(supervisor: Petkov)
M. Lopez Antequera Univ. Malaga, RUG UE
(supervisors: Petkov, Gonzalez)
A. Neocleous Univ. Cyprus, RUG UE
(supervisors: Petkov, Schizas)
N. Striscuiglio Univ. Salerno, RUG UE
(supervisors: Petkov, Vento)
C. Shi priv. funds 1.0
(supervisor: Petkov)
E. Schiza Univ. Cyprus external
(supervisors: Petkov, Pattichis, Schizas)
93
JBI Annual Report
PhD students
E. Talavera Martinez Univ. Barcelona, RUG UE
(supervisors: Petkov, Radeva)
M. Babai KVI, RUG external
(supervisor: Wilkinson)
U. Moschini NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Wilkinson)
Jasper vand de Gronde NWO 1.0
(co-supervisor: Wilkinson)
R. Nakibuule NUFFIC external
(supervisor: Wilkinson)
Guests
A. Witoelar, University of Oslo, Norway
G. Zacchary, Arizona State Uinv., USA
A. Schulz, Bielefeld University, Germany
M. Lux, Bielefeld University, Germany
T. Villmann, Hochschule Mittweida, Germany
N. Caticha, Univ. Sao Paulo, Brazil
P. Bosilj, Universite de Bretagne-Sud, IRISA Vannes, France
J. Westerinck, Philips Research, Eindhoven
L. Brun, Univ. Caen, France
D. Pleiter, FZ Jeulich and Univ. Regensburg, Germany
G. Kruithof, Astron, Netherlands
C. K. Neocleous, Tech. Univ. Cyprus, Cyprus
C. N. Schizas, Univ. Cyprus, Cyprus
J. Oostveen, TNO, Netherlands
J. Tavares, Univ. Porto, Portugal
P. Radeva, Univ. Barcelona, Spain
R. van Wezel, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands
94
JBI Annual Report
8.1 Research Program
High quality research in the area of intelligent computer systems is our mission. We aim at publishing
in top journals and presenting results at leading international conferences. Strong emphasis is put
on training graduate students and mentoring post-doctoral researchers to achieve outstanding results,
having in mind also relevant interdisciplinary applications of computer science in life sciences, health
care, finance, astronomy, etc.
A large variety of interrelated topics is addressed in our our research program, including image pro-
cessing and analysis, computer vision, pattern recognition, machine learning and brain-inspired com-
puting.
We intend to continue developing efficient methods and algorithms in the general area of Intelligent
Systems. By doing so, we will participate in the grand challenge of giving computers the abilities to
perceive, analyse, learn, take decisions and to enhance human creativity. Various trans-disciplinary ap-
plications from areas such as medicine, life sciences in general, animal breeding, astronomy, robotics,
surveillance, law enforcement or the financial industry continue to provide inspiration for our work.
Notably, life-science, bio-medical and health-care applications constitute one important focus for our
future research and a number of long-term collaborations have been established.
We participate in the school of Behavioural and Cognitive Neurosciences (BCN) with the brain-
inspired computing aspects of our research. We are also members of the Advanced School of Com-
puting and Imaging (ASCI) and we contribute to its course programme. We participate in the EU
H2020 project TrimBot and the STW special programme Breed for Food. Our group plays an in-
strumental role in the Intelligent Systems specialisation of the MSc programme in Computer Science,
by offering courses in Computer Vision, Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks and by providing
research projects for graduate students. These graduate courses are followed also by many students of
Artificial Intelligence and other programs.
Brain-inspired computing in pattern recognition and computer vision
We develop models of information processing in brain cortex and use them in computer algorithms.
This research is relevant for the areas of image and audio processing, computer vision, pattern recog-
nition, visual perception, and computational neuroscience. Our goal is to understand how people see
and to deploy principles of natural vision in computer algorithms for artificial vision. Using facts
from neuroscience and visual perception, we build models of visual and audio information processing
in the brain and use them in computer simulations to obtain insights and derive practical computer
vision algorithms.
One example is a model of a grating cell that we developed [Petkov, Kruizinga: 1997 Biol. Cyb. 76:
83-96] and used in a texture operator [Kruizinga, Petkov: 1999 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 8: 1395-1407],
[Grigorescu, Petkov, Kruizinga: 2002 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 11: 1160-1167]. By means of computer
simulations we demonstrated that grating cells may play an important role in the disambiguation of
95
JBI Annual Report
edge information in early vision (texture vs. contours).
Another example is our model of non-classical receptive filed inhibition, also called surround sup-
pression, in orientation selective neurons [Petkov, Westenberg: 2003 Biol. Cyb. 88: 236-246]. We
demonstrated that the biological role of this inhibitory mechanism is quick pre-attentive detection of
object contours and region boundaries in natural images that are rich in texture. Later, we studied
general contextual modulation in vision and its de-texturizing effect [Gheorghiu et al., Vis. Res. 104,
12-23, 2014]. We proposed various contour detection algorithms that deploy this mechanism and
showed that they are more effective in detecting object contours and region boundaries than tradi-
tional computer vision algorithms for edge detection [Grigorescu, Petkov, Westenberg: 2003 IEEE
Trans. Im. Proc. 12: 729-739], [Grigorescu, Petkov, Westenberg: 2004 Im. Vis. Comp. 22: 609–622],
[Papari, Campisi, Petkov, Neri: 2007 EURASIP J. Adv. Sig. Proc., Article ID 71828]. This work has
been extended by applying gestalt principles to edge grouping [Papari, Petkov: 2008 IEEE Trans. Im.
Proc. 17: 1950-1962], [Papari, Petkov: Proc. SPIE 2008, vol. 6812, art. no. 68121B].
We also studied the orientation and speed tuning properties of spatio-temporal 3D Gabor and motion
energy filters with surround suppression as models of time-dependent receptive fields of simple and
complex cells in primary visual cortex (V1) [Petkov, Subramanian: 2007 Biol. Cyb., 97: 423-439].
We demonstrated how these filters are related to motion detection, noise reduction, texture suppression
and contour enhancement.
We developed a new computational model of a simple cell that outperforms the popular Gabor func-
tion model [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2012 Biol. Cyb. 106 (3): 177-189], which was later extended by
introducing inhibition [Azzopardi, Rodriguez-Sanchez, Piater, Petkov: 2014 PLOS ONE, vol. 9 (7):
e98424. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0098424, 2014].
In the same line of research we modeled shape representation in areas V4 and TEO of visual cortex
and applied our models to various practical problems [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2011 LNCS 6854 : 451-
459], [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2012 Patt. Rec. Lett. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2012.11.002],
[Azzopardi, Petkov: 2013 IEEE Trans. PAMI 35 (2): 490-503], [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2013 LNCS 8048
: 9-16], [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2014 Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, vol. 8(80)], [Azzopardi,
Petkov: 2014 BrainComp, LNCS, vol. 8603], [Azzopardi et al.: 2015 Medical image analysis, 19 (1):
46-57, 2015].
We call our approach to model design ’combination of receptive fields’ (CORF). We developed an ef-
ficient implementation of the mentioned models that we call ’combination of shifted filter responses’
(COSFIRE). CORF models and COSFIRE filters are trainable as they can be configured by the auto-
matic analysis of a user-specified prototype pattern.
Another example of our research that is inspired by psychophysical research on the human visual sys-
tem is a method for the evaluation of the robustness of shape recognition algorithms to incompleteness
of contours [Ghosh, Petkov: 2005 IEEE Trans. PAMI 27: 1793-1804].
96
JBI Annual Report
Image and audio processing, computer vision, health care, big data, applications
We study processing operations that are fundamental for computer vision, such as contour detection.
This resulted in a large survey: G. Papari and N. Petkov: Edge and line oriented contour detection:
State of the art, J. Im. Vis. Comp., 29 (2-3), 2011, 79-103. Moreover, we have proposed a novel
contour detector that relies on simple operations: convolutions with difference-of-Gaussian filters,
blurring, shifting and multiplication [Azzopardi, Petkov (2012): LNCS 7552: 395-402].
In shape analysis we study geometrical approaches in which a feature point is characterized by the
spatial arrangement of other feature points around it. The collection of local geometrical descriptors
for the different feature points of an object is used as a shape characteristics of that object [Grigorescu,
Petkov: 2003 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 12: 1274-1286]. In the same context we developed a method for
the automatic construction of trainable filters that we called COSFIRE (Combination of Shifted Filter
Responses) [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2013 IEEE Trans. PAMI 35 (2): 490-503] and we demonstrated the
effectiveness of this approach in various practical applications.
Another direction in our work is the development of image processing operators that add artistic
effects to photographic images [Papari, Petkov, Campisi: 2007 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc., 16: 2449-
2662], [Papari, Petkov: 2009 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 18: 652-664].
On the applications side, we collaborate with researchers from the University of Leon, Spain, in
the area of automatic classification of boar spermatozoa [Sanchez, Petkov, Alegre: 2006 Cell. Mol.
Biol., 52: 38-43], [Petkov, Alegre, Biehl, Sanchez: 2008 Comp. Biol. Med. 38: 461-468]. We also
collaborate with the Department of Dermatology of the University Medical Center Groningen on the
application of content based image retrieval and expert systems to dermatological problems [Bosman,
Petkov, Jonkman: 2010 Skin Res. and Tech. 16: 109-113], [Bunte et al: 2011 Patt. Rec. 44 (9): 1892-
1902], [Giotis et al: 2012 Skin Res. and Tech., 19 (1), E123-E131], [Giotis et al.: Expert Systems with
Applications, 42 (19): 6578-6585, 2015]. We have also proposed a method to automatically localise
the vascular bifurcations in retinal images, a process that is important for the diagnosis of several
cardiovascular diseases. [Azzopardi, Petkov: 2013 Pattern Recognition Letters, 34 (8): 922-933].
We have recently proposed a novel delineation algorithm and demonstrated that it is highly effective
and efficient for the segmentation of the vessel trees in retinal fundus images [Azzopardi, Strisciuglio,
Vento, Petkov: 2015 Medical Image Analysis vol.19(1), 46-57].
Together with researchers from the Univ. of Salerno, we develop algorithms for audio surveillance
[Foggia et al.: IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, PP (99): 1-10, 2015], [Foggia et
al.: Pattern Recognition Letters, Available online 9 July 2015].
Together with researchers from the Universities of Malaga and Bielefeld, we develop algorithms for
oder recognition [Schleif et al.: Pattern Analysis and Applications. p. 1-14, 8 Jan. 2015].
97
JBI Annual Report
Another application to health care is the system for personalized advice for schizophrenia patients
that we develop with the group Distributed systems (M. Aiello) and researches from the psychiatry
department of UMCG [Emerencia et al 2013 AI in Medicine 58 (1): pp. 23-36].
Together with researchers from the Univ. of Cyprus, we work on eHealth systems [Schiza et al.:
Technology and Health Care Journal, 23 (4): 509-522, 2015].
In the area of big data, we designed a method that helps a large international bank recognise automat-
ically in an early phase who among the delayers of mortgage rate payments will default [Sun et al.,
CIFEE, 489-496, 2014]. Early recognition is important because banks need to block certain capital in
such cases and early arrangements with a client may reduce the overall amount. The method and its
computer implementation are in use at the concerned bank since mid-2013 and led to large reduction
of operation costs.
Connected filters, Connectivity Theory and Segmentation
Connected filters are a comparatively new field of research within mathematical morphology. They
are edge preserving operators which have found use in noise removal, texture analysis, image com-
pression and description, and feature extraction. Research on connected operators in our group entails
algorithm development (including parallelization), development of new classes of filters, applications
to 2-D and 3-D medical images, and the development of new connectivity measures for these filters
for increased robustness. Recently, processing of giga-pixel and tera-pixel scale images for remote
sensing and astronomy has been added to this list of applications.
One line of this research links to visual cortex modelling: developing morphological analogues of
texture operators based on models of certain visual cortical cells. It is hoped these morphological
counterparts will be an order of magnitude faster, whilst retaining the useful properties of the cortical
cell models. Finally, fast visualization based on connected attribute filters is being explored. Re-
cently, work has begun expanding this line into hyperconnected filters and attribute-space-connected
filters, which increase the flexibility of perceptual groupings available, and allow dealing with overlap
explicitly.
Extensions to colour, or other vector images, and even tensor images are being developed, both for
regular colour and multi-band processing and for diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Applications include
brain imaging, astronomical imaging, and work is being started on surveillance applications.
This research also has close links to machine learning, because machine learning technques are be-
coming incorporated into the morphological filtering methods themselves. Learning Vector Quantiza-
tion has been used to teach filters to enhance certain objects in images.
Segmentation is a core problem in image analysis, and methods based on both simple thresholding
methods and more advanced methods such as watersheds and deformable models are being explored.
Application areas are many, but the focus lies on biomedical imaging, both macroscopic (MRI, CT)
and microscopic. New application domains in astronomy are also being explored, and in particular
98
JBI Annual Report
automatic detection of astronomical sources in massive image databases.
Machine learning
Three major goals can be identified in our research activities in computational intelligence and ma-
chine learning: to obtain a thorough theoretical understanding of machine learning based data analysis,
the development and putting forward of efficient methods and algorithms, and their development in
relevant practical applications.
Theoretical investigations of model situations provide valuable insights into machine learning pro-
cesses and helps to optimize existing training schemes or to develop entirely new methods. Here,
the use of adaptive measures and relevance learning in distance based classifiers is in the center of
our interest. The method of Matrix Relevance Learning, for instance, is based on adaptive metrics in
Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ). It has proven to improve classification performance significantly
in many cases and, at the same time, provides valuable insights into the problem at hand.
With respect to algorithm development, important recent examples include specific approaches for
functional dat and the analysis of complex-valued feature vectors. Frequently, real world data com-
bine qualitatively different observation or measurements. An obvious example is that of patient data,
which stem from a variety of sources, frequently. The design and data driven optimization of suitable
methods for such multi-modal data sets is one of the most interesting challenges in the field.
Practical applications of newly developed methods and algorithms constitute an essential part of our
research. In this context, it is instrumental to establish and maintain intense collaborations with experts
from the application domain.
In the following, a few recent examples of application oriented projects are highlighted:
A very successful on-going project concerns the classification of adrenal tumors and aims at the de-
velopment of a reliable classifier based on steroid metabolomics data. The developed diagnostic tool
is currently evaluated for clinical use in a prospective study. The approach is also being extended with
respect to the monitoring of treated patients and the detection of tumor recurrences.
The recent investigation of cytokine expression data in the context of Rheumatoid Arthritis aimed at
the selection of relevant markers in the context of chronic inflammatory diseases. The results triggered
the identification of novel disease mechanisms in the early phases of Rheumatoid Arthritis.
As a third example of our activities in the analysis of bio-medical data, we would like to mention
the efficient detection and classification of crop plant diseases based on photographic images is the
topic of a joint project with Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda. This research will be extended
significantly with respect to the use of hyperspectral images and models of disease dynamics in the
framework of a project recently funded by the Melinda and Bill Gates Foundation.
Many scientific disciplines, in particular the life sciences, are experiencing an impressive increase of
99
JBI Annual Report
the rate at which data are acquired. In the bio-medical context, for instance, genomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, or other omics data play a role of increasing importance in areas ranging from ba-
sic research to clinical practice. Several methodological challenges can be identified immediately:
The huge amount of potentially relevant data calls for automated analyses tools. High-dimensional,
complex data sets need to be made accessible by means of compression and visualization techniques.
Similarly, problems related to clustering, classification, or regression trigger the search for efficient
dimension reduction tools and practical schemes for the selection of relevant features in the data.
Ultimately, the integration of information from various sources and technical platforms, e.g. clinical,
imaging, and -omics data poses the question of how to combine and relate mixed data sets effectively.
Methodological challenges like the ones mentioned above will continue to be in the focus of our re-
search interests. The close contact with real world applications constantly reveals interesting problems
and generates new research questions.
8.2 Overview of scientific results
Brain-inspired computing, pattern recognition, audio and image processing,
We proposed a novel delineation algorithm and demonstrated that it is highly effective and efficient
for the segmentation of the vessel trees in retinal fundus images [Azzopardi et al.: Medical Image
Analysis vol.19(1), 46-57, 2015], [Strisciuglio et al.: CAIP 2015, Vol. LNCS 9257, pp. 300-312].
The following paper received the bast paper award of VIPIMAGE 2015: N. Strisciuglio, M. Vento, G.
Azzopardi, N. Petkov: Unsupervised delineation of the vessel tree in retinal fundus images. Compu-
tational Vision and Medical Image Processing VIPIMAGE 2015, 149-155.
Together with researchers from the Univ. of Salerno, we developed new algorithms for audio surveil-
lance [Foggia et al.: IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, PP (99): 1-10, 2015], [Foggia
et al.: Pattern Recognition Letters, Available online 9 July 2015], [Foggia et al.: Proc of 12th IEEE
Int. Conf. on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS), 2015, 1-6],
Together with researchers from the Universities of Malaga and Bielefeld, we developed effective
algorithms for oder recognition [Schleif et al.: Pattern Analysis and Applications, 1-14, 8 Jan. 2015].
Together with researchers from the Univ. of Cyprus, we work on eHealth systems [Schiza et al.:
Technology and Health Care Journal, 23 (4): 509-522, 2015]. E.C. Schiza received the best student
paper award for the paper: E.C. Schiza, G. Panos, C. David, N. Petkov, C.N. Schizas: Integrated
electronic health record database management system: a proposal. ICIMTH 2015 - International
Conference on Informatics, Management, and Technology in Healthcare. July 9-11, 2015, Athens,
Greece, In Enabling Health Informatics Applications, in the series Studies in Health Technology and
100
JBI Annual Report
Informatics, 213: 187-190 (IOS Press, 2015).
We achieved good results in the recognition of architectural and electrical symbols by COSFIRE filters
with inhibition [Guo et al.: CAIP 2015, LNCS 9257, 2015, 348-358].
We achieved good results in cutting edge localisation in an edge profile milling head [Fernandez-
Robles et al. CAIP 2015, LNCS 9257, 2015, 336-347].
We achieved good results in the automatic differentiation of u- and n-serrated patterns in direct im-
munofluorescence images [Shi et al.: CAIP 2015, LNCS 9256, 2015, 513-521].
We achieved good results in the ornamentation detection and recognition in singing folk music [Neo-
cleous et al: CAIP 2015, LNCS 9256, 2015, 558-569].
Connected filters, Connectivity Theory and Segmentation
In terms of connected filters, several improvements of attribute filtering were made, along with forays
into hyperconnected attribute filters. The work on automatic attribute-threshold selection, to eliminate
the need for user intervention presented at International Conference on Pattern Recognition 2010, was
extended, and this extended study was published in the thesis of F.N. Kiwanuka. A more extensive
study has been accepted for publication in Pattern Recognition (online version available December
2015, in print 2016).
The work on implementing vector attribute filters in 3D and incorporating machine learning tech-
niques into them has been extended. Previously we have shown that several methods for unsupervised
learning (clustering) using vector attributes work better than automatic attribute threshold selection.
Initial results were presented at the International Conference on Pattern Recognition 2012, and this
work was extended to a wider study published in the thesis of F.N. Kiwanuka. Improvements have
been presented at the International Symposium on Mathematical Morphology 2015 in Reykjavik, and
an extended version has been accepted for a special issue of the new open access journal Mathematical
Morphology, Theory and Applications and has appeared in January 2016.
An important new development is the study of remote sensing data, in collaboration with the European
Commission Joint Research Centre, in Ispra, Italy. This entails multi-scale morphological studies of
huge data sets, ranging from gigapixel to terapixel scale, with the aid of Differential Morphological
Profiles (DMP). The aim is to use this type of analysis to detect, e.g., rubble in images of areas affected
by earthquakes, tsunamis or other disasters. We have improved the previously published versions of
the DMP algorithm to improve cache coherence and reduce computational overhead, leading to speed
increases of a factor of three.
Further extensions include the Differential Area Profile, and the derived multi-scale levelling seg-
mentation. Building on previous results, and using a new 64-core parallel machine obtained through
funding from NWO, we are abble to perform multi-scale analysis at a rate of about 4 Gpixels per
minute, on this one compute server, attaining speed ups of up to 50× on 64 cores. The results have
101
JBI Annual Report
been accepted in the International Journal of Geo-Information (appeared in print in 2016).
An important new application is that of the Global Human Settlement Layer http://ghslsys.
jrc.ec.europa.eu/, which aims to give a complete, up-to-date overview of all human habitation
on earth, and an unprecedented resolution. We are now moving to distributed memory algorithms for
tera-pixel images. For this purpose a new algorithm is being devised, which changes the maximum
communication and memory loads per node back fromO(N) toO(
√
N). Apart from work on remote
sensing applications, very large stitched, 360 deg images can be processed using these methods.
We have continued our research into developing a better type of source extractor for astronomical
imaging. We previously improved on the state-of-the-art program Source Extractor, by incorporat-
ing a real Max-Tree implementation, and implementing a new strategy for Max-Tree filtering called
bi-variate statistical attribute thresholding. In methodology, we determine a threshold based on one
attribute based on a statistical test on the likelyhood that the feature detected is due te noise, as a
function of the area of the feature. In this case the user needs to supply a p-value which determines
the probability that a noise feature is rated as a true object. For large objects, a small deviation of,
e.g., the image power within it over the local background suffices to rate as a detection, whereas a
a small object needs to have a higher image power. The results show great promise, as the sensi-
tivity of the method to extended sources seems to be an order of magnitude better than SExtractor,
whilst retaining excellent sensitivity for compact sources, and negligible false positive count, even at
a conservative p-value of 10−6. We have since improved the backgorund estimation and the detection
method and presented the results at International Symposium on Mathematical Morphology 2015 and
the International Conference on Image Processing 2015 in Quebec.
Given the data sizes and types, this means that we must develop a parallel Max-Tree algorithm for
floating point and other high-dynamic-range data. The new algorithm has been developed and is a
combination of a bottom-up flooding approach to compute a coarse approximation Max-Tree, fol-
lowed by top-down refinement phase based on the union-find methods, thus combining the two lead-
ing schools of thought on these algorithms into a single “diplomatic” algorithm. Speed-up of up 40×
have been achieved on 64 cores, which translates to a 30-fold speed increase with respect to the fastest
sequential algorithm. This work has been submitted to IEEE trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. A
major revision under review at the moment.
A new parallel max-tree based algorithm for local pattern spectra was developed for classification of
merging vs overlapping galaxies. The results were presentated at the CAIP 2015 conference in Malta,
where it received an honourable mention in the HPC paper award competition.
In collaboration with the Universities of Rennes and Vannes, France, we have investigated the use
of local pattern spectra for content-based image retrieval. These patterns spectra provide similar
performance to methods like SIFT, but with a much smaller feature vector size (65 vs 128 dimensions).
These results were presented at the International Symposium on Mathematical Morphology 2015 in
Reykjavik, and the International Conference on Image Processing 2015 in Quebec.
102
JBI Annual Report
Machine learning and its applications
Here we highlight key results which were obtained and published in 2015 in the context of machine
learning and its practical application.
Our efforts in the investigation and development of novel algorithms resulted in the publication of
several theory oriented papers in 2015: The realization of Non-Euclidean Principal Component Anal-
ysis by Hebbian Learning was addressed in a collaboration of M. Lange, M. Biehl and T. Villmann
yielding a publication in Neurocomputing 147: 107-119 (2015). A framework for Learning Vector
Quantization with Adaptive Cost-based Outlier-Rejection was presented by T. Villmann, M. Kaden,
D. Nebel and M. Biehl at the International Conf. on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns (CAIP
2015) and appeared in Springer Lecture Notes on Computer Science Vol. 9257: 772-782.
In a collaboration with researchers from Bielefeld University, techniques for Inferring Feature Rele-
vances from Metric Learning were introduced by A. Schulz, B. Mokbel, M. Biehl and B. Hammer in:
IEEE Symp. Series on Computational Intelligence, Cape Town, IEEE, 8 pages (2015).
First results concerning the Polynomial Approximation of Spectral Data in LVQ and Relevance Learn-
ing were presented by F. Melchert at the Workshop New Challenges in Neural Computation at the
GCPR 2015 in Aachen/Germany. This work was published, with co-authors U. Seiffert and M. Biehl,
in Machine Learning Reports 03-2015: 25-32 (2015).
In a collaboration with Dagmar Scheel-Toellner from the School of Immunity and Infection, Uni-
versity of Birmingham/UK we have analysed cytokine expression data in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
patients. The application of Generalized Matrix Relevance LVQ, a method developed within our
group, revealed that two specific bio-markers seem to play an essential role in the early stages of RA.
This insight generated novel hypotheses about the disease mechanisms, which could be confirmed by
targeted studies of tissue samples. The main findings were published by Y. Leo, N. Adlard, M. Biehl
et. al. in Annals of the Rheumatic Disease, avaialable online (2015).
As an outcome of our on-going collaboration with Philips Medical Research in Eindhoven and as
part of J.J.G. de Vries’ PhD thesis project, three publications appeared in 2015. The first one, by
J.J.G. de Vries, S.C. Pauws and M. Biehl, concerns the Insightful Stress Detection from Physiology
Modalities using Learning Vector Quantization and appeared in Neurocomputing 151 (2): 873-882
(2015). Emotion Classification is the topic of another journal paper by J.J.G. de Vries et al. in the
Journal of Synthetic Emotions 6(1): 40-59 (2015). The problem of Facial Expression Recognition
was addressed by in a contribution to CAIP 2015 (Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9257:
760-771, 2015).
Several journal and conference publications are currently in press which indicate that our research
activities continue to yield significant output.
103
JBI Annual Report
8.3 Research subjects
N. Petkov: brain inspired computing, pattern recognition, machine learning.
G. Azzopardi: visual cortex modeling, object recognition and localization.
L. Fernandez Robles: visual pattern recognition.
J. Guo: inhibition in trainable feature detectors.
M. Lopez Antequera: pattern recognition for robotics.
A. Neocleous: signal processing and classification for music analysis.
E. Schiza: electronic patient file.
C. Shi: inhibition in trainable feature detectors.
N. Strisciuglio: vascular segmentation, audio processing.
E. Talavera Martinez: life-logging with a camera.
M. Biehl: machine learning, similarity based methods, life science applications.
K. Domaschke: Analysis of time-resolved fluorescence spectra.
M. Gay: Sparse models for information transmission.
M. Lange: Information theoretical aspects of prototype based learning.
F. Melchert: Classification of hyperspectral images and other functional data.
D. Nebel: Learning from relational data, rejection mechanism for outliers.
G. Owomugisha: Crop plant disease detection in images and spectral data.
M.H.F. Wilkinson: morphology, connectivity, biomedical imaging.
M. Babai: (hyper)connected morphology for particle track extraction.
U. Moschini: astronomical data analysis using (hyper)connected filters.
8.4 Publications
Dissertations
– J. van de Gronde, Beyond scalar morphology: A theoretical framework for mathematical mor-
phology on colour and tensor-valued images, Promotor: prof. dr. J.B.T.M. Roerdink, co-
promotor: dr M.H.F. Wilkinson, June 30, 2015, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences,
University of Groningen, 152 pages, ISBN 978-90-367-7956-2.
104
JBI Annual Report
Edited books and volumes
– R. Smedinga, M. Biehl, F. Kramer (eds.), 12th SC@RUG 2014-2015, Proc. of the Student
Colloquium Computer Science, University of Groningen (ISBN 978-90-367-7942-5), 2015, 74
pages.
Articles in scientific journals
– G. Azzopardi, N. Strisciuglio, M. Vento, N. Petkov, Trainable COSFIRE filters for vessel de-
lineation with application to retinal images, Medical image analysis, 19 (1), 2015, 46-57.
– P. Foggia, N. Petkov, A. Saggese, N. Strisciuglio, M. Vento: Audio surveillance of roads: A
system for detecting anomalous sounds, IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2015, 1-10. doi:10.1109/TITS.2015.2470216.
– P. Foggia, N. Petkov, A. Saggese, N. Strisciuglio, M. Vento: Reliable detection of audio events
in highly noisy environments, Pattern Recognition Letters, 65 (1), 2015, 22-28. ISSN 0167-
8655, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2015.06.026.
– I. Giotis, N. Molders, S. Land, M. Biehl, M. F. Jonkman, N. Petkov, MED-NODE: A computer-
assisted melanoma diagnosis system using non-dermoscopic images, Expert Systems with Ap-
plications, 42 (19), 2015, 6578-6585.
– M. Lange, M. Biehl, T. Villmann, Non-Euclidean Principal Component Analysis by Hebbian
Learning, Neurocomputing, 147, 2015, 107-119.
– Y. Leo, N. Adlard, M. Biehl, M. Juarez, T. Smallie, M. Snow, C.D. Buckley, K. Raza, A.
Filer, and D. Scheel-Toellner, Expression of chemokines CXCL4 and CXCL7 by synovial
macrophages defines early stage of rheumatoid arthritis, Ann. of the Rheumatic Disease, online
first, 2015, 9 pages.
– E.C. Schiza, K.C. Neokleous, N. Petkov and C.N. Schizas: A patient centered electronic health:
eHealth system development, Technology and Health Care Journal, 23 (4), 2015, 509-522.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26409913, doi: 10.3233/THC-150919.
– F-M. Schleif, B. Hammer, J. G. Monroy, J. G. Jimenez, J-L. Blanco-Claraco, M. Biehl, N.
Petkov, Odor recognition in robotics applications by discriminative time-series modeling, Pat-
tern Analysis and Applications, 2015, 1-14.
– J.J.G. de Vries, P.M.C. Lemmens, D. Brokken, S.C. Pauws, and M. Biehl, Towards Emotion
Classification Using Appraisal Modeling, Int. J. Synthetic Emotions, 6 (1), 2015, 40-59.
105
JBI Annual Report
– J.J.G. de Vries, S.C. Pauws, and M. Biehl, Insightful Stress Detection from Physiology Modal-
ities using Learning Vector Quantization, Neurocomputing, 151 (2), 2015, 873-882.
– O. de Wiljes, R.A. van Elburg, M. Biehl, and F.A. Keijzer, Modeling spontaneous activity across
an excitable epithelium: Support for a coordination scenario of early neural evolution, Front.
Comput. Neurosci., available online, 2015, 12 pages.
Articles in conference proceedings
– M. Babai, N. Kalantar-Nayestanaki, J. Messchendorp, M.H.F. Wilkinson, Tracking Sub-atomic
Particles Through the Attribute Space, Mathematical Morphology and Its Applications to Sig-
nal and Image Processing, LNCS, 9082, Springer, 2015, 86-97.
– M. Biehl, B. Hammer, F.-M. Schleif, P. Schneider, and T. Villmann, Stationarity of Matrix
Relevance LVQ, Int. Joint Conf. Neural Networks, Killarney, 2015, 8 pages.
– P. Bosilj, E. Kijak, M.H.F. Wilkinson, S. Lefèvre. Short local descriptors from 2D connected
pattern spectra, ICIP 2015, IEEE Int. Conf. Image Processing (ICIP), 2015, 1548-1552.
– P. Bosilj, M.H.F. Wilkinson, E. Kijak, S. Lefèvre, Local 2D Pattern Spectra as Connected Re-
gion Descriptors, Mathematical Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Process-
ing, LNCS, 9082, Springer, 2015, 182-193.
– L. Fernandez-Robles, G. Azzopardi, E. Alegre, N. Petkov, Cutting Edge Localisation in an Edge
Profile Milling Head, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, CAIP
2015, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS, 9257, (Springer Int. Publishing),
2015. 336-347.
– P. Foggia, N. Petkov, A. Saggese, N. Strisciuglio, M. Vento, Car crashes detection by audio
analysis in crowded roads, Proc of 12th IEEE Int. Conf. on Advanced Video and Signal Based
Surveillance (AVSS), 2015, 1-6, doi: 10.1109/AVSS.2015.7301731.
– J. Guo, C. Shi, G. Azzopardi, N. Petkov: Recognition of architectural and electrical symbols
by COSFIRE filters with inhibition, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. on Computer Analysis of Images and
Patterns, CAIP 2015, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS, 9257, (Springer Int.
Publishing), 2015, 348-358.
– F.N. Kiwanuka, M.H.F. Wilkinson, Cluster Based Vector Attribute Filtering, Mathematical
Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Processing, LNCS, 9082, Springer, 2015,
277-288.
106
JBI Annual Report
– F. Melchert, U. Seiffert, and M. Biehl, Polynomial Approximation of Spectral Data in LVQ and
Relevance Learning, New Challenges in Neural Computation, Workshop at the GCPR, Aachen
(2015), Machine Learning Reports 03-2015, 2015, 25-32.
– U. Moschini, M. H. F. Wilkinson. Viscous-hyperconnected attribute filters: A first algorithm,
Mathematical Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Processing, LNCS, 9082,
Springer, 2015, 669-680.
– U. Moschini, P. Teeninga, S.C. Trager, M.H.F. Wilkinson, Parallel 2D Local Pattern Spectra of
Invariant Moments for Galaxy Classification, G. Azzopardi and N. Petkov (eds.): CAIP 2015,
Part I. 16th Intl. Conf. on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, Springer, LNCS, 9257,
2015, 121-133. (Honourable mention HPC award)
– E. Mwebaze, G. Bearda, M. Biehl, and D. Zühlke, Combining dissimilarity measures for
prototype-based classification In: M. Verleysen (editor), Proc. of the 23rd European Symposium
on Artificial Neural Networks (ESANN) 2015, Bruges, d-side publishing, 2015, 31-36.
– A. Neocleous, G. Azzopardi, C.N. Schizas, N. Petkov, Filter-based approach for ornamentation
detection and recognition in singing folk music, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. on Computer Analysis
of Images and Patterns, CAIP 2015, Part I, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS, 9256,
(Springer Int. Publishing), 2015, 558-569.
– E.C. Schiza, G. Panos, C. David, N. Petkov, C.N. Schizas, Integrated electronic health record
database management system: a proposalICIMTH 2015 - International Conference on Infor-
matics, Management, and Technology in Healthcare July 9-11, 2015, Athens, Greece, Published
as ebook: Enabling Health Informatics Applications, in the series Studies in Health Technology
and Informatics, 213: 187-190 (IOS Press, 2015). (Best student paper award).
– A. Schulz, B. Mokbel, M. Biehl, and B. Hammer, Inferring Feature Relevances From Metric
Learning, IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence, Cape Town, 2015, 1599-
1606.
– C. Shi, J. Guo, G. Azzopardi, J.M. Meijer, M.F. Jonkman, N. Petkov, Automatic differentiation
of u- and n-serrated patterns in direct immunofluorescence images, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. on
Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, CAIP 2015, Part I, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, LNCS, 9256, (Springer Int. Publishing), 2015, 513-521.
– N. Strisciuglio, M. Vento, G. Azzopardi, N. Petkov: Unsupervised delineation of the vessel
tree in retinal fundus images, Computational Vision and Medical Image Processing VIPIMAGE
2015, J. Tavares and R.M. Natal Jorge (Eds.), (CRC Press/Balkema, Taylor and Francis Group;
Leiden, NL, 2016), 2015, 149-155. (This paper received the bast paper award of VIPIMAGE
2015.)
107
JBI Annual Report
– N. Strisciuglio, G. Azzopardi, M. Vento, N. Petkov, Multiscale blood vessel delineation using
B-cosfire filters, Proc. 16th Int. Conf. on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, CAIP
2015, Part II, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS, 9257, (Springer Int. Publishing),
2015, 300-312.
– P. Teeninga, U. Moschini, S.C. Trager, M.H.F. Wilkinson, Improved detection of faint extended
astronomical objects through statistical attribute filtering, Mathematical Morphology and Its
Applications to Signal and Image Processing, LNCS, 9082, Springer, 2015, 157-168.
– P. Teeninga, U. Moschini, S. C. Trager, M.H.F. Wilkinson, Improving background estimation
for faint astronomical object detection, ICIP 2015, IEEE Int. Conf. Image Processing (ICIP),
2015, IEEE, 2015, 1046-1050.
– T. Villmann, M. Kaden, D. Nebel and M. Biehl, Learning Vector Quantization with Adaptive
Cost-based Outlier-Rejection, G. Azzopardi and N. Petkov (eds.), CAIP 2015, Part II. 16th Intl.
Conf. on Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns, Springer, LNCS, 9257, 2015, 772-782.
– G.-J. de Vries, S. Pauws M. Biehl, Facial Expression Recognition using Learning Vector Quan-
tization, G. Azzopardi and N. Petkov (eds.), CAIP 2015, Part II. 16th Intl. Conf. on Computer
Analysis of Images and Patterns, Springer, LNCS, 9257, 2015, 760-771.
Other publications
– M. Biehl, A. Ghio, F.-M. Schleif, Developments in computational intelligence and machine
learning Editorial, Special Issue, ESANN 2014 - Selected Papers, Neurocomputing, 169, 2015,
185-186.
– V. Chortis, I. Bancos, K. Lang, B. Hughes, D. O’Neil, A. Taylor, M. Fassnacht, J. Bertherat,
F. Beuschlein, M. Quinkler, D. Vassiliadi, M. Conall Dennedy, M. Mannelli, M. Biehl, and W.
Arlt, Urine steroid metabolomics as a novel diagnostic tool for early detection of recurrence in
adrenocorticla carcinoma, Endocrine Abstracts, 38, Abstract OC3.4, 2015.
– K. Lang, F. Beuschlein, M. Biehl, A. Dietz, A. Riester, B. Hughes, D. O’Neil, S. Hahner, M.
Quinkler, J. Lenders, C. Shackleton, M. Reincke, and W. Arlt, Urine steroid metabolomics as a
diagnostic tool in primary aldosteronism, Endocrine Abstracts, 38, Abstract OC1.6, 2015.
– A. Taylor, I. Bancos, V. Chortis, K. Lang, D. O’Neil, B. Hughes, C. Jenkinson, J. Deeks, C.
Shackleton, M. Biehl, and W. Arlt, Further advances in diagnosis of adrenal cancer: a high-
throughput urinary steroid profiling method using LC-MS, Endocrine Abstracts, 38, Abstract
OC2.3, 2015.
108
JBI Annual Report
8.5 External funding and collaboration
External funding
We acquired a research grant of 640 kEuro within the EU H2020 project TrimBot in which we col-
laborate with leading universities and industrial companies.
We acquired a research grant of 240 kEuro from STW for the project SmartBreed in which we collab-
orate with researchers from Wageningen University and agro-industrial companies.
Godliver Owomugisha is an external PhD candidate from Makerere University, Uganda, supported by
the Melinda and Bill Gates Foundation.
Kristin Domaschke, David Nebel, Mandy Lange, and Mathias Gay are external PhD candidates from
the Unversity of Applied Sciences in Mittweida, Germany.
F. Melchert is a PhD candidate in the framework of the ’sandwich’ program of the Graduate School
Groningen, supported by the Fraunhofer Institute IFF in Magdeburg, Germany.
Rose Nakibuule is an external PhD candidate from Makerere University, Uganda, supported NUFFIC.
Laura Fernandez Robles from the University of Leon, Spain, is enrolled as an external PhD student
in Groningen and is jointly supervised by Enrique Alegre (University of Leon) and Nicolai Petkov. A
contract between the Universities of Groningen and Leon concerning a double PhD degree has been
signed.
Eirini Schiza from Cyprus is enrolled as an external PhD student in Groningen and is jointly super-
vised by Nicolai Petkov (RuG) and C. Schizas and C. Pattichis (Univ. of Cyprus).
Nicola Strisciuglio is a PhD student in the framework of a ’sandwich’ program of the graduate school.
He spends half of the time at the University of Groningen and the other half at the University of
Salerno and will obtain a double PhD degree from the two universities. He is supervised by Nicolai
Petkov and Mario Vento from the University of Salerno.
Manuel Lopez Antequera is a PhD student in the framework of a ’sandwich’ program of the graduate
school. He spends half of the time at the University of Groningen and the other half at the University
of Malaga and will obtain a double PhD degree from the two universities. He is supervised by Nicolai
Petkov and Javier Gonzalez from the University of Malaga.
Andreas Neocleous iss enrolled as a PhD student in the framework of a ’sandwich’ program of the
graduate school. He spends half of the time at the University of Groningen and the other half at the
University of Cyprus and will obtain a double PhD degree from the two universities. He is supervised
by Nicolai Petkov and Christos Schizas from the University of Cyprus.
109
JBI Annual Report
Estefania Talavera Martinez was enrolled as a PhD student in the framework of a ’sandwich’ program
of the graduate school. She will spend two years at the University of Groningen and another two years
at the University of Barcelona and will obtain a double PhD degree from the two universities. He is
supervised by Nicolai Petkov and Petia Radeva from the University of Barcelona.
Jiapan Guo and Chenyu (Astone) Shi are PhD students at the group with financing from the People
Republic of China and private funds, respectively.
Ugo Moschini is a PhD student on a (HyperGAMMA) project on hyperconnected filtering in an as-
tronomical context, financed from a grant to Wilkinson from NWO-EW in the free competition 2011.
The project Connected Morphological Operators for Tensor Images (COMOTI) was awarded to Roerdink
and Wilkinson in the Open Competition 2010 of NWO. A PhD student (Jasper van der Gronde) is ap-
pointed in the Computational Science and Visualization group.
External collaboration
Biehl collaborates with Barbara Hammer from Bielefeld University in the context of the theory and
application of prototype based clustering, classification, and visualization of high-dimensional data.
The development of novel algorithms and alternative distance measures is also studied in collaboration
with Thomas Villmann in Mittweida, Germany. The application of LVQ in steroid metabolomics and
tumor classification is in the center of an intense collaboration with Wiebke Arlt from the University
of Birmingham, UK. Another medical application, the early diagnosis of inflammatory diseases based
on bio-markers, is studied in collaboration with Dr. Dagmar Scheel-Töllner, also from the Medical
School at Birmingham/UK. Biehl furthermore collaborates with Gyan Bhanot (Rutgers University,
New Jersey) in the context of genomics and proteomics data analysis. The application of machine
learning in the context of life science applications is also the main topic of the collaboration with for-
mer PhD student Ernest Mwebaze and with John Quinn at Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda.
In collaboration with Prof. Udo Seiffert, Fraunhofer Institute IFF Magdeburg, Germany, Biehl inves-
tigates the clustering and classification of hyperspectral data representing samples of organic material.
A collaboration concerning the analysis of large prescription databases was initiated with Eelko Hak
and Katja Taxis from the Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy.
Biehl has signed Erasmus-Socrates agreements with Profs. Hammer (Bielefeld), Villmann (Mittweida),
and Wöhler (TU Dortmund).
N. Petkov leads the UG research team that participates in the EU H2020 project TrimBot of a consor-
tium of leading universities and industrial companies. He also leads the UG research team that par-
ticipates in the STW project SmartBreed in which we collaborate with researchers from Wageningen
University and agro-industrial companies. He collaborates with M.F. Jonkman from the Department
of Dermatology of UMCG on the application of content based image retrieval and expert systems to
dermatologic problems. He also collaborates with N. Jansonius from the Ophthalmology department
110
JBI Annual Report
of UMCG on the processing of retinal fundus images for large scale screening purposes. N. Petkov
and Biehl collaborate with J. Gonzalez Jimenez from the University of Malaga on the automatic clas-
sification of odor from data collected by multiple sensors (e-nose). N. Petkov and J. Gonzalez Jimenez
jointly supervise a ’sandwich’ PhD student, M. Lopez Antequera. N. Petkov collaborates with Vento
from the University of Salerno in computer vision and audio processing; they joinlty supervise the
’sandwich’ PhD student N. Strisciuglio. Petkov and Ch. Schizas from the University of Nicosia col-
laborate on the automatic analysis of music; they jointly supervise the ’sandwich’ PhD student A.
Neocleous. N. Petkov, Ch. Schizas and C. Pattichis from the Univ. of Cyprus collaborate in the area
of ’electronic patient file’ and jointly supervise the PhD student E. Schiza. N. Petkov collaborates
with E. Alegre from the University of Leon; they jointly supervise the PhD student L. Fernandez Rob-
les. N. Petkov collaborates with P. Radeva from the Univ. of Barcelona; together they supervise the
’sandwich’ PhD student E. Talavera Martinez.
G. Azzopardi and N. Petkov organised and co-chaired CAIP 2015 held in Malta, co-chaired by them.
The proceedings of CAIP 2015 were published as LNCS 9256 and LNCS 9257. G. Azzopardi and N.
Petkov are guest editors of a special issue of the journal Machine Vision and Applications (Springer)
dedicated to CAIP 2015 . N. Petkov, L. Grandinetti (Cosenza), K. Amunts (Duesseldorf) and T. Lip-
pert (Juelich) organised BrainComp 2015 in Cetraro, Italy, and prepare the proceedings as a volume
in the LNCS.
In 2015, Petkov published scientific papers with 13 colleges from 9 foreign universities: Salerno (Fog-
gia, Saggese, Vento), Malaga (Monroy, Jimenez), Nicosia (Schizas, Neokleous), Bielefeld (Hammer),
Birmingham (Schleif), Almeria (Blanco Claraco), Londen (Land), Malta (Azzopardi), Leon (Ale-
gre). He had 14 foreign visitors, most of whom were also speakers in the CS colloquium: P. Radeva
(Barcelona), X. Jiang (Muenster), H. Unger, W. Halang (Hagen), L. Grandinetti (Cosenza), T. Lippert
(Juelich), J. Kaempfer (Juelich), K. Amunds (Duesseldorf), L. Sanchez (Leon), A. Sanchez (Madrid),
S. Stankovich (Monte Negro), C. Schizas (Nicosia), C. Pattichis (Nicosia), M. Sodanil (Bangkok).
Wilkinson collaborates with the Dermatology department of the University Medical Centre Groningen
on hand eczema analysis. The collaboration with the Kapteyn Institute is longstanding, and currently
focuses on exploring the use of hyperconnected filters,and especially vector-attribute filters in auto-
matic source extraction in image data bases. This has resulted in the HyperGAMMA project funded
by NWO-EW. This has been extended into a new project into a much larger European collaboration in
the SUNDIAL project (ITN submitted January 2016, funding awarded in May 2016). He collaborates
with L. Najman and H. Talbot (ESIEE, Paris) on mathematical morphology, and in particular topo-
logical watersheds, and also within the SUNDIAL project. A collaboration of biomedical imaging
has been set up with K.E. Purnama and T.A. Sardjono of the ITS in Surabaya, Indonesia. He collabo-
rates with Sebastien Lefèvre of the Université de Bretagne-Sud on connective morphology. A further
collaboration with the Nuclear Accelerator Institute in Groningen on tracking subatomic particles has
been strengthened further within the new Data Science and Systems Complexity centre.
111
JBI Annual Report
8.6 Further information
Biehl is associate editor of the journals Pattern Recognition and Neural Processing Letters. He
is member of the scientific committee of the European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks
(ESANN) conference series and has served as Program Committee member of numerous international
conferences.
Biehl co-edited a special issue of the journal Neurocomputing which appeared in 2015 and comprises
selected contributions to the 22nd ESANN conference in 2014.
Biehl was invited to give tutorial lectures at the Conference on Computer Analysis of Images and Pat-
terns (CAIP 2015, Malta) and at the International Workshop on Brain Inspired Computung (BRAIN-
COMP 2015, Italy).
Biehl participated (upon invitation) in a Working Group on Gene, protein and RNA regulation in
health and disease at the Aspen Center for Physics, Colorado/USA.
N. Petkov is member of the editorial boards of the following journals: J. Image and Vision Computing
(Elsevier), J. Neural, Parallel and Scientific Computations (Dynamic Publ.), Int. J. Computational
Vision and Biomechanics (Serials Publ.) and Int. J. Hybrid Intelligent Systems (IOS Press). He was
member of the programme committees of several international conferences.
He was member of PhD examination committees at the TU Delft (Januari 2015) and the Univ. Malta
(December 2015). Petkov lectured in the Erasmus programme at four universities: Leon (March),
Nicosia (April), Salerno (July), Nicosia (November).
He is currently chairman (2015-2017) of the steering committee of the CAIP (Int. Conf. on Analysis
of Images and Patterns) series of conferences.
In July 2015 Petkov was keynote speaker at IC2IT in Bangkok.
In 2015, Petkov organised three workshop with international participation in Allersmaborg and Gronin-
gen.
Wilkinson is (technical) programme committee member of several conferences, including the Inter-
national Conference on Image Processing 2011, the International Conference on PatternRecognition
2012, and the International Symposium on Mathematical Morphology 2011. He resigned as asso-
ciate editor for Pattern Recognition Letters at the end of 2012. He also retired as board member of
the Dutch Society for Pattern Recognition and Image Processing (NVPHBV) after serving for over 6
years. He is on the steering committee for the International Symposium on Mathematical Morphol-
ogy conferences. He has put forward a proposal for an IAPR Technical Committee for Mathematical
Morphology. He has given tutorials on connected filters and connectivity at various national and
international conferences, and organized the course on Advanced Morphological Filters for the na-
tional research school Advanced School for Computing and Imaging (ASCI). Finally, he is member
112
JBI Annual Report
of the cluster Computer Vision Noord Nederland, a consortium of companies and academia seeking
to stimulate the field of computer vision in the Northern Netherlands.
Impact
A number of our research articles in the period 2005-2015 belong to the group of highly cited publi-
cations of their corresponding years in Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Biology and Bio-
chemistry, or Clinical Medicine, according to the number of citations they collect in the Web of
Science of Thompson Scientific (as of January 2016):
– top-1%:
- N. Aghaeepour et al.: 2013 Nature Methods 10: 228-238
- C.F. Davies et al.: 2014 Cancer Cell 26: 319-330
- Azzopardi, Petkov: 2013 Patt. Rec. Letters 34 (8): 922-933
- Azzopardi, Petkov: 2012 Biol. Cyb. 106 (3): 177-189
- Grigorescu, Petkov, Westenberg: 2004 Image and Vis. Comp. 22: 609-622
- Grigorescu, Petkov, Westenberg: 2003 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 12: 729-739
- Grigorescu, Petkov, Kruizinga: 2002 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 11: 1160-1167
- Jalba, Wilkinson, Roerdink: 2006 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 15: 331-341
- Urbach, Wilkinson: 2008 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 17: 1-8
- Urbach, Roerdink, Wilkinson: 2007 IEEE Trans. PAMI 29: 272-285
- Papari, Petkov: 2011 Image and Vis. Comp., 29 (2-3): 79-103
– top-10%:
- Arlt, Biehl, et al.: 2011 J. Clin. Endocr. & Metabol. 96: 3775-3784
- Azzopardi, Petkov: 2013 IEEE Trans. PAMI 35 (2): 490-503
- Biehl, Ghosh, Hammer: 2007 J. Machine Learning Res. 8: 323-360
- Biehl, Ghosh, Hammer: 2006 Neurocomputing 69: 660-670.
- Biehl et al.: 2015 Bioinformatics,31: 453-461
113
JBI Annual Report
- Bunte, Biehl, Hammer: 2012 Neural Computation 24: 771-804
- Bunte, Schneider, Hammer, et al.: 2012 Neural Networks 26: 159-173.
- Bunte, Haase, Biehl, Villmann: 2012 Neurocomp. 90: 23-45
- Bunte, Biehl, Jonkman, Petkov: 2011 Pattern Recognition 44: 1892-1902
- Bunte et al.: 2011 Neurocomputing 74: 1340-1350
- Ghosh, Petkov: 2006 IEEE PAMI 27: 1793-1804
- Giotis, Bunte, Petkov, Biehl: 2013 J. Math. Imaging and Vision 47: 79-92.
- Jalba, Wilkinson, Roerdink: 2004 IEEE Trans. PAMI 26: 1320-1335
- Jalba, Wilkinson, Roerdink: 2006 IEEE Trans Im. Proc. 15: 331-341
- Jalba, Wilkinson, Roerdink: 2005 Mach. Vis. Appl. 16: 217-228
- Lange, Biehl, Villmann: 2014 Neurocomputing 147: 107-119
- Meijster, Wilkinson: 2002 IEEE Trans. PAMI 24: 484-494
- Ouzounis, Wilkinson: 2007 IEEE Trans. PAMI 29: 990-1004
- Papari, Petkov: 2008 IEEE Trans Im. Proc., 17: 1950-1962
- Papari, Petkov: 2007 IEEE Trans Im. Proc., 16: 2449-2462
- Papari, Petkov: 2011 Pat. Rec., 44: 1999-2007
- Papari, Petkov: 2011 Pat. Rec. Lett., 34: 922-933
- Schneider, Bunte, Stiekema, Hammer, Villmann, Biehl: 2010 IEEE Trans. Neural Networks
21: 831-840
- Schneider, Biehl, Hammer: 2009 Neural Computation 21: 2942-2969
- Schneider, Biehl, Hammer: 2009 Neural Computation 21: 3532-3561
- Urbach, Wilkinson: 2008 IEEE Trans Im. Proc. 17: 1-8
- Westenberg, Roerdink, Wilkinson: 2007 IEEE Trans. Im. Proc. 16: 2943-2952
- Wilkinson: 2007 Image and Vis. Comp. 25: 426-435
- Wilkinson, Gao, Hesselink, Jonker, Meijster: 2008 IEEE Trans. PAMI 30: 1800-1813
114
JBI Annual Report
Software
- We have made available a Matlab toolbox Relevance and matrix adaptation in LVQ (GRLVQ,
GMLVQ, LiRaMLVQ) at http://matlabserver.cs.rug.nl/gmlvqweb/web/.
- A begginers’ toolbox in Matlab, GMLVQ demo code, is provided at http://www.cs.rug.
nl/˜biehl/gmlvq
- Matlab implementations for Gabor filters, COSFIRE keypoint detector, and CORF contour de-
tector are available on http://matlabserver.cs.rug.nl/
115
JBI Annual Report
116
JBI Annual Report
9. Scientific Visualization and Computer Graphics
Group leader: Prof. dr. J.B.T.M. Roerdink
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Dr. H. Bekker (until 5-9-2015) RUG 0.2
Prof. dr. J.B.T.M. Roerdink RUG 1.0
Prof. dr. A.C. Telea RUG 1.0
Tenure track assistant professors
Dr. J. Kosinka (from 1-9-2015) RUG 1.0
PhD students
P. Barendrecht RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Kosinka, Roerdink)
D. Coimbra Capes-Nuffic external
(supervisor: Telea)
C. Feng personal grant 1.0
(supervisor: Telea)
J.J. van de Gronde (until 1-3-2015) NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Roerdink)
C. Ji CSC external
(supervisor: Roerdink)
J. Kustra (until 18-05-2015) Philips external
(supervisor: Telea)
R. Martins Capes-Nuffic external
(supervisor: Telea)
R. Rodriguez Capes-Nuffic external
(supervisor: Telea)
P. Rauber Ubbo Emmius 1.0
(supervisor: Telea, Roerdink)
R.R. da Silva Capes-Nuffic external
(supervisor: Telea)
V. Soancatl Aguilar CONACYT external
(supervisor: Roerdink)
A. Sobiecki CNPq 1.0
(supervisor: Telea)
M. van der Zwan Lely Tech. 1.0
(supervisor: Telea)
117
JBI Annual Report
Postdocs
J.J. van de Gronde (from 16-3-2015) RUG 1.0
(supervisor: Roerdink)
D. Williams (until 15-6-2015) NWO 1.0
(supervisor: Roerdink)
Guests
J. Ahrens, Los Alamos National Laboratory, US
B. Burgeth, University of Saarland, Germany
A. Falcao, Univ. Campinas, Brazil
C. Jung, Federal Univ. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
F. Leymarie, Goldsmiths Univ. of London, UK
R. Minghim, University of São Paulo, Brazil
L. Najman, Université Paris-Est, France
M. Walter, Federal Univ. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
118
JBI Annual Report
9.1 Research Program
The research group Scientific Visualization and Computer Graphics carries out research in the area of
scientific visualization, information visualization, visual analytics, shape processing, geometric mod-
elling, and computer graphics. With respect to applications, the research concentrates on fundamental
and applied problems from the life sciences (in particular medical imaging and bioinformatics), as-
tronomy, large-scale software engineering, and business intelligence.
Large data visualization
Visualization of large data sets requires advanced techniques in image processing and segmentation,
hierarchical data management, and data reduction. Both the increasing size, high dimensionality, and
complexity of these data ask for new techniques for interactive visualization, so that the speed of
the data processing stage matches that of the visualization step. We address this demand by devel-
oping efficient algorithms and/or by mapping the involved computations to programmable Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs), which are capable of outperforming CPUs for certain compute-intensive
applications. We develop scalable techniques for e-Visualization of big data, with a particular focus
on time-dependent data, graphs, and networks.
Tensor field morphology
The processing and visualization of tensor fields has become very important over the last decade. A
prime application area is medical imaging of the brain, where diffusion tensor magnetic resonance
imaging enables the in-vivo exploration of nerve fiber bundles. We develop a solid mathematical
and algorithmic framework for connectivity-based morphological filtering and visualization of tensor
fields. The work is based on (extensions of) the complete lattice framework of mathematical mor-
phology and builds upon existing work on morphological operators for matrix fields, with special
attention to invariance properties, such as translation, rotation or scale invariance. Applications are in
fields such as neuroscience or material science.
Multiscale shape processing
Recent 3D data acquisition and segmentation techniques have made it possible to gather large collec-
tions of complex 3D shapes. These come in a variety of formats, such as point clouds, range data, or
volumetric densely-sampled fields. Shape processing targets the extraction of high-level information
from such datasets, aiming at an easier and better understanding of the structure, topology, and ge-
ometry of 3D shapes embedded in the data. We address this using 2D and 3D medial descriptors, or
skeletons, which jointly capture shape structure and properties in a compact, multiscale, fashion. We
have designed several 3D skeletonization algorithms that reach, or surpass, state-of-the-art methods
in terms of speed, scalability, accuracy, robustness to noise, and coverage of all types of Euclidean
skeletons known in the literature. We next use these algorithms to address several shape process-
ing problems, including 3D shape segmentation and simplification and digital hair removal from 2D
dermatoscopic images.
119
JBI Annual Report
Multidimensional data exploration
Data collections having a large number of attributes recorded per data point, also known as mul-
tidimensional datasets, are increasingly present and important in many application fields. We sup-
port multidimensional data exploration by using dimensionality-reduction projections, which gener-
ate scatterplot-like views of tens of thousands of observations having tens of dimensions. To ease the
interpretation of projections, we develop new explanatory techniques that enable end users to inter-
actively retrieve high-dimensional information such as identities and ranges of dimensions from the
compact, simplified, scatterplot views. We apply our explanatory methods to problems from machine
learning, software understanding, and astrophysics.
Applications
In medical visualization the group studies the analysis and visualization of data obtained by struc-
tural and functional imaging techniques such as fMRI, DTI, PET, or EEG. The detection process is
complex, requiring image processing to obtain high quality images, mathematical and statistical anal-
ysis for quantitative characterization of significant effects, and visualization for interpretation of the
results. New work in this area focuses on a combination of machine learning and visualization for
predicting neurodegenerative diseases.
The group participates in a research effort on problems from astronomy. Astronomical data sets are
growing to enormous sizes. To explore these data sets effectively, new and scalable tools must be
developed that can cope with the sheer data volume which has entered the tens of terabytes regime. In
this research the focus is on feature extraction, interactive visualization and visual analytics techniques
for high-dimensional data.
A new application of our earlier research in multiscale shape skeletonization involves digital hair
removal (DHR) from dermatoscopic imagery. In this context, we use skeletal descriptors to locate
hairs in dermatoscopic images, and next remove these by image inpainting. Our method is able
to handle a wide variety of hair morphologies (stubble, long, curled), thicknesses, and color (from
opaque, high-contrast to weakly pigmented), works fully automatically, and shows a higher rate of
detection and similar removal quality as compared to state-of-the-art DHR techniques. We validate
our work by testing our method on the most comprehensive collection of dermatoscopic images known
in the literature so far (over 300 images), and having our results visually checked by dermatologists.
The student co-author of this work, J. Koehoorn, has received the GUF-100 prize of the university.
For shape segmentation, we apply our 3D skeletal descriptors to the problem of identifying the natural
parts of various types of 3D shapes. In particular, we target the domain of anatomic shape segmen-
tation, which is challenging due to the high variability and complexity of shapes under processing
(e.g., bone structures and organs having a fuzzy part-whole structure). Our extended medial features,
constructed atop of classical 3D surface skeletons, show a good ability to produce meaningful seg-
mentations of such complex shapes.
For traffic control, we explore innovative interactive visualization methods for analyzing large col-
120
JBI Annual Report
lections of time-dependent trajectories, or trails. Applications include the simplified visualization of
vehicle traffic datasets (airplanes) and the visual analysis of eye-tracking datasets describing how sub-
jects study a scene and/or accomplish a visual task. By extending our earlier work on bundled trails
to handle attribute information for eye-tracking data, we developed a technique allowing instructors
of commercial pilots to assess the effectiveness of novel cockpit designs in a flight simulator.
9.2 Overview of scientific results
Tensor field morphology
Path-based morphology for tensor fields was extend by constructing directed graphs representing such
data, and then modifying the traditional path opening algorithm to work on these graphs. New results
for morphological “sponges” were obtained, that are less restrictive but still allow useful definitions
of various properties and concepts from morphological theory. A generalized version of the scale-
invariant rank operator was obtained, which can be used to create a nearly scale-invariant generaliza-
tion of path openings that is robust to noise. Efficient algorithms were developed for sequences and
directed acyclic graphs with binary or real values.
Multiscale unified skeletonization
A major challenge in the computation of all types of medial descriptors is their well-known sensitivity
to noise – small details, or noise, present in the input shape cause large changes in the computed skele-
tons, in terms of so-called spurious branches. Multiscale regularization methods are the technique of
choice to reduce such undesired effects. To date, however, no single regularization technique was able
to handle all types of skeletons known in the literature (2D, 3D surface, and 3D curve). To address
this, we developed a unified model that casts skeletonization into a mass and momentum conserving
advection process, and computes all known skeleton types by solving a system of partial differen-
tial equations. Besides providing, for the first time, a theoretical unification of regularized skeletons
definitions, our method is also faster and simpler to use than existing state-of-the-art skeletonization
techniques. This research was done in collaboration with the Eindhoven University of Technology,
the Netherlands.
Multidimensional data exploration and explanation
Dimensionality reduction (DR), or the use of multidimensional projections, is one of the methods of
choice for finding patterns and groups of related observations in multidimensional data. Many DR al-
gorithms have been proposed in the literature and are increasingly more often used in visual analytics
applications. However, users of such algorithms have little insight in what patterns that are present in
a projection scatterplot, such as outliers and groups, actually mean. We support users in this context
by designing a set of so-called interactive explanatory techniques for multidimensional projections.
These techniques automatically highlight the position, in the visual space, of the original data dimen-
sions and their ranges; extract and annotate groups of observations by the key dimensions explaining
their presence; and highlight the most important dimensions responsible for the presence of outlier
121
JBI Annual Report
Figure 3: Bundling of eye-tracking trails of a subject examining a painting in a museum. Using directional
and temporal information during bundling, eye trails are separated and simplified to emphasize how the subject
linked the main characters’ faces while scanning the image. Image realized with the technique presented in
V. Peysakhovich, C. Hurter, A. Telea, Attribute-Driven Edge Bundling for General Graphs with Applications in
Trail Analysis, Proc. IEEE PacificVis, 2015.
observations. This research was done in collaboration with the Institute of Math. and Computing
Sciences, Univ. of São Paulo, Brazil; and the Institute of Computing, Univ. of Campinas, Brazil.
Medical data visualization
We developed a visualization technique for brain fiber tracts from DTI data that provides insight into
the structure of white matter through visual abstraction. We achieve this abstraction by analyzing the
local similarity of tract segment directions at different scales using a stepwise increase of the search
range. Locally similar tract segments are moved toward each other in an iterative process, resulting
in a local contraction of tracts perpendicular to the local tract direction at a given scale. This not only
leads to the abstraction of the global structure of the white matter as represented by the tracts, but also
creates volumetric voids. This increase of empty space decreases the mutual occlusion of tracts and,
consequently, results in a better understanding of the brain’s three-dimensional fiber tract structure;
see Fig. 4.
The Principal Component Analysis in conjunction with the Scaled Subprofile Model was applied to
FDG-PET brain imaging data to obtain features which were used as input for a supervised decision
tree classifier. New results were obtained by combining data collections from several medical centers
in the Netherlands and Spain, leading to more robust classification.
Large data visualization
In the NWO-NLeSC project on e-Visualization of Big Data, we continued work on decision tree
classification, by augmenting each decision node with thumbnails of the principal component (PC)
images from which the subject scores are computed, and also provide labeled scatter plots of the
122
JBI Annual Report
[a] [b] [c]
Figure 4: DTI fiber tract abstraction based on similarity and proximity (tractography was performed for
the complete brain, but all images show only one hemisphere of the brain). Tracts are colored according to
direction; top-down: green; left-right: red; perpendicular to view-plane: blue. Central structure in red: corpus
callosum; green structure directly above the corpus callosum: cingulum. (a) uncontracted; (b) contracted at
a scale of 5 mm; (c) a subset of the contracted structure highlighted. Taken from: M.H. Everts, E. Begue, H.
Bekker, J.B.T.M. Roerdink, Exploration of the Brain’s White Matter Structure through Visual Abstraction and
Multi-Scale Local Fiber Tract Contraction. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2015,
21(7), 808–821.
distribution of scores. These plots allow the progress of individual subjects to be traced through the
tree and enable the user to focus on complex or unexpected classifications. In addition, we present a
visual representation of a typical brain activity pattern arriving at each leaf node, and show how this
can be compared to a known reference to validate the behaviour of the tree.
In joint work with the Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, we studied interactive visualization in blind
surveys of HI in galaxies. Our aim is to develop a fully interactive visualization tool with 1-D/2-
D/3-D, quantitative, and comparative capabilities combined with supervised semi-automated analysis.
This will enable flexible and fast human interaction with the data. Also, 3-D visualization, coupled
to modelling, provides additional capabilities helping the discovery of subtle structures in the 3-D
domain.
9.3 Research subjects
P. Barendrecht: morphing for subdivision curves and surfaces.
H. Bekker: visualization of diffusion tensor imaging data, computational geometry.
D. Coimbra: dimensionality reduction methods.
C. Feng: skeleton-based shape processing.
J.J. van de Gronde: morphological operators for tensor field analysis and visualization.
C. Ji: Visualization of brain connectomics data.
J. Kosinka: Geometric modelling; computer graphics.
J. Kustra: 3D point cloud segmentation and analysis using medial axes.
R. Martins: dimensionality reduction methods.
P. Rauber: visual analytics for classifier design.
R. Rodriguez: explaining multidimensional projections.
123
JBI Annual Report
J.B.T.M. Roerdink: scientific visualization; morphological and wavelet-based multidimensional data
processing; neuroimaging; bioinformatics.
R. R. da Silva: explaining multidimensional projections.
V. Soancatl Aguilar: Visualization of gaming data.
A. Sobiecki: 3D shape reconstruction using inpainting.
A.C. Telea: information visualization; software visualization; dimensionality reduction; multiscale
shape processing.
D. Williams: e-visualization of big data.
M. van der Zwan: 3D shape reconstruction for automatic navigation.
9.4 Publications
Dissertations
– J. Kustra, Medial Descriptors for 3D shape Segmentation, Reconstruction, and Analysis, Pro-
motor: A.C. Telea. University of Groningen, 18 May 2015, 173 pages.
– J.J. van de Gronde. Beyond Scalar Morphology (cum laude), Promotor: J.B.T.M. Roerdink;
copromotor: M.H.F. Wilkinson, University of Groningen, June 30 2015, 153 pages.
Contributions to books
– C. Feng, A. Jalba, A. Telea. Part-Based Segmentation by Skeleton Cut Space Analysis, Mathe-
matical Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Processing (Proc. ISMM 2015),
eds. J.A. Benediktsson, J. Chanussot, L. Najman, H. Talbot, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
9082, 2015, 607-618.
– J.J. van de Gronde and J.B.T.M. Roerdink, Sponges for Generalized Morphology, Mathematical
Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Processing (Proc. ISMM 2015), eds. J.
A. Benediktsson, J. Chanussot, L. Najman, H. Talbot, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9082,
2015, 351-362.
– J.J. van de Gronde, H.R. Schubert, and J.B.T.M. Roerdink, Fast Computation of Greyscale
Path Openings, Mathematical Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Processing
(Proc. ISMM 2015), eds. J.A. Benediktsson, J. Chanussot, L. Najman, H. Talbot, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science 9082, 2015, 621-632 .
– J.J. van de Gronde, M. Lysenko, and J.B.T.M. Roerdink, Path-Based Mathematical Morphology
on Tensor Fields, Ingrid Hotz and Thomas Schultz, eds., Visualization and Processing of Higher
Order Descriptors for Multi-Valued Data, Springer International Publishing, 2015, 109-127.
124
JBI Annual Report
– J. Koehoorn, A. Sobiecki, D. Boda, A. Diaconeasa, S. Doshi, S. Paisey, A. Jalba, A. Telea.
Automated Digital Hair Removal by Threshold Decomposition and Morphological Analysis,
Mathematical Morphology and Its Applications to Signal and Image Processing (Proc. ISMM
2015), eds. J. A. Benediktsson, J. Chanussot, L. Najman, H. Talbot, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 9082, 2015, 15-26.
Articles in scientific journals
– M. van Diest, J. Stegenga, H.J. Wörtche, J.B.T.M. Roerdink, G.J. Verkerke, and C.J.C. Lamoth,
Quantifying Postural Control during Exergaming Using Multivariate Whole-Body Movement
Data: A Self-Organizing Maps Approach, PLoS ONE, 10 (7), 2015, e0134350.
– M.H. Everts, E. Begue, H. Bekker, J.B.T.M. Roerdink, and T. Isenberg. Exploration of the
Brain’s White Matter Structure through Visual Abstraction and Multi-Scale Local Fiber Tract
Contraction, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 21 (7), 2015, 808-
821.
– A.C. Jalba, M. A. Westenberg, and J.B.T.M. Roerdink. Interactive Segmentation and Visualiza-
tion of DTI Data Using a Hierarchical Watershed Representation, IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 24 (3), 2015, 1025-1035.
– D. Mudali, L.K. Teune, R.J. Renken and K. L. Leenders, and J.B.T.M. Roerdink, Classification
of Parkinsonian Syndromes from FDG-PET Brain Data Using Decision Trees with SSM/PCA
Features, Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, Article ID 136921, 2015,
1-10 .
Articles in conference proceedings
– J.J. van de Gronde, Tensorial Orientation Scores, Computer Analysis of Images and Patterns
(CAIP), Springer International Publishing, 2015, 783-794.
– R. Martins, R. Minghim, A. Telea, Explaining Neighborhood Preservation for Multidimensional
Projections, Proc. Computer Graphics and Visual Computing (CGVC), Eurographics Associa-
tion, 2015, 25-32. Best student paper award.
– V. Peysakhovich, C. Hurter, A. Telea, Attribute-Driven Edge Bundling for General Graphs with
Applications in Trail Analysis, Proc. PacificVis, IEEE, 2015, 134-141.
– P. Rauber, R. da Silva, S. Feringa, M. Celebi, A. Falcao, A. Telea, Interactive Image Feature
Selection Aided by Dimensionality Reduction, Proc. 7th Intl. Eurovis Workshop on Visual
Analytics (EuroVA), 2015, Eurographics Association, 2015, 24-29.
125
JBI Annual Report
– W. Schmidt, J. Sotomayor, A. Telea, C. Silva, J. Comba, A 3D Shape Descriptor based on
Depth Complexity and Thickness Histograms, Proc. 28th Conf. Graphics, Patterns, and Images
(SIBGRAPI), 2015, 226-233.
– R. da Silva, P. Rauber, R. Martins, R. Minghim, A. Telea, Attribute-based Visual Explanation of
Multidimensional Projections, Proc. 7th Intl. Eurovis Workshop on Visual Analytics (EuroVA),
Eurographics Association, 2015, 35-40.
– M. van der Zwan, A. Telea, Robust and Fast Teat Detection and Tracking in Low-Resolution
Videos for Automatic Milking Devices, Proc. 10th Intl. Joint Conf. Computer Vision, Imaging
and Computer Graphics Theory and Applications (VISAPP), 2015, 92-102.
– M. van der Zwan and A. Telea, Robust and Fast Teat Detection and Tracking in Low-Resolution
Videos for Automatic Milking Devices, Proc. VISAPP., 520-530, 2015.
Other publications
– M.H. Everts, H. Bekker, and J.B.T.M. Roerdink and Tobias Isenberg, Interactive Illustrative
Line Styles and Line Style Transfer Functions for Flow Visualization. Technical report 1503.05787,
arXiv.org, March 2015. Extended version of a short paper at Pacific Graphics 2011,
http://dx.doi.org/10.2312/PE/PG/PG2011short/105-110.
– A. Sobiecki, J. Koehoorn, D. Boda, C. Solovan, A. Diaconeasa, A. Jalba, A. Telea, A New Ef-
ficient Method for Digital Hair Removal by Dense Threshold Analysis, Fourth World Congress
of Dermoscopy, April 16-18, Vienna, Austria, 2015. Poster and extended abstract.
9.5 External funding and collaboration
External funding
– Intelligent video-based robot navigation (i-VIRNA). Period: 2011–2015. Funding: Lely Tech-
nologies NV, Maassluis, Netherlands (one PhD student).
– 3D Shape Reconstruction using Inpainting (2012–2016). Agency: National Council for Scien-
tific and Technological Development (CNPq), Brazil. Funding: one PhD.
– Effective image annotation through active learning applied to natural image databases and ma-
lignant melanoma diagnosis (2013–2016). Funding: Ubbo Emmius programme, one sandwich
PhD (in cooperation with Univ. Campinas, Brazil).
126
JBI Annual Report
– BRANETEC 3 (2013-2016). Agency: CAPES and NUFFIC. International undergraduate ex-
change program between the Computer Science departments of the Univs. of Groningen and
Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS, Brazil). Funding: 180 kEuro.
– NWO, project Connected Morphological Operators for Tensor Images (COMOTI), 2011-2015,
one PhD.
– NWO-NLeSC, project e-Visualization of Big Data, jointly with Kapteyn Astronomical Institute
and the Donald Smits Center for Information Technology (CIT). e-Science for Converging Sci-
ences (eSOCCS) program of the Netherlands eScience Center (NLeSC). Period: 2013-2015.
Funding: 480 kEuro.
External collaboration
Roerdink participates in the Groningen Neuroimaging Center of the research school BCN (Behavioural,
Cognitive and Neurosciences), and collaborates on visualization problems related to neuroimaging
with the Dep. of Neurology of the University Medical Center Groningen (prof. dr. Maurits, prof. dr.
K.L. Leenders). He collaborates with the Kapteyn Astronomical Institute of the University of Gronin-
gen on scalable visualization of astronomical data (prof. J. van der Hulst, prof. E. Valentijn). On tensor
field morphology he collaborates with dr. J. Angulo, Center for Mathematical Morphology (CMM),
Fontainebleau, France.
Telea collaborates with the Institute of Mathematics and Computing Sciences, Univ. of São Paulo,
Brazil (prof. R. Minghim, prof. F. V. Paulovich, prof. L. G. Nonato) on image-based information
visualization in a three-year researcher exchange and joint-supervision PhD project co-funded by
CAPES (Brazil) and Nuffic (Netherlands). He also collaborates in medial axis theory and applications
with prof. A. Falcao (Univ. of Campinas, Brazil), profs. M. Walter and C. Jung (Federal Univ. Rio
Grande do Sul, Brazil), dr. A. Jalba (Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands), and dr. J.
Kustra (Philips Research). In information visualization applications for trail analysis, he collaborates
with dr. C. Hurter (ENAC/Univ. of Toulouse, France).
Kosinka collaborates with the Computer Laboratory at the University of Cambridge (prof. N. Dodg-
son) on CAD model processing and with the Institute of applied Geometry at Johannes Kepler Uni-
versity (Linz, Austria; prof. B. Jüttler) on hierarchical schemes for spline and subdivision surfaces.
Further, he collaborates with the Faculty of Applied Sciences at the University of West Bohemia (dr.
M. Lávička) on various curve and surface interpolation techniques, and with the Numerical Porous
Media Center at Kaust (dr. Bartoň) on selected topics in geometric modelling.
127
JBI Annual Report
9.6 Further information
Roerdink has a joint appointment with the Neuroimaging Center of the University Medical Center
Groningen. He is member of the Graduate School for Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences (BCN
Groningen) and the Advanced School for Computing and Imaging (ASCI). He is director of the Jo-
hann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, co-chair of the FMNS center for Data
Science and Systems Complexity (DSSC), and member of the Board of Directors of Energysense. He
is JBI-representative for Informatics Europe, management committee member of European Concerted
Research Action: Enhanced X-ray Tomographic Reconstruction (COST Action MP1207), chairman
of the Computer Science Board of the Lorentz Center Leiden, member of the international steer-
ing committee on Visual Computing in Biology and Medicine, member of the international steering
committee on Biological Data Visualization, member of the Netherlands Organisation For Scientific
Research steering committee Neuroinformatics.NL, and member of IPN (Informatics Research Plat-
form Netherlands). He is member of ACM and the Eurographics Association, and Senior Member
of the IEEE. He was reviewer for a number of international journals; program committee member of
EuroVis, BioVis, VCBM, and CAIP; and papers co-chair of IEEE SciVis 2015 (25-30 Oct., Chicago,
USA). He was member of the PhD reading committees of Zhigang Tu (University of Utrecht), Stef
van den Elzen (TU Eindhoven), and Kasper Dinkla (TU Eindhoven).
Telea acts as chair of the joint IEEE VISSOFT – ACM SOFTVIS steering committee. He was on sev-
eral conference program committees, notably EuroVis, IEEE Visualization, SCAM, Graph Drawing,
VAST, and EuroVA. He is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board High Performance Comput-
ing & Visualization (WAR HPC/V) of the University of Groningen, of the national research school
ASCI, and of the Board of the University of Groningen Graduate School of Science (GSS). In 2015
he was keynote speaker at several data-analytics related national events such as the Science of Big
Data Analytics and Visualization organized by the Netherlands e-Science Center (Nov 2015).
Kosinka is a member of ASCI and regularly reviews papers for several computer graphics and geo-
metric modelling journals.
128
JBI Annual Report
10. Software Engineering
Group leader:
Prof.dr.ir. P. Avgeriou
Tenured staff (JBI members) source fte
Prof.dr.ir. P. Avgeriou RuG 1.0
Tenure track source fte
Dr. M. Lungu RuG 1.0
Non-tenured staff (JBI members)
Dr. Ap. Ampatzoglou RuG 1.0
Tenured staff (other)
Dr. R. Smedinga RuG 0.3
Honorary professors
Prof.dr.ir. J. Bosch Chalmers University of Technology 0.0
Prof.dr.ir. M. Stal Siemens 0.0
Postdocs
V. H. S. Durelli NUFFIC-CAPES 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
PhD students
Z. Li FNR 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
D. Tofan RuG 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
C. Manteuffel ITEA2 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
D. Feitosa NUFFIC-CAPES 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
S. Charalampidou ITEA2 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
S. Mahdavi-Hezavehi Ubbo Emmius and Linnaeus University 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
C. Yang Ubbo Emmius and Wuhan University 1.0
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
129
JBI Annual Report
PhD students
Ar. Ampatzoglou University of Macedonia external
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
E. M. Arvanitou University of Macedonia external
(supervisor: Avgeriou)
J. S. van der Ven Independent Consultant external
(supervisor: Bosch)
A. Hoffman Siemens external
(supervisor: Stal)
Guests
Philippe Kruchten, University of British Columbia, Canada
Vassilios Vescoukis, National Technical University of Athens, Greece
Farhad Arbab, CWI, the Netherlands
Danny Weyns, Linnaeus University, Sweden
Thomas Slotos, Leuphana University of Lueneburg, Germany
Jose Carlos Maldonado, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Elisa Yumi Nakagawa, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Georgios Gousios, University of Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Matthias Riebisch, University of Hamburg, Germany
130
JBI Annual Report
10.1 Research Program
The Software Engineering research program is concerned with theoretical and practical aspects of
engineering software and software-intensive systems. The program focuses on one particular field of
Software Engineering: Software Architecture. Software Architecture is one of the key disciplines that
can help to deal with the hard but also interesting challenges that we are currently facing: increasing
integration of Systems and Software Engineering; focus on the end user and the offered added value;
increasing demand on software dependability and other critical qualities; dealing with rapid, accel-
erating change; continuous distribution, mobility, interoperability and globalization; emergence of
ultra-large systems (systems of systems); demand for reusability and legacy integration; proliferation
of data- and computation-intensive applications; the trend of autonomous or self-managing software;
the combinations of biology and computing.
The group aims to contribute in architecting and designing industrial software-intensive systems that
meet quality standards by carrying out joint research projects with universities, research institutes,
and industrial partners, thus combining academic know-how with industrial practice. The group fo-
cuses on three major application domains: embedded systems (e.g. Healthcare systems), energy (and
particularly the smart grid) and healthy ageing (through smart homes). The research topics of the
group include: Architectural Knowledge, Architecting Embedded Systems, Quality Metrics and An-
alytics, Architecting Self-Adapting Systems, Technical Debt, and Software Ecosystems. These topics
are further elaborated in the following paragraphs.
Architectural Knowledge. There is a growing awareness of the importance of Architectural Knowl-
edge (AK) in the software architecture community. Starting with the Griffin project (2005), we have
investigated what AK entails, how this can be captured in architectural documentation, the relation-
ship between architectural analysis and AK, and architectural decisions. Documenting architecture
decisions has significant benefits for system design and evolution, but is rarely practiced in industry.
Therefore, we have developed a framework (published in 2011) that captures all relevant concerns for
documenting architecture decisions. In the context of an industry-research collaboration with ABB
(2013) we developed a tool for documenting architecture decisions called Decision Architect. The
tool has been extended in recent years (2013-2016) and has been released under an open source li-
cense. Moreover, we investigated support for architectural decision making using an approach from
knowledge engineering (the repertory grid technique), for which we offer open source tool support
(2010-2014). Currently, we are extending the scope of Architectural Knowledge Management to the
domain of embedded system engineering, which is characterized by multi-disciplinary, multi-lifecycle
and multi-site development processes. The objectives of this research direction are to: (1) adapt AK
management approaches to the domain of embedded systems, (2) facilitate AK sharing and reuse
across disciplines and projects, (3) track the interactions and relations between various artifacts such
as design decisions, models and implementation artifacts, (4) carry out and evaluate AK management
activities in industrial organizations.
131
JBI Annual Report
Architecting Embedded Systems. Embedded Systems (ESs) have become pervasive in modern so-
ciety. However, the development of these systems is still challenging, as their complexity grows
together with the innovations and necessities of modern society. In order to facilitate the development
of ESs and support the guarantee of quality within their design, we are performing research on two
topics: process models and the architecting process. The first topic aims at developing a new pro-
cess framework mechanism for defining and handling process components, with respect to specific
requirements that apply in the domain of ES development, i.e. the multi-disciplinary, multi-lifecycle,
multi-site and multi-organisation development. Such a framework is expected to reduce the effort
for process engineers in designing and applying high-quality processes. The second topic aims at
defining an architecting process for designing critical-embedded systems, a special type of ESs. In
Critical Embedded Systems (CES) the assurance of critical quality attributes plays an important role
as failures of the system may cause serious damage to the environment, to human lives, to expensive
equipment, or non-recoverable financial losses. To this end, we investigate critical quality models for
CES and their use in the design and evaluation of CES architectures.
Quality Metrics and Analytics. The object-oriented paradigm is a dominant way in developing soft-
ware systems. A basic argument that software developers pose in favor of object-orientation is that
it is closer to the way that human brains think, i.e. in terms of objects and actions. However, in or-
der for object-oriented software development to preserve its main advantage, the developed software
should stay modular and understandable. The group’s focus in terms of object-oriented design is on
methods and techniques that guarantee the internal and external product quality. Our work until now
has been focused on GoF design patterns, code refactoring, and quality assessment. We have applied
our research on some emerging application domains like game development. As future development,
we aim at investigating approaches on artifact traceability, the validation of existing metrics, the intro-
duction of new metrics and metric suites, and continue the work of the group on patterns, refactorings,
component extraction and OO game development.
Architecting Self-Adapting Systems. Self-adaptive systems are resilient and flexible systems ca-
pable of autonomously adapting themselves. Due to the continuous evolution of software-intensive
systems, a self-adaptive system monitors itself in order to change its behavior to deal with uncertain
operating conditions such as unpredicted system faults, changing stakeholders needs, and changing
environment and system characteristics. In this project we study a systematic approach for self-
adaption of multiple concerns at runtime. Until now we have systematically reviewed the literature
and investigated existing methods. In addition, we have been studying and classifying the main uncer-
tainties in the self-adaptive system domain to have a better understanding of the problem domain. We
are currently focusing on developing models that capture the required knowledge of quality concerns
and investigate how these models can be employed at runtime to support tradeoff analysis and conflict
resolution.
Technical Debt. Technical debt, which refers to immature software artifacts that fail to meet the re-
quired level of quality, has recently attracted increasing attention from both academia and industry in
132
JBI Annual Report
the software engineering field. To date, little work has been done on technical debt at the architecture
level, the so-called Architectural Technical Debt (ATD). In the short term, ATD may be incurred to
fulfill specific business advantages; but, in the long term, ATD can to a great extent reduce the main-
tainability and evolvability of a software system. Our group focuses on ATD management in terms
of achieving a balance between value and cost of architectural debt. Until now, we have proposed a
conceptual model of architectural debt and an ATD management process applying this ATD concep-
tual model in order to facilitate the decision-making in a value-oriented perspective of architecting.
Our current work is focusing on identifying, measuring, and documenting architectural debt. In ad-
dition, we have validated that two system-wide modularity metrics can indicate the amount of ATD.
In parallel, we work on economic theories that could be applied to technical debt management and
measurement.
Software Ecosystems. Many challenges in software development emerge at the limit between sys-
tems, and not within a single system itself. One first step towards solving these challenges is de-
veloping infrastructure that treats the entire codebase and associated artifacts as a single ecosystem
(One company which treats its entire source code in this manner is Google). By analyzing the entire
ecosystem in a holistic manner and applying data science to software engineering artifacts, we can
(1) Provide a more efficient way to get feedback about which are the weak points of the development
process (2) Detecting and preventing intra- and inter-project quality problems, and (3) Improving
software engineering tools beyond the capabilities of the programming language.
10.2 Research subjects
P. Avgeriou: software architecture design and evaluation, patterns and pattern languages, architectural
knowledge, technical debt, architecture metrics.
Ap. Ampatzoglou: object-oriented design, artifact traceability, software quality measurement.
Ar. Ampatzoglou: economics, technical debt.
E. M. Arvanitou: software quality measurement.
J. Bosch: software ecosystems, agile software development, continuous deployment, software archi-
tecture, software process, software product lines.
S. Charalampidou: artifact traceability, processes, object-oriented refactorings, object-oriented com-
ponentization.
V. H. S. Durelli: architectural evaluation, mutation testing.
D. Feitosa: architectural design, object-oriented design, embedded systems, software quality mea-
surement.
Z. Li: architectural knowledge, technical debt.
M. Lungu: software ecosystems, software analytics, software evolution and maintenance.
S. Mahdavi-Hezavehi: architectural design, self-adaptive systems.
C. Manteuffel: architecture decisions, architecting embedded systems.
R. Smedinga: oo-approach, architecture design decision representation.
133
JBI Annual Report
M. Stal: software architecture, architectural patterns.
D. Tofan: architecture decisions, repertory grid technique, architecture variability.
J.S. van der Ven: software architecture.
C. Yang: architectural assumptions, architecture-agility combination.
10.3 Publications
PhD Theses
– D. Tofan, Understanding and Supporting Software Architectural Decisions For Reducing Ar-
chitectural Knowledge Vaporization, University of Groningen, November, 2015, 278 pages.
– Z. Li, Managing Technical Debt in Software Architecture, University of Groningen, June 2015,
234 pages.
Articles in scientific journals
– D. Ameller, M. Galster, P. Avgeriou, X. Franch, A survey on quality attributes in service-based
systems, Software Quality Journal, February 2015, Springer.
– A. Ampatzoglou, A. Chatzigeorgiou, S. Charalampidou, and P. Avgeriou, The Effect of GoF
Design Patterns on Stability: A Case Study, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 41
(8), 2015, 781-802.
– Ar. Ampatzoglou, Ap. Ampatzoglou, A. Chatzigeorgiou, P. Avgeriou, The financial aspect of
managing technical debt: A systematic literature review, Information and Software Technology,
64, 2015, 52-73.
– M. Galster, P. Avgeriou, An industrial case study on variability handling in large enterprise
software systems, Information and Software Technology, 60, 2015, 16-31.
– Z. Li, P. Avgeriou, P. Liang, A systematic mapping study on technical debt and its management,
J. Systems and Software, 101, 2015, 193-220.
– D. Tofan, M. Galster, I. Lytra, P. Avgeriou, U. Zdun, M. Fouche, R. de Boer, and F. Solms,
Empirical evaluation of a process to increase consensus in group architectural decision making,
Information and Software Technology, 72, 2015, 31-47.
134
JBI Annual Report
Articles in conference and workshop proceedings
– E. Arvanitou, A. Ampatzoglou, A. Chatzigeorgiou, P. Avgeriou, Introducing a Ripple Effect
Measure: A Theoretical and Empirical Validation, 9th Int. Symp. Empirical Software Engi-
neering and Measurement (ESEM), Beijing, China, October, 2015, 22-23.
– S. Charalampidou, A.s Ampatzoglou, and P. Avgeriou, Size and cohesion metrics as indicators
of the long method bad smell: An empirical study, 11th Int. Conf. Predictive Models and Data
Analytics in Software Engineering (PROMISE), ACM, Article 8, 2015, 10 pages.
– D. Feitosa, A. Ampatzoglou, P. Avgeriou, and E. Y. Nakagawa, Investigating Quality Trade-
offs in Open Source Critical Embedded Systems, Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Quality of Software
Architectures (QoSA), ACM, 2015, 113-122.
– Z. Li, P. Liang, P. Avgeriou, Architectural Technical Debt Identification based on Architec-
ture Decisions and Change Scenarios, 12th Working IEEE/IFIP Conf. Software Architecture
(WICSA 2015), Montreal, Canada, 4-8 May 2015.
Edited Proceedings of Conferences and Workshops
– N. Ernst, P. Avgeriou, P. Kruchten, Seventh Int. Workshop on Managing Technical Debt (MTD
2015), in conjunction with ICSME 2015, October 2nd 2015, Bremen, Germany.
– F. Oquendo, P. Avgeriou, C. Cuesta, K. Drira, E. Nakagawa, J. Maldonado, A. Zisman, Third
Int. Workshop Software Engineering for Systems-of-Systems (SESoS 2015), in conjunction with
37th Int. Conf. Software Engineering (ICSE 2015), Florence, Italy, May 17, 2015.
– I. Ozkaya, R. Nord, H. Koziolek, P. Avgeriou, Second Workshop on Software Architecture and
Metrics (SAM 2015), in conjunction with 37th Int. Conf. Software Engineering (ICSE 2015),
Florence, Italy, May 16, 2015.
Workshop Reports
– I. Ozkaya, R. Nord, H. Koziolek, P. Avgeriou, Toward Simpler, not Simplistic, Quantification of
Software Architecture and Metrics: Report on the Second International Workshop on Software
Architecture and Metrics. SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes Volume 40, Issue 5 (September 2015),
43-46.
135
JBI Annual Report
10.4 External funding and collaborations
External funding
Projects funded in the previous years and running in 2015 are:
– Semantic-enabled collaboration Towards Analysis, Negotiation and Documentation on Dis-
tributed Requirements Engineering (STAND), funded by Fonds National de la Recherche (FNR)
Luxembourg under the AFR scheme (15/1/2011 until 15/1/2015) [Zengyang Li].
– Process Models for Engineering of Embedded Systems (PROMES), Funded by ITEA2 (1/2/2013
until 1/2/2016) [Christian Manteuffel and Sofia Charalampidou].
– Empirical Software Engineering for Critical Embedded Systems (ESECES), Funded by NUFFIC-
CAPES (1/9/2012 until 1/9/2016) [Daniel Feitosa, Lina Mara Garcs Rodriguez, Edilson Jos
Davoglio Candido, Katia Romero Felizardo, Vincius Durelli and Frank J. Affonso].
– Architecting Critical Embedded Systems (ACES), Science Without Borders, “Special Visiting
Researcher” Grant (1/6/2012 until 1/6/2015).
External collaborations The group works together with the University of Luxembourg in the context
of the STAND project. In the context of the TSDAD project we have worked with ABB (Germany).
Two of the group’s new grants (ACES and ESECES) are in collaboration with the University of São
Paulo in Brazil. In the context of the PROMES project we work with Oce, ESI-TNO, KE Works,
Vector Fabrics, VTT (Finland), Nokia (Finland), Haloila (Finland) and Metso (Finland). We have
an informal project with the University of Macedonia (Greece), where Elvira Maria Arvanitou and
Areti Ampatzoglou are both located and co-supervised. Finally, we have joint PhD projects with the
Linnaeus University (Sweden) [S. Mahdavi-Hezavehi] and the Wuhan University (China) [Y. Chen].
In addition to the above, the group has collaborated with the following foreign universities and orga-
nizations in terms of joint publications, co-supervision of theses and research projects: Wuhan Uni-
versity, China (Prof. Liang), Swinburne University, Australia (Dr. Tang), University Rey Juan Carlos,
Spain (Dr. Capilla), Limerick University, Ireland (Prof. Fitzgerald), University of Vienna, Austria
(Prof. Zdun), Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium (Prof. Holvoet), University of Canterbury,
New Zealand (Dr. Galster), Siemens AG, Germany (Prof. Stal), Tampere University of Technology,
Finland (Prof. Koskimies), Linnaeus University, Sweden (Prof. Weyns and Andersson), Chalmers
University of Technology, Sweden (Prof. Bosch and Chaudron), HSR, Switzerland (Prof. Zimmer-
mann), Polytechnic University of Catalunya, Spain (Prof. Franch), University of British Columbia,
Canada (Prof. Kruchten), University of Helsinki, Finland (Prof. Mannisto), University of South Brit-
tany, France (Prof. Oquendo), University of Pretoria, South Africa (Dr. Solms).
136
JBI Annual Report
The group has ongoing Socrates-Erasmus agreements together with the Tampere Technical Univer-
sity (Finland), Universidad Rey Juan Carlos (Spain), Linnaeus University (Sweden), University of
L’Aquila (Italy), University of Piraeus, (Greece), University of Cyprus (Cyprus), Wroclaw University
of Technology (Poland), University of Macedonia (Greece), Aristotle University (Greece), National
Technical University of Athens (Greece).
10.5 Further activities
P. Avgeriou was co-organizer of three international workshops: the 3rd International Workshop on
Software Engineering for Systems-of-Systems (SESoS 2015), the 2nd Workshop on Software Ar-
chitecture Metrics (SAM 2015), and the Seventh International Workshop on Managing Technical
Debt (MTD 2015). He was Workshop and Tutorial chair of the 16th International Conference on
Product-Focused Software Process Improvement (PROFES 2015), Bolzano, Italy. He served in nu-
merous Program and Steering Committees of international conferences and in the editorial boards of
IEEE Software and Springer Transactions on Pattern Languages of Programming. He served in the
Board of the Research School ‘Institute for Programming and Algorithmics’ (IPA), in the board of the
Dutch National Association for Software Engineering (VEReniging Software Engineering Nederland
VERSEN), and in the Expert Committee for the Best IPA Dissertation Award. He has continued ser-
vice as member of the International Software Engineering Research Network (ISERN) and as Senior
Member of IEEE. Finally he served in three PhD Committees in other universities and as reviewer on
19 scientific journals.
M. Lungu joined the group in September 2015. Since then he has reviewed articles for the Journal
of Software and Systems as well as the open access journal PeerJ Computer Science. He also co-
organized the International Workshop on Software Ecosystems that was co-located with ECSA 2015
in Cavtat, Croatia.
R. Smedinga was secretary in the board of Stichting Nioc (http://www.nioc.nl), responsible for orga-
nizing conferences on computing science education.
10.6 Distinctions
The TSE article of A. Ampatzoglou, A. Chatzigeorgiou, S. Charalampidou, P. Avgeriou entitled “The
Effect of GoF Design Patterns on Stability: A Case Study” was accepted as a Journal First and invited
for presentation at the European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Sympo-
sium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2015), Bergamo, Italy from August 30
September 4.
P. Avgeriou gave invited talks at the Chalmers University of Technology (Sweden) and the University
of Utrecht.
137
JBI Annual Report
Colloquium Computer Science 2015 – List of Speakers
– December 9
Dr. A. Witoelar, University of Oslo, Sweeden
Extracting the last bits of information from GWAS summary statistics
– December 3
Prof. M. Riebisch, University of Hamburg, Germany
Reuse in Architectural Decision-Making
– November 19
Dr. M. Galster, University of Canterbury, New Zealand
Trends in software architecture research and practice
– October 29
Dr. G. Gousios, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Mining GitHub for fun and profit
– October 8
Prof. A. Tate, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
The Helpful Environment - Geographically Dispersed Intelligent Agents that Collaborate
– October 7
Dr. M. Sodanil , King Mongkut’s University of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand
Neural Networks in Speech Recognition for Acoustic Modeling of Tonal Language
– September 23
Prof. C.N. Schizas
eHealth for the Citizen for Better Privacy and Data Protection
– September 21
Prof. C.S. Pattichis, University of Cyprus, Greece
Cardiovascular Health Informatics: Predicting the Risk of Stroke Based on Ultrasound Image
Analysis of the Atherosclerotic Carotid Plague
– June 29
Prof. B. Burgeth
Elementary Morphology for Color Images and Orientation Fields
– June 29
Prof. L. Najman
Graph-based mathematical morphology
138
JBI Annual Report
– June 24
J.C. Maldonado, ICMC-USP, Brazil
INCT-SEC: an overview of the results and perspectives
– June 17
Prof. R. van Liere, CWI, The Netherlands
Automated Extraction and Interactive Visualization of Line-Like Structures from Electron To-
mograms
– June 12
Prof. J. Ahrens
Implications of Numerical and Data Intensive Technology Trends on Scientific Visualization
and Analysis
– June 10
T. van der Storm, CWI, The Netherlands
Live Little Languages
– June 3
Dr. T. Slotos, Leuphana University of Lueneburg, Germany
The Golden Age of Software Architecture better named The Middle Age of Software Architec-
ture - some provocative thoughts
– June 2
Prof. G. Zachary, Arizona State University,
The CS development dividend: how one African university gave rise to a reseach cluster
– May 21
Prof. J. Comba, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil
Visualization and Computer Graphics research at UFRGS/Brazil
– May 20
Prof. A. Sanchez, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Spain
Automatic Linguistic Reports in Deforestation Analysis
– May 19
Prof. F.F. Leymarie, Goldsmiths University of London, UK
Medial scaffolds of 3D data
– May 27
Dr. G. Azzopardi
Combination Of Receptive Fields (CORF): A novel computational simple cell model with ap-
plication to contour detection and delineation
139
JBI Annual Report
– May 13
M. Lux, Bielefeld University, Germany
Clustering of DNA sequences
– A. Schulz, Bielefeld University, Germany
Visualization of Classifiers
– May 6
Dr. L. Sanchez, University of Leon, Spain
Boar spem cell classification using digital image processing
– April 15// Prof.Dr.-Ing. hhabil. H. Unger, FernUniversität Hagen, Germany
Fully decentralised search engines: just a dream?
– March 25
D. Nebel, University of Mittweida, Germany
Learning interpretable models from Dissimilarity Data
– March 18
Prof. F. Arbab, CWI, The Netherlands
Coordinated Composition of Components
– March 4
Prof. X. Jiang, University of Münster
Biomedical Imaging: A Computer Vision Perspective
– Prof. A. Montanari, University of Udine, Italy
Past, present, and future of Interval Temporal Logics
– Prof. J. Baeten, CWI, The Netherlands
Computability revisited
140
JBI Annual Report
Colloquium Mathematics 2015 – List of Speakers
– December 1
Dr. M. Kool, MI Utrecht, The Netherlands
Enumerative geometry: from Ancient Greeks to Modern Physicists
– November 24
Prof. J. Stokman
Recursion relations in dense loop models
– November 12
J. Liao, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
VBARMS: A variable block algebraic recursive multilevel solver for sparse linear systems
– November 10
Dr. A. Giacobbe, University of Padova, Italy
Quasi-periodicity of relative quasi-periodic tori
– October 29
W. Rozema, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Low-dissipation methods and models for the simulation of turbulent subsonic flow
– October 27
Prof. J. van den Berg
Growth models where large clusters are frozen
– October 20
Prof. R. Cooke, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
Vine Regression
– October 13
Dr. R. van der Veen, JBI, KdV Institute (UvA), The Netherlands
Knots and quantum groups
– September 29
Prof. C. Dutilh Novaes, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Reductio Proofs From A Dialogical Perspective
– September 15
M. Atiyah, VideoMATH
The Millenium Prize Problems
141
JBI Annual Report
– July 14
C-Q. Cheng, Nanjing University, China
Arnold diffusion in nearly integrable Hamiltonian systems with multiple degrees of freedom
– June 29
F. Zang
Distributed Control of Networked Lure’s Systems
– June 11
H.J. Kojakmetov, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Classification of constrained differential equations embedded in the theory of slow fast systems
– June 8
B. Nunes Borges de Lima, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil
Embedding binary sequences into Bernoulli site percolation on Z3
– May 26
Dr. C.C.C.J. Kalle, University of Leiden, The Netherlands
Local dimensions for the Bernoulli convolution
– May 12
Prof. A. van der Schaft, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
A network dynamics approach to chemical reaction networks
– May 7
B. Jargalsaikhan, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Linear conic programming: genericity and stability
– April 28
Dr. H. Peters, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
A polynomial map with wandering Fatou components
– April 23
Prof. S. Hassi, University of Vaasa, Finland
Boundary pairs, boundary triplets andn Weyyl functions of nonnegative operators
– April 23
Prof. J. Berhrndt, Graz University of Technology, Austria
Spectral and Extension Thheory of Elliptic Partial Differential Operators
– April 20
Prof. B. Rink, VU Amsterdam, The Netherlands
The hidden symmetries of network dynamics
142
JBI Annual Report
– April 14
R. Mohammadi, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Bayesian Structure Learning in Sparse Graphical Models
– March 31
Prof. J. Wiegerinck
Plurifine potential theory
– March 17
Prof. G.L.M. Cornelissen, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands
Reconstruction of walks in graphs
– March 3
Math movie ”Fermat’s Last Theorem”
– February 19
E. Vos, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Formation control in the port-Hamiltonian framework
– February 17
Prof. E.C. Wit, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
Ernst for President! (or: How Statistics helps to achieve fair elections)
– February 10
Dr. D.R. Valesin, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
The Contact Process on Power Law Random Graphs
– January 22
L. Gijben, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
On Approximations, Complexity and Applications for Copositive Programming
143

