(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
148 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Cost Optimization of Cloud Computing Services in a 
Networked Environment
Eli WEINTRAUB 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management 
Afeka Tel Aviv Academic College of Engineering 
Tel Aviv, Israel 
Yuval COHEN 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management 
Afeka Tel Aviv Academic College of Engineering 
Tel Aviv, Israel
 
 
Abstract—Cloud computing service providers' offer their 
customers' services maximizing their revenues, whereas 
customers wish to minimize their costs. In this paper we shall 
concentrate on consumers' point of view. Cloud computing 
services are composed of services organized according to a 
hierarchy of software application services, beneath them 
platform services which also use infrastructure services. 
Providers currently offer software services as bundles consisting 
of services which include the software, platform and 
infrastructure services. Providers also offer platform services 
bundled with infrastructure services. Bundling services prevent 
customers from splitting their service purchases between a 
provider of software and a different provider of the underlying 
platform or infrastructure. This bundling policy is likely to 
change in the long run since it contradicts economic competition 
theory, causing an unfair pricing model and locking-in 
consumers to specific service providers. In this paper we assume 
the existence of a free competitive market, in which consumers 
are free to switch their services among providers. We assume 
that free market competition will enforce vendors to adopt open 
standards, improve the quality of their services and suggest a 
large variety of cloud services in all layers. Our model is aimed at 
the potential customer who wishes to find the optimal 
combination of service providers which minimizes his costs. We 
propose three possible strategies for implementation of the model 
in organizations. We formulate the mathematical model and 
illustrate its advantages compared to existing pricing practices 
used by cloud computing consumers. 
Keywords—Cloud Computing; Pricing Model; Cost 
optimization; Software as a service; Platform as a service; 
Infrastructure as a service 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, organizations base their computing facilities 
on server farms located inside the organization in geographical 
central sites. In the last years organizations began to shift parts 
of their computing infrastructures outside the geographic 
organizational borders to the cloud, where the facilities are 
owned and managed by other organizations. Reference [26] 
state that shifting computing infrastructure outside the 
geographic borders enforces performing changes in production 
processes and technological changes. Those organizations 
have to establish new processes of production control, service 
level monitoring, and resolve security and privacy issues. 
Cloud Computing (CC) typically deals with organizations 
using computing services, communication and web 
applications. Most definitions state that CC technology 
enables on-demand services, scalability, and flexibility, in 
enlarging or downgrading computing consumption ([31] [29]). 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
defines CC as a model for enabling convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (for example, networks, servers, storage, 
applications and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released with minimal management effort or service-provider 
interaction [23]. Reference [22] argues that occasionally cloud 
providers suffer outages, thus using a multi-cloud broker is a 
preferred solution to remove single point of failures. 
Reference [3] introduces an Inter-Cloud Computing additional 
layer on top of CC systems which enables shifting resources 
among the participating cloud systems in occasions of high 
load levels. 
Cloud computing targets four main groups of 
organizational customers: private, public, community and 
hybrid [34]. For private customers, cloud model computing 
infrastructure services are typically located outside the 
organization’s sites at a cloud service provider. A public 
customer typically chooses cloud service providers through a 
bidding process, issuing request for proposal, choosing the 
best proposal, and contracting for the best bidder having the 
best proposal. The cloud computing provider may use the 
same computing infrastructures for supplying the needs of 
other companies. In a community model, infrastructure 
services are shared by a group of customers. In a hybrid 
model, an organization can use infrastructure services supplied 
by public, private or as part of a community. Reference [11] 
who researched the emerging themes in financial services 
technologies found that cloud computing seems to be a cost-
effective infrastructure affording capital efficiency for 
financial services providers. 
We shall review the main motivations and obstacles to 
adopting the cloud technology by companies. Cutting cost has 
been found an important factor for CC adoption. Information 
security has been found as a barrier to CC adoption, and is an 
issue dealt intensively in CC research [7]. Reference [28] who 
researched CC trends, claims that security will not be a barrier 
for cloud adoption, since it will be implemented by centralized 
automated processes. 
II. CLOUD COMPUTING PRICING MODELS 
Economic issues concerning CC service pricing models 
are dealt by [10] who states that research need to be 
strengthened in the economic issues of CC pricing models. 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
149 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Reference [37] claims that variance among providers' services 
put difficulties in comparing pricing models. Reference [37] 
utilizes a game theoretic model to analyze the pricing 
strategies for computing services and shows that price and 
revenue of computing services are significantly influenced by 
market structure and technological parameters. Reference [36] 
classified CC research publications. The researchers found 
that cost saving is the strongest incentive for organizations 
considering CC adoption. They also found that pricing is the 
least researched issue, but is an emerging topic in cloud 
computing research. 
CC services are usually sorted to three groups: SaaS 
(Software as a service), PaaS (Platform as a Service) and IaaS 
(Infrastructure as a Service), each service belongs to a 
specified group, and is offered for specific prices. 
There exist two main pricing models. Pay-per-use is the 
most used model [1], in which the consumer is charged a fee 
for a used unit in a specified duration. The unit used may be a 
certain computing unit of hardware, software or application, 
for example GB or CPU [5]. Fixed-price model, sometimes 
called subscription in which the user is charged for using a 
service unit for a fixed price, usually in periods of month or 
year. In the fix-price model consumers may consume an 
unlimited amount of unit resources, although in some 
contracts consumption is limited to a maximal amount which 
consumers do not intend to reach. In the fixed-price model 
consumers might be charged for resources they have not 
actually consumed. In certain cases their usage is stopped or 
degraded after reaching the maximal limit. Reference [1] 
surveyed pricing models and classifies them to three groups: 
fixed – in which the customer is charged the same amount all 
the time, dynamic – in which prices changes dynamically 
according to purchased volumes and market-dependant in 
which prices changes according to market conditions. 
Reference [1] found that the pricing approach are one of the 
following: fixed price with no volume limits, fixed price plus 
per-unit rate, assured purchase volume plus per-unit price rate, 
per-unit rate with a ceiling, and per-unit price. The authors 
found also several theoretical studies for cloud computing 
pricing which are not implemented in practice. Reference [18] 
performed an analytical and empirical examination of Cloud 
IaaS pricing models and found that pay-per-use pricing model 
is perceived as the dominant scheme by the scientific 
community. 
Research aimed at understanding customers' motivations 
show that they are willing to control their payments, preferring 
to pay for services they had, and not being charged for fix 
prices which sometimes include services they have not 
consumed. Reference [16] claims that market competition 
powers using pay per use pricing model could bring efficient 
allocations of computing facilities. Reference [34] illustrates 
that current trends in CC show an ambition to base pricing 
models on dynamic pay-per-use pricing models. In certain 
cases consumers prefer to pay a fixed price, ignoring pay-per-
use model advantages which fit their exact consumption and 
might minimize their costs [4], [26]. Reference [35] explored 
pricing models from both views: providers and consumers. 
The researchers found that some providers offer pay-per-use 
pricing and leave some consumer surplus to the customers, in 
order to be more attractive. Examining customers’ point of 
view, usage-based pricing was also found more attractive 
because of higher consumer surplus. Reference [15] explored 
cloud provider pricing models using cluster analysis and found 
common business models; one cluster includes niche 
providers who use fix pricing, and another cluster includes 
mass players using pay-per-use pricing models. A possible 
explanation of using fix prices is lock-in situations prevalent 
among niche players' products. Reference [19] who researched 
costing schemes offers a decision model which calculates 
financial trade-off between private clouds and public clouds 
with respect to the workloads. The model takes in 
consideration cloud bursting as a third option of the two 
costing options. Cloud bursting is a deployment model which 
enables vendors to manage varying demands to resources, to 
supply stable quality of services according to pricing schemes. 
Several researchers studied pricing models wishing to 
explain anomalies in consumer decisions. Reference [17] 
found that consumers wish to maximize their usage while 
minimizing their costs. The researchers also identified biased 
decisions of two kinds: cases of fixed-prices-bias in which 
consumers prefer a fixed price model although they would pay 
less on a pay-per-use tariff, and cases of pay-per-use bias, in 
which consumers prefer a pay-per-use tariff although they 
would pay less on fixed-price tariffs. Reference [17] states that 
possible cause for the fixed-price bias is an insurance effect 
leading consumers to pay more for their budget confidence. 
Reference [14] who surveyed pricing models, found that a 
fixed-price bias was found among half of consumers of the 
survey and among one quarter of consumers was found a pay-
per-use bias. Those researchers state that the insurance effect 
has significant influence on the flat rate bias while the pay-
per-use bias is influenced by the flexibility effects. 
Providers' decisions concerning pricing models are 
influenced by strategic and marketing reasons. For example 
[14] states providers use to offer free of charge services using 
lock-in strategies, and [21] claims providers use to offer 
different prices for specific customers for marketing or cash-
flow management reasons. They also state there may be cases 
in which providers offer different service quality at different 
prices, causing transparency difficulties in evaluating 
providers' prices. Providers are using bundling techniques 
which force consumers buy certain services which they would 
have not bought otherwise. Reference [34] found differences 
between private and organizational consumers. Most cloud 
services which are focused on private consumers are free of 
charge as Microsoft’s Live Mesh [24]. In contrast, 
organizational consumers are usually charged, and only some 
add-on services on IaaS or SaaS are free of charge. PaaS 
providers often offer their development tools for free. 
Reference [30] claims providers' motivation in bundling extra 
services such as applications or infrastructures to the PaaS 
services which they are already committed to, thus locking-in 
their consumers. Reference [30] states that after a consumer 
had invested in customizing his applications to a specific 
platform, switching costs to other providers' services are high, 
due to necessary changes in programming language. Acting 
this way, providers are causing a monopoly situation. 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
150 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Free competition enables maximization of consumers' 
benefits and minimizing consumers' costs. Existing pricing 
models may be characterized by several features which raise 
difficulties to economic competition. Reference [32] uses a 
multi-method approach for the evaluation of a pricing model 
raising the awareness of indirect and hidden costs in cloud 
computing pricing models. They found that some providers try 
to attract customers by a low price per storage while charging 
hidden costs for data transfer even for data transfer within the 
provider’s infrastructure. Reference [7] states customers face 
difficulties in evaluating prices of cloud services, difficulties 
that are one of the main reasons preventing customers from 
adopting cloud services. 
We found in literature three competition barriers' features: 
bundling of services, lack of transparency, and varying tariff 
structures. 
 Bundling of services 
Examining providers' pricing models as published in their 
websites (for example [2], [13], [24]) we can observe the 
phenomena of bundling services. We suggest introducing new 
definitions of two kinds of bundling: first is horizontal 
bundling, second is vertical bundling. In horizontal bundling a 
provider offers several services, all belong to one layer. For 
example Amazon EC2 offers several bundles each one is 
composed of the following components: CPU, ECU, memory, 
instance storage, and operating system. In such bundling 
situations consumers may not use their own operating system. 
In vertical bundling a provider offers services which belong to 
lower layers, in addition to the main needed service. For 
example Amazon offers SaaS services, in which the consumer 
is asked to choose the configuration of infrastructure he wants 
the software application to run. Existing Service Providers 
(SP) pricing models include two kinds of vertical bundles: 
SaaS bundles which include infrastructure and platform 
services offered by the SaaS provider, and PaaS bundles 
which include infrastructure services offered by the PaaS 
provider. A consumer may not use a PaaS service such as his 
own operating system or an operating system he bought from 
another cheaper service provider. 
We argue consumers should be able to choose another 
infrastructure service provider instead of being forced to use 
the infrastructure services of the SaaS or PaaS main provider. 
Providers use to bundle services in ways that customers are 
unable to know the real prices of each service component. 
Such a situation contradicts economic competition principles, 
causing an unfair pricing model when examining customers' 
optimal alternatives. In the long run, market forces are bound 
to change this into a more competitive setting. Providers will 
have to improve their competitive advantages by adapting 
their infrastructures to improved interoperability, portability 
and standardization. 
 Lack of transparency 
Bundling masks the prices of services, in both situations: 
vertical and horizontal bundling. The provider offers a tariff 
for the whole bundle without breaking it to its components' 
services, in a package deal. In such situations customers do 
not know the price of a specific service which is part of the 
bundle. Feeling ignorance of the pricing structure, customers 
are reluctant of searching a competing service. Reference [32] 
found that public cloud customers receive no insight into the 
underlying IT infrastructure and have restrictive 
administrative rights. Transparency of service costs in cloud 
computing is a key factor to popular wide usage by 
organizations [8]. Reference [33] surveyed cloud monitoring 
tools and state that the design of monitoring tools is yet an 
under researched area. They state that lack of an appropriate 
strategy prohibits cost prediction, as well as other unwanted 
outcomes. Reference [6] proposes a pricing model which 
includes incentives to providers who are willing to present the 
pricing components of their services and also the 
configuration of the technological implementation such as the 
assets consumed for each service. Improving transparency will 
be feasible by breaking bundles to component services so that 
a consumer may choose each service by comparison to 
competing providers' prices. 
 Varying tariff structures 
A consumer wishing to compare a service offered by 
several providers may find it difficult to perform, sometimes 
impossible at all. Reference [27] states that the large number 
of cloud providers' services based on varying pricing schemes 
has led to complexities in cloud service selection. This 
situation is due to the following reasons: 
- Services having different functionalities. For example 
operation systems and database management systems of 
different suppliers.    
- Computing resources having different technological 
characteristics such as speed or volume, which relate to 
specific suppliers' technologies. 
- Differences in service levels. For example differences in 
time limits for fixing software failures. 
- Differences in contract duration. Providers use to offer 
better prices for long-term contracts. 
- Differences in discounts. Different discounts due to high 
volume discounts offered for certain volumes; higher 
discounts for higher volumes. 
According to Reference [8] pricing models are not 
transparent thus making price comparisons difficult. Providers 
use different tariff structures; some providers such as Google 
charge separately for each service, and providers like Amazon 
and Microsoft offer predefined bundles of services. 
The variability of charges between current SPs does not 
give sufficient common ground for a simple comparison. This 
variability is illustrated in the following table which shows the 
tariffs of Amazon, Microsoft and Google. As can be seen in 
the table, each service provider suggests different services 
with specific functionalities, for example different operating 
systems. Tariffs are based on different units such as storage 
capacity and time. We normalized the published tariff units to 
a standard scale based on Cents/Hour, but the process of 
normalization includes obstacles and barriers which are 
difficult to overcome, which is an outcome of the specific 
characteristics of suppliers' services, as illustrated in table I. 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
151 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
The differences in existing tariff structures illustrate the 
difficulties involved in making a comparison of the published 
cloud services pricing models, thus raising barriers to 
technological connectivity and free competition of cloud 
services.
TABLE I.  VARIABILITY OF TARIFF COSTS OF AMAZON, MICROSOFT AND GOOGLE 
SaaS Amazon SP1 Tariff Microsoft Azure SP2 Tarriff Google cloud SP3 Tariff 
 
Email 1000 msg 10 cents. Assume 
1000 msg / month 
10 - - DropBox 10GB 1.4 
 Cloud search Cent / hour 39   search 10k  records 50 
PaaS Amazon SP1 Tariff Microsoft Azure SP2 Tarriff Google cloud SP3 Tariff 
 Operating system Per hour 13.3 
General purpose standard 
instance. Per hour.  
18 
Standard instance 2 vCores 
3.75 GB. Per hour 
7 
 
Support 49 $ per month (12-hour-
response) 
7 
Developer support. 29$ Per 
month. 8 hour response 
4 
Silver tier support. 150$ 
per month. 4 hours -1 day 
response 
21 
IaaS Amazon SP1 Tariff Microsoft Azure SP2 Tarriff Google cloud SP3 Tariff 
 Relational Database services. Per hour 9 SQL DB (10-50GB). Per hour 6.25 
Cloud SQL D2. 16B RAM 
Per hour 
19 
 Storage TB standard vol Per hour  7 Storage TB Per hour 1.5 
Stored cloud DB for 1 TB 
0.18$/month 
2.5 
In this paper we propose a pricing model in which the 
customer is free to choose service providers according to his 
own pricing preferences, composing the bundled services by 
his own, not according to constraints put by SP's. The 
proposed pricing model defines two fees: in cases a SP is 
requested by the consumer to interface to another underlying 
service provider, the consumer will have to pay two fees: a 
fixed sum of money for initiating the connection to the other 
SP, and a dynamic fee for each executed transaction. Those 
fees may be specific for each couple of two SP's, for a specific 
service (Saas, Paas or Iaas). 
Cloud providers use two main pricing models: fix-rate 
pricing and pay per use pricing. Incorporating risk analysis 
and cash-flow management considerations consumers use 
sometimes fix-price pricing models. The model we propose 
handles both models. We do not deal with theoretical models 
cited by [1] and with schemes which limit volumes of 
consumed resources or models which lower prices when 
resources are not utilized by the consumer. Tariff tables are 
normalized to hourly time units. In cases a provider offers a 
fixed-price tariff we normalize it to a pay-per-use price 
transforming monthly rates to hourly rates. The pricing model 
we propose optimizes technological configuration of the costs 
of services a customer may choose, in a multi-providers 
network. The model simulates situations in which consumers 
may install software or hardware components on multi 
providers' sites, optimizing consumers' total CC expenses. The 
proposed model is aimed at solving the problems existing in 
pricing models: bundling of services, pricing transparency, 
and a common structure of pricing tariffs. 
III. CLOUD COMPUTING ARCHITECTUE 
Cloud computing architecture is described in literature as 
consisting of three layers: IaaS, PaaS and SaaS. Each layer 
performs certain functions, serving consumers' requests and 
also supporting functions requested by upper layers. This 
separation to layers also fits current services offered by Cloud 
providers. Reference [34] defines a framework of CC 
architecture composing three layers of functions supporting 
cloud computing services. Figure I describe architectures' 
components. White rectangles describe computing services, 
grey rectangles describe computing resources. Following the 
functions performed by each layer. 
Infrastructure layer – This layer focuses on providing 
technologies as basic hardware components for software 
services. There are two kinds of infrastructures: storage 
capabilities and computing power. 
Platform layer - includes services which are using cloud 
infrastructures needed for their functioning. There are two 
kinds of platform services: development and business 
platforms. Development platforms are aimed for usage by 
developers who write programs before transferring them to 
production and usage by organizations' users. Business 
platforms enable organizational developers make adaptations 
of software packages for deployment in their organizations. 
Application layer - consists of the programs and human 
interfaces used by the organizations' end-users. Applications 
are running on cloud assets, making use of platform and 
infrastructure layers. There are two kinds of services in this 
layer: applications and on-demand services. Application 
services are software packages ready for end-users such as 
Microsoft Office, while on-demand services are software 
applications which are used by the organizations' customers. 
Those services are used according to on-demand needs, and 
used on a pay-per-use or fixed-price pricing model. 
To summarize, SPs offer their customers' three kinds of 
services: IaaS, PaaS and SaaS. Each SP manages all 
underlying infrastructure for the offered service. For example 
a SP suggesting a SaaS product is also bundling into the 
product the PaaS and IaaS layers. Reference [38] state that 
according to cloud computing architecture a certain provider 
may run an application using another provider’s infrastructure, 
but in practice both providers are parts of the same 
organization. Current practice is that when a provider suggests 
selling a PaaS service he also bundles the IaaS layer in the 
deal. Such bundling by service providers limit free market 
forces from entering the competition, forcing customers pay 
for components they may buy cheaper from other providers. 
For example a customer may buy a SaaS service from SP1, 
but buy the underlying PaaS service from SP2 which sells the 
appropriate platform service cheaper than SP1. Reference [25] 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
152 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
claims that in the future, developers will plan their cloud 
applications which will enable migration of services among 
clouds of multiple clouds. According to [38] cloud computing 
architecture is more modular compared to traditional hosting 
architectures based in server farms, and programs running on 
different layers are loosely coupled, thus enabling the 
development of a wide range of applications. Reference [31] 
also claims that it is possible that applications belonging to 
different layers will be run on separate geographical locations 
even in different countries. Reference [27] claims that virtual 
machine migration allows transfer of a running application 
from one virtual machine to another, which may be provided 
by a different IaaS provider. 
We propose a business model which enables implementing 
functionalities of a service provider interfacing the underlying 
platform or infrastructure service by other service providers 
according to consumers' preferences. Implementing this 
required functionality puts two requirements on cloud 
architecture. Firstly, the architecture should be based on open 
standards which will enable interfacing between many 
components among all providers in all three layers. Second, 
the architectures' building blocks should be loosely coupled. 
Implementation of those two functionalities should enable 
connectivity among vertical and horizontal services, thus 
elimination of the bundling phenomena. Figure II describes 
the new suggested cloud architecture. Arrows describe 
services supplied by underlying layers. Rectangles describe 
computing services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Current Cloud business model Architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. A Dynamic Architecture for Cloud Computing 
IV. CLOUD COMPUTING PRICING MODEL 
In an efficient market, customers should be able to easily 
compare all their options, and choose the best. Thus, a simple 
common cost method should be used. Vendors will have to 
adapt their pricing models to standard schemes in order to 
improve their competitiveness and raise their quality of 
services. We suggest a simple pricing model with a common 
tariff base. The simplest basis is a single ratio of Cents/Hour 
of usage. A more advanced pricing model may include in 
addition to the usage payments, periodical fixed payments for 
various services. We shall start with the simple model first. 
A. The Case Study Example 
The inability to compare SP offerings is a competitive 
market failure which hinders not only SP competitiveness, but 
also the decisions of the customers. We claim that market 
forces are bound to drive cloud service tariffs to be more 
comparable than they are today. To enable simple comparison 
of SPs we suggest three competitive pricing models in which 
service providers are competing for giving the best offer to a 
customer having specific requirements. Each SP base its offer 
on its in-house offering with complimentary services bought 
from its business partners. Also, when a SP buys another 
underlying service from another SP, s/he must pay not only 
for the service, but also for the administrative work and the 
interfaces between suppliers involved in the purchase. 
  
Business model 
Application Platform Infrastructure 
On-Demand Apps. 
Computing 
Development Software 
Business 
Storage 
Business model 
Application 
Platform 
Infrastructure 
On-Demand Apps. 
Computing 
Development Software 
Business 
Storage 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
153 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
In this section we describe a theoretical example of three 
SPs and their tariffs, and an organizational customer that has 
to choose certain SP's based on its business and computing 
requirements. We introduce three pricing models which will 
make use of the data described in this section. Table II 
summarizes the estimated requirements of a hypothetic cloud 
services customer. All requirements are either in hours, 
volume or other specified unit. Table III lists the tariff of three 
SPs for the case study. 
TABLE II.  CUSTOMER ESTIMATED MONTHLY REQUIREMENTS 
SaaS Service name 
Requirement in 
units 
Units of service 
 Data transfer  2,400 1 TB 
 Email services 2,400 1000 messages 
 Cloud search 600 1 search 
 Documents Mgt. 200 1 hour 
 ERP 2,400 1 hour 
PaaS Service name 
Requirement in 
units 
Units of service 
 Operating system 600 1 hour 
 Memory 1,000 1 hour, 1 GB 
 Instance storage   1,000 1 hour, 1 GB 
 Developer support 240 1 hour 
IaaS Service name 
Requirement in 
units 
Units of service 
 
Relational Database 
services 
880 1 hour 
 Storage standard vol.  240 1 TB, 1 hour 
 Backup (GB) 1,000 1 GB, 1 hour 
The customer contacts three candidate SPs to get a price 
quote. The published tariffs of these SPs appear in table III. 
TABLE III.  TARIFFS OF THREE SERVICE PROVIDERS. TARIFFS ARE IN 
CENTS/HOUR. EXAMPLE PRICES. ASSUMING BASIC USAGE 
SaaS Service name 
SP1 
tariff 
Sp2 
tariff 
SP3 
tariff 
 Data transfer  1 2 1 
 Email services 2 3 1 
 Cloud search 3 4 3 
 Documents Mgt. 2 1 1 
 ERP 50 47 60 
PaaS Service name 
SP1 
tariff 
Sp2 
tariff 
SP3 
tariff 
 Operating system 13 18 7 
 Memory  20 25 35 
 Instance storage 12 10 15 
 Developer support 3 4 2 
IaaS Service name 
SP1 
tariff 
Sp2 
tariff 
SP3 
tariff 
 Relational Database services 9 6 19 
 Storage standard vol.  17 15 25 
 Backup  20 28 20 
According to current practices each SP provides all the 
services using his/her tariff. So, based on current practices 
bundled services per SPs would give: 
SP1 price per monthly usage:          $ 2019.20  
SP2 price per monthly usage:          $ 2110.40  
SP3 price per monthly usage:          $ 2482.00  
Therefore, SP1 is the least cost provider ($ 2019.20). 
However, our suggested model enables the consumer to set an 
efficient market price that further minimizes his/her expenses. 
This could take several forms depending on the main supplier 
of choice: 
B. Hierarchical Pricing Model 
Since fitting SaaS services to the customer is more 
sensitive to customer requirements (and usually more 
expensive) – this model assumes that each SP maximizes its 
SaaS capabilities and look for purchasing the best combination 
of platform and infrastructure services that best complements 
its own offerings in these levels. Since SPs seek simple 
management and control of sub-contracted services, only one 
SP could be chosen for complementing the platform or the 
infrastructure level. The Platform SPs can also purchase 
infrastructure services. Also, when a SP buys another 
underlying service he must pay two fees: a fixed monthly sum 
of money for initiating, controlling and maintaining the 
connection to the other SP, and a fee for each executed 
transaction. 
While SaaS is the highest level in the hierarchy, the 
computations are started from the lowest level (IaaS) and 
progress through PaaS to the decision taken by the SP based 
on their SaaS and possibly sub-contracted PaaS and/or IaaS. In 
this example the IaaS total monthly costs (in $) per SP are as 
calculated in table IV, table V and table VI. 
TABLE IV.  IAAS MONTHLY PRICES PER SP FOR THE EXAMPLE 
IaaS Service 
SP1 
$/month 
SP2 
$/month 
SP3 
$/month 
 
Relational DB  
services 
79.2 52.8 167.2 
 
Storage standard 
vol.  
40.8 36 60 
 Backup 200 280 200 
Total  320 368.8 427.2 
Thus SP1 is the IaaS provider of choice for the 
requirements of this customer. 
TABLE V.  PAAS TOTAL COSTS (IN $) PER SP FOR THE EXAMPLE 
PaaS Services 
SP1 
$/month 
SP2 
$/month 
SP3 
$/month 
 Operating system 78 108 42 
 Memory 200 250 350 
 Instance storage 120 100 150 
 Developer support 7.2 9.6 4.8 
Total  405.2 467.6 546.8 
Again SP1 is also the PaaS provider of choice for the 
requirements of this customer. 
Finally, the SaaS total costs (in $) per SP per month are as 
follows: 
  
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
154 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
TABLE VI.  SAAS MONTHLY PRICE PER SP FOR THE EXAMPLE 
SaaS Service 
SP1 
$/month 
SP2 
$/month 
SP3 $/month 
 Data transfer 24 48 24 
 Email service 48 72 24 
 Cloud search 18 24 18 
 Document mgt.  4 2 2 
 ERP 1200 1128 1440 
Total  1294 1274 1508 
Here SP2 is the SaaS provider of choice for this customer. 
The customer in this model would choose at each level the 
provider of choice for the requirements. If we ignore the fixed 
monthly sum of money for initiating, controlling and 
maintaining the connection between SP2 and SP1, SP2 is 
chosen for SaaS ($1274, Table VI) and SP1 for PaaS ($405.2, 
Table V) and IaaS ($320, Table IV). 
The total cost per month would be the sum of minimum: 
320+405.20+1274 = $ 1999.20 
Assuming there is a fix monthly fee of $30 for initiating, 
controlling and maintaining the connection between two 
different SPs in each two consecutive levels. The monthly fee 
of 30$ is chosen as an example only, for model illustration, 
without limiting the generality of the model since comparing 
investment alternatives usually involve fix and variable costs, 
two components which our model includes. An additional $ 30 
per month would be charged for the connection SP2(SaaS)-
SP1(PaaS), and no charge for the same SP1 between PaaS and 
IaaS. In that case, the total cost would be: $ 1999.20+30 = $ 
2029.20. 
Let F be the fixed monthly fee for initiating, controlling 
and maintaining the connection between SP2 and SP1. 
If F<1294-1274 the above policy would remain optimal 
with monthly cost of F+1999.20. 
If F>1294-1274 than Choosing SP1 to supply the three levels 
of service would yield: 
320+405.20+1294 =$ 2019.20 
Of course supplier selection decisions require sensitivity 
analysis (finding the impact of small changes in requirements) 
but the example here is just for illustrating the required 
computations. 
C. The simple pricing model 
This model relaxes the assumptions about hierarchy and 
the need for simple management and control over sub-
contracted services. Thus, in this model each SP offers the 
bundle of services that is composed of the minimal tariffs. The 
cost of sub-contracting management and control is assumed to 
be a fixed sum per service per period. Thus, each SP supplies 
his/her own services if their tariffs are minimal. Otherwise 
they sub-contract other suppliers (as shown in Table VII). For 
example SP1 offers the services included in SaaS PaaS and 
IaaS (Table II column SP1 tariff). 
TABLE VII.  MINIMAL COST SUPPLIER FOR EACH SERVICE
SaaS Service name SaaS Minimal tariff 
SP1 Sub contract 
(Bald) 
SP2 Sub contract (Bald) SP3 Sub contract (Bald) 
 Data transfer  1 SP1 SP3 SP3 
 Email services 1 SP3 SP3 SP3 
 Cloud search 3 SP1 SP3 SP3 
 Documents Mgt. 1 SP3 SP2 SP3 
 ERP 47 SP2 SP2 SP2 
PaaS Service name PaaS min. tariff SP1 Sub contract  SP2 Sub contract SP3 Sub contract 
 Operating system 7 SP3 SP3 SP3 
 Memory (GB) 20 SP1 SP1 SP1 
 Instance storage  GB 10 SP2 SP2 SP2 
 Developer support 2 SP3 SP3 SP3 
IaaS Service name IaaS min tariff SP1 Sub contract  SP2 Sub contract SP3 Sub contract 
 Relational Database services 6 SP2 SP2 SP2 
 Storage TB standard volume.  15 SP2 SP2 SP2 
 Backup (GB) 20 SP1 SP1 SP3 
The minimal tariff of each item yields total monthly price 
for the customer’s requirements of:   $ 1831.60. 
In addition, the customer must contact the other two SPs to 
establish the purchases and track the transactions. Assuming a 
monthly cost per SP per service of $ 30.00 for the 
administrative work of ordering, tracking and payment 
management yields: 
Main SP1: 1831.60+8*30 = 2071.60 
Main SP2: 1831.60+7*30 = 2041.60 
Main SP3: 1831.60+5*30 = 1981.60 
Thus, Main SP3 is chosen with monthly expenses of: 
1981.60, compared with the minimal cost SP, this is annual 
savings of $ 451.20). 
D. The Complete Mathematical Model 
While the hierarchical pricing model and the simple 
pricing model reduce costs significantly, they do not find the 
absolute minimal cost solution. To complete the modeling of 
cloud pricing, this section presents a solution that finds the 
optimal cost solution. This section defines a complete 
mathematical optimization formulation that could be applied 
by prevalent optimization software packages. We use the 
following definitions. 
Definitions 
i – index of infrastructure providers 
k – index of platform service provider 
m – index of software service providers 
  
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
155 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
j – index of infrastructure service type 
l – index of platform service type 
n – index of software service type 
Xj  - usage of infrastructure service j. 
Yl  - usage of platform service l. 
Zn.- usage of software service n. 
ICij  -  infrastructure fixed cost of provider i and service type j 
Iij  -  infrastructure variable cost of provider i and service type 
j. 
PCkl  -  platform fixed cost of provider k and service type l 
Pkl  - platform variable cost of provider k and service type l 
SCmn  -  software fixed cost of provider m and service type n 
Smn  -  software variable cost of provider m and service type n 
PIki - a fixed sum of money for initiation the connection 
between platform SP k and infrastructure SP i 
SPmk - a fixed sum of money for initiation the connection 
between software SP m and platform SP k 
The computations start at the Infrastructure stage: 
At that stage there are i infrastructure service providers 
(SPs) and j service types. The usage of infrastructure service 
type j is the variable Xj. Thus, the infrastructure price 
corresponding to the i
th
 service provider and j
th
 service type is 
ICij+IijXj. These are also the published infrastructure tariffs. 
The next stage is the Platform services. 
At that stage there are k platform service providers (SPs) 
and l platform service types. The usage of infrastructure 
service type l is the variable Yl. Thus, the infrastructure price 
corresponding to the k
th
 service provider and l
th
 service type is 
PCkl+PklYl. These are also the published platform tariffs. 
The connection cost between Infrastructure SP and 
Platform SP is: Cki and the purchased infrastructure price for a 
given k (SP) is  
j
jijij XIIC  
So, the cost for a given platform SP k the prices s/he offers 
for a given Yl  is the optimal combination of:   
)}({
0:0:
 


i Xj
jijijki
k Yl
lklkl
jl
XIICCYPPCMIN
 
Last stage is performed on software service provider. 
At that stage there are m software service providers (SPs) 
and n software service types. The usage of software service 
type n is the variable Zn. Thus, the infrastructure price 
corresponding to the m
th
 service provider and n
th
 service type 
is SCmn+SmnZmn. These are also the published software tariffs. 
The connection cost between software SP and Platform SP is: 
Cmk. 
So, the cost for a given software SP (m) the prices s/he 
offers for a given Zn is the optimal combination of:  
: 0 : 0 : 0
{ ( ( ))}
S.T.
Software  types and requirements:
Values of Z  
Values of Y  
Values of X  
n l j
mn mn n mk kl kl l ki ij ij j
m n Z k l Y i j X
n
l
j
MIN SC S Z C PC P Y C IC I X
n
l
j
  
   



     
 
The constraints are the software type and usage 
requirements: Zn and its derivative requirements: Yl and Xj  
Overall, this is a quadratic optimization formulation that 
could be solved by the prevalent solvers (software packages) 
including [9], [20], and [12]. 
When adding a fix monthly cost of $30 per service of 
another SP, the optimization yields the minimal cost solution: 
$ 1866.40 which is better than the corresponding solution of 
the simple model ($ 1891.60) or the hierarchical model ($ 
9118.20). 
To understand the optimization results it is useful to 
understand that minimizing cost drives one main SP that 
subcontract services (from the other SPs) in cases that 
contribute to the main SP competitiveness. Thus, in our case 
there are only three possible main SPs: SP1, or SP2, or SP3. 
We shall use table VI here again for the rest of the 
explanations. 
If SP1 is chosen, the minimization yields: 
SP1 supplies data transfer – SP1 rate is minimal ($24) 
SP1 supplies Email services – SP1 rate is less than $30 
higher than the minimum ($48). 
SP1 supplies Cloud search - SP1 rate is minimal ($18) 
SP1 supplies Document Mgt. - SP1 rate is less than $30 
higher than the minimum ($4) 
SP2 supplies ERP service – with cost of ($1128+$30 = 
$1158). 
Total SaaS cost: 24+48+18+4+1158= $1254 
If SP2 is chosen, the minimization yields: 
SP1 supplies data transfer – SP2 rate is less than $30 
higher than the minimum ($48) 
SP3 supplies Email services – SP2 rate is more than $30 
higher than the minimum  
($24+$30= $54) 
SP2 supplies Cloud search - SP2 rate is less than $30 
higher than the minimum ($24) 
SP2 supplies Document Mgt. – SP2 rate is minimal ($2) 
SP2 supplies ERP service – SP2 rate is minimal ($1128). 
Total SaaS cost: 48+54+24+2+1128= $1256 
If SP3 is chosen, the minimization yields: 
SP3 supplies data transfer – SP3 rate is minimal ($24) 
SP3 supplies Email services – SP3 rate is minimal ($24) 
SP3 supplies Cloud search – SP3 rate is minimal ($18) 
SP3 supplies Document Mgt. – SP3 rate is minimal ($2) 
SP2 supplies ERP service – SP2 rate is minimal with cost 
of ($1128+$30 = $ 1158). 
Total SaaS cost: 24+24+18+2+1158= $1228 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
156 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
These are only SaaS computations. The minimization 
computations continue in the same manner for the PaaS and 
IaaS (using tables IV and V). While the above calculations 
show that main SP3 is the least cost SaaS provider, the overall 
computations (with the addition of PaaS and IaaS) show that 
main SP1 is the minimal cost $ 1866.40. 
V. DISCUSSION 
In this paper we presented three possible pricing models 
that could serve as free market tools to form competition. To 
ensure the free market competition, we eliminated few of the 
competition barriers in each of our pricing models: bundling 
of services, lack of transparency and varying tariff structures.  
Table VIII evaluates the level of optimization yielded by 
each model and ease of technological implementation in cloud 
computing architecture. The evaluation criteria are discussed 
below. 
TABLE VIII.  SUMMARY OF PRICING MODELS' EVALUATION 
Evaluation criteria Hierarchical pricing model Simple pricing model 
Complete mathematical pricing 
model 
Vertical unbundling Partial High High 
Horizontal unbundling No High High 
Pricing transparency Limited  High High 
Tariff structure Limited High High 
Cost optimization Low Medium High 
Ease of technological implementation High Low Low 
Evaluation criteria: 
Vertical integration is partial (but still existing due to the 
possibility to choose providers) in the hierarchical model since 
all services of one layer are bundled to one provider whereas 
in the two other models vertical unbundling is high since 
services of one layer may be supplied by different providers. 
Horizontal unbundling does not exist in the hierarchical 
model since consumers select a providers' bundle of services, 
but cannot select services from other providers. In the other 
models consumers select services independently from any 
provider. 
Pricing transparency and tariff structure are limited in the 
hierarchical model since selection in based on providers' 
bundle price, but are not based on prices of services. This is in 
contrary to the two other models. 
Cost optimization is optimized in the complete 
mathematical model. In the simple model the optimization is 
not maximal since selection of services is performed on a 
subgroup of all providers' services. In the hierarchical model 
optimization is low due to selection on the basis of providers' 
bundle's price, but not based on services' prices. 
Ease of technological implementation is high in the 
hierarchical model since the number of interfaces among 
suppliers is minimal, thus minimum resources needed to build 
and maintain. In the other models the number of interfaces is 
high since all services interfacing with different providers 
need to be built. 
Each organization has to calculate the above parameters, 
assess the impacts on the level of optimization and ease of 
implementation and then make his cost optimization decisions. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper proposes three cost minimization models for 
cloud computing consumers, (while keeping the published 
tariffs). Choosing one of the models is performed by taking 
into account organizational considerations. The first model is 
hierarchical; one supplier is chosen for each of the three layers 
(SaaS, PaaS, IaaS). The hierarchical model is easy to 
implement and also reduces customers' costs compared to the 
current situation. This model produces only a limited amount 
of services unbundling and only limited transparency of 
prices. The second model, we call the simple pricing model, 
enables high transparency and unbundling of services and 
further cost reduction. Implementing this model is more 
difficult since the control of various providers and services is 
more complicated. The third, called the complete pricing 
model is similar to the simple pricing model but goes one step 
further enabling full cost optimization. 
Three preconditions are required for effective competition, 
and for our pricing models to be effective. We claim market 
forces are bound to cause these conditions to materialize in the 
long run. First, suppliers have to offer standard features of 
their services. This will be the ground for a comparison of 
different supplier services. Secondly, having standard features 
will enable standardizing tariff tables for cloud computing 
market, and make service cost structure transparent. Thirdly, 
software suppliers should build their services according to 
open standards, (which nowadays are not the case), thus 
enabling connectivity among different services offered by 
suppliers. 
In this paper we dealt with cost minimization of cloud 
services. Further research is needed for incorporating 
additional consumers' considerations such as preference of a 
fix-price model on a pay-per-use model due to risk aversion, 
and providers' impacts on consumers' biases in buying 
decisions. Further research is needed for better understanding 
the providers' considerations in the cloud computing market. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Al-Roomi, M., Al-Ebrahim, S., Buqrais, S., Ahmad, I., (2013), Cloud 
Computing Pricing Models: A Survey. International Journal of Grid and 
Distributed Computing: Vol 6. No 5. 
[2] Amazon Web Services – How AWS Pricing Works, 
https://d36cz9buwru1tt.cloudfront.net/AWS_Pricing_Overview.pdf, 
accessed  02 June 2014. 
[3] Aoyama, T., Sakai, H., (2013). Inter-Cloud Computing, Business 
Information Systems Engineering 3/2013. 
[4] Anandasivam, A., Premm, M., (2009). Bid Price Control and Dynamic 
Pricing in Clouds. ECIS – European Conference on Information Systems 
17. 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2015 
157 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
[5] Bitran, G., Caldentey, R., (2003). An overview of pricing models for 
revenue management. Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Management 5(3):203–229. 
[6] Blau, B., Neumann, D., Weinhardt, C., Michalk, W., (2008). 
Provisioning of service mashup topologies. In: Proceedings of the 16th 
European conference on information systems, Galway. 
[7] Chen, Z., Han, F., Cao, J., Jiang, X., Chen, S., (2013). Cloud 
Computing-Based Forensic Analysis for Collaborative Network Security 
Management System. Tsinghua science and technology, Vol 18/1, 2/ 
2013. 
[8] El Kihal, S., Schlereth, C., Skiera, B., (2012). Price comparison for  
Infrastructure-as-a-Service. In: ECIS 2012 Proceedings. 
[9] GAMS homepage (2014). http://www.gams.com/, accessed  02 Jul 
2014. 
[10] Gens, F., (2009). Clouds and Beyond: Positioning for the next 20 Years 
in Enterprise IT, IDC presentation on innoforum09, 25-03-2009, 
http://www.slideshare.net/innoforum09/gens. 
[11] Gill, A., Banker, D., Seltsika, P., (2015). Moving Forward: Emerging 
Themes in Financial Services Technologies Adoption, Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems: Vol. 36, Article 12. 
[12] Gino optimization software (2014). 
http://www.mat.univie.ac.at/~neum/glopt/software_l.html, accessed  02 
Jun 2014. 
[13] Google Cloud platform (2014). 
https://cloud.google.com/?gclid=Cj0KEQjwmPKeBRCj4bOro6nBitAB
EiQABa2FJJiC0E3d61rVTIdBElecEgzYWDTaf_EyAckJ_nOykH4aAs
nH8P8HAQ, accessed  02 Jun 2014. 
[14] Koehler, P., Anandasivam, A., Dan, M., Weinhardt, C., (2010). 
Customer heterogeneity and tariff biases in cloud computing. Thirty 
First International Conference on Information Systems, St. Louis 2010 
1, ICIS 2010 proceedings. 
[15] Labes, S., Erek, K., Zarnekow, R., (2013). Common Patterns of Cloud 
Business Models. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas 
Conference on Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 
2013. 
[16] Lai, K., (2005). Markets are dead long live markets. In: SIGecom 
Exchanges 5(4): pp 1–10. 
[17] Lambrecht, A., Skiera, B., (2006). Paying Too Much and Being Happy 
about It: Existence, Causes and Consequences of Tariff-Choice Biases. 
Marketing Research 43, number 2 (2006): 212-223. 
[18] Lampe, U., Hans, R., Selieger, M., Pauly, M., Schiefer, M., (2014). 
Pricing in Infrastructure Clouds – An Analytical and Empirical 
Examination. In: Proceedings of the 20th Americas conference on 
Information systems.  
[19] Lilienthal, M., (2013). A Decision Support Model for Cloud Bursting, 
Business & Information Systems Engineering 2|2013. 
[20] Lindo systems (2014). www.lindo.com, accessed  02 Aug 2014. 
[21] MacKie-Mason, J. K., Varian, H. R., (1995). Pricing Congestible 
Network Resources. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications 13, number 7 (1995): pp 1141-1149. 
[22] Mansouri, Y., Toosi, A., N., Buyya, R., (2013). Brokering Algorithms 
for Optimizing the Availability and Cost of Cloud Storage Services, 
2013 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology 
and Science. 
[23] Mell, P., Grance, T., (2009). “The NIST definition of cloud computing”, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST, Vol. 53 No. 6, p. 
50. 
[24] Microsoft cloud services pricing details (2014). 
.https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/pricing/details/cloud-services/, 
accessed  02 Aug 2014. 
[25] Paraiso, F., Haderer, N., Merle, P., Rouvoy, R., Seinturier, L., (2012). A 
Federated Multi-Cloud PaaS Infrastructure, 2012 IEEE Fifth 
International Conference on Cloud Computing. 
[26] Pueschel, T., Anandasivam, A., Buschek, S., Neumann, D., (2009). 
Making money with clouds: Revenue optimization through automated 
policy decisions. ECIS - European Conference on Information Systems 
17. 
[27] Rehman, U. Z., Hussain, F. K., Hussain, O. K., (2011). Towards Multi-
Criteria Cloud Service Selection, 2011 Fifth International Conference on 
Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing. 
[28] Staten, J., (2014). Forrester, Cloud predictions for 2014: Cloud joins the IT 
portfolio, http://blogs.forrester.com/james_staten/13-12-04-
cloud_computing_predictions_for_2014_cloud_joins_the_formal_it_por
tfolio, accessed  02 March 2014. 
[29] Vaquero, L., Rodero-Merino, L., Caceres, J., Lindner, M., (2009). A 
Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Definition. Editorial note. ACM 
SIGCOMM (2009). Computer Communication Review 50 Volume 39, 
Number 1, January 2009. 
[30] Varian, H. R., (2003). Economics of Information Technology. Working 
Paper. 
[31] Velte, A., Elsenpeter, R., Velte, T. J., (2009). Cloud Computing: A 
practical approach. Tata McGraw-Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. 
[32] Walterbusch, M., Martens, B., Teuteberg, F., (2013). Evaluating cloud 
computing services from a total cost of ownership perspective. 
Management Research Review Vol. 36 No. 6, pp. 613-638. 
[33] Ward, S. J., Barker, A., (2014). Observing the clouds: a survey and 
taxonomy of cloud monitoring. Journal of Cloud Computing 2014, 3:24.  
[34] Weinhardt, C., Blau, B., Stößer, J., (2009). Cloud Computing – A 
Classification, Business Models, and Research Directions. Business & 
Information Systems Engineering 05/2009. 
[35] Wu, S., Banker, R., (2010). Best Pricing Strategy for Information 
Services. Journal of association for information systems. 
[36] Yang, H., Tale, M., (2012). A Descriptive Literature Review and 
Classification of Cloud Computing Research. Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems: Vol. 31, Article 2. 
[37] Yung-Ming, L., Chia-Ling, C., (2012). Analyzing The Pricing Models 
For Outsourcing Computing Services. PACIS 2012 Proceedings. 
[38] Zhang, Q., Cheng, L., Bautaba, R., (2010). Cloud computing: State-of-
the-art and Research challenges. J Internet Serv Appl (2010) 1:7-18.
 

