ILOG Optimization
IBM Software
Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling 
Problems: How Business Managers can use 
Mathematical Optimization Technology 
2     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology3
“By maximizing its use of network capacity, the company has increased 
profitability and reduced operating costs while maintaining high service 
levels. In 2002 alone, Menlo Worldwide Forwarding reduced operating 
costs 21 percent, increased operating margin by 41 percent, and improved 
financial results by US$80 million in the North American aircraft 
transportation operation. Moreover, management used the optimization 
model to facilitate Menlo’s transition from a heavily asset-based, 
integrated airfreight company to an asset-light, freight forwarding 
business. This created a flexible operating environment and a competitive 
advantage for future operations.”
— 2003 Finalist Team for the Franz Edelman Award for Achievement in Operations 
Research and Management Sciences Menlo Worldwide Forwarding (now part of Con-
Way Transportation) 
Excerpt from an article published in the January-February 2004 issue of Interfaces A journal by the Institute for Operations 
Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS®)
Reprinted by permission, Prior, R. C., R. L. Slavens, J. Trimarco, V. Akgun, E. G. Feitzinger, C-F. Hong, “Menlo Worldwide 
Forwarding Optimizes its Network Routing”, Interfaces, volume 34, number 1, January-February, 2004. Copyright 2004, the 
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences, 7240 Parkway Drive, Suite 310, Hanover, Maryland 21076.
2     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology3 IBM Software     3
Overview
What Makes Optimization Special
Optimization is unique simply by being the mathematical 
discipline focused on efficiency. Along with statistics and 
predictive analytics, it is one of the two mathematical 
disciplines used most frequently in the world of business. It 
applies mathematics and logic to the pursuit of objective 
efficiency. It does not concern itself with probability or attempt 
to predict the future by looking at what happened in the past. 
It takes facts—costs and yields, available resources and demand, 
goals and constraints—and finds the best possible plan or 
schedule of activities using mathematics and logic. And this is 
why the Institute for Operations Research and the 
Management Sciences (INFORMS) calls OR/MS the “Science 
of Better.” 
Statistics and predictive analytics help people make smarter 
decisions by helping them play the odds. Optimization helps 
people make smarter decisions by finding efficiencies that they 
could not find on their own. This is why optimization is as 
widely used as predictive analytics. It is hard to imagine a bank 
or insurance company without sophisticated predictive 
analytics to manage risk and profitability. It is just as difficult to 
imagine a manufacturing or transportation company without 
optimization in the planning or scheduling of its resources.
Optimization also keeps us in touch with the history of 
mathematics. For over 2,000 years, humans have been working 
with geometry, algebra and logic to find better ways to make 
things. Since Descartes unified algebra and geometry over 300 
years ago, we have been trying to work out solutions to our 
most challenging problems by using analytic geometry, 
graphing equations on an X-Y grid. World War II, however, 
was the beginning of the development of optimization in its 
present form. Techniques that came to be called Operations 
Research (OR) were used by both the British Navy and the 
U.S. Navy to determine the best locations for radar stations 
and anti-submarine resources. They worked very well and a 
profession was born. 
Where Optimization is Used
Optimization is used in most major industries—more in some 
than in others—but ubiquitous, nevertheless. Examples of 
common business applications can be seen in Table 1
Most of these applications produce plans or schedules. Some 
produce optimal prices, store layouts, stock trades or other sets 
of decisions. In the majority of cases, analysts and managers get 
these solutions through packaged applications that make 
decisions based on a generic optimization model, one that is 
intended to fit a large number of organizations. In other cases, 
managers use a custom optimization model built by in-house 
OR professionals or an outside consultant with OR skills and 
domain expertise in their industry. 
The business problems addressed above can be thought about 
using a three-category framework—long-term economic 
planning, short-term production/delivery planning, and 
detailed scheduling. This framework is helpful in discussing 
the types of complexity found in various optimization 
problems, the difficulties associated with solving them, and the 
ease-of-use requirements for each. Within the world of 
optimization, these categories are often used when discussing 
problem types and requirements.
How Optimization Works
An optimization model is a carefully defined set of inputs—
demand, resources, costs, assumptions, constraints, preferences 
and goals—expressed in equations, matrices and logic 
statements that find the best solution to a business planning or 
scheduling problem. The output is an optimized plan or 
schedule with information about the best possible solution, its 
binding constraints, and the underlying economics and 
operational efficiency. Here are some examples for the 
structural components of a model: 
•	 Resources	Available: trucks, containers, airplanes, rail cars, 
people of various skills or seniority, machines, assembly or 
packaging lines, hospital beds, inventories (raw materials, work 
in process, finished goods), just-in-time (JIT) deliveries, 
consumers who could buy a product and so on. 
4     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology5
•	 Demand	To	Be	Filled	or	Services	To	Be	Performed: 
products to be built, customer orders to be filled, patients to 
be cared for, market-ing offers to make, classes to be 
scheduled, and so on.. Sometimes this requires forecasting the 
Table 1: Applications
Manufacturing
Transportation and 
Logistics
Financial 
Services
Utilities and Natural 
Resources
Telecom
Multiple and 
Other
•	Inventory	
optimization
•	Supply	chain	
network	design
•	Production	plan	ning
•	Detailed	scheduling
•	Shipment	plan	ning
•	Truck	loading
•	Maintenance	
scheduling
•	Depot/warehouse	
location
•	Fleet	assignment
•	Network	design
•	Vehicle	and	container	
loading
•	Vehicle	routing	and	
delivery	scheduling
•	Yard,	crew,	driver	and	
maintenance	
scheduling
•	Inventory	optimization
•	Portfolio	
optimization	and	
rebalancing
•	Portfolio	in-kinding
•	Trade	crossing
•	Loan	pooling
•	Product/price	
recommendations
•	Supply	portfolio	
planning
•	Power	generation	
scheduling
•	Distribution	planning
•	Water	reservoir	
management
•	Mine	operations
•	Timber	harvesting
•	Network	capacity	
planning
•	Routing
•	Adaptive	network	
configuration
•	Antenna	and	
concentrator	
location
•	Equipment	and	
service	configuration
•	Workforce	
scheduling
•	Advertising	
scheduling
•	Marketing	
campaign	
optimization
•	Revenue/Yield	
management
•	Appointment	and	
field	service	
scheduling
•	Combinatorial	
auctions	for	
procurement
Table 2: Categories of Economic Analysts
Typical Frequency Examples
Long Term 
Planning
•	Annual
•	Quarterly
•	Occasional
•	Whether	to	expand	a	plant	or	open	a	new	one
•	How	many	distribution	centers	to	have
•	What’s	the	value	of	additional	equipment	over	time
Short Term
Planning
•	Monthly
•	Weekly
•	How	much	should	we	produce	this	week
•	How	many	shifts	should	we	have
•	How	many	resources	will	we	need
•	Which	marketing	campaigns	will	provide	the	most	impact	for	a	set	
budget
Detailed  
Scheduling
•	Weekly
•	Daily
•	Hourly
•	Which	activity	should	be	done	when
•	Which	resource	should	be	assigned	when
•	When	can	maintenance	or	any	special	task	be	most	efficiently	
schedules
best case, worst case and most-likely case over one or multiple 
time periods.
•	 Operating	and	Capital	Costs: hourly labor rates, overtime 
premiums, mileage costs, depreciation expense, supply costs, 
4     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology5 IBM Software     5
switchover costs, inven-tory carrying costs, shrinkage costs, 
marginal costs, cost of capital for new equipment purchases, 
and so on. 
•	 Yield/Throughput	Assumptions: average driving speed 
between Warehouse A and Customer B, minutes to dock and 
unload a truck, cars painted per hour, regular patients served 
safely by a nurse, percent of customers who will agree to 
accept a marketing offer in exchange for a discount, revenue 
per customer at different times of the day, and so on
•	 Global	Operating	Constraints: rail yard A is 500 miles from 
rail yard B, a worker can work no more than 20 hours of 
overtime in a week, a worker must have a one-hour break no 
more than four hours from the beginning or end of a shift, the 
Intensive Care Unit must have at least two nurses with X 
certification, 50 percent of the nurses on a shift must be fully 
credentialed, no more than 5 percent of homeowner policies 
in X state should be from Y county, fund position weights may 
not be more than 0.5 percent from index weights, the 
production of Product A requires five activities in sequence 
(each with resource consumption, cost and time properties), 
truck drivers must end their routes in the same town they 
started from, the call center can only call 10,000 people for 
this marketing campaign, employees can be rotated from day 
shift to evening shift and evening to night, but not day to 
night, and so on.
•	 Individual	Operating	Constraints	and	Preferences: 
Customer A will not take deliveries between 11:30 a.m. and 
1:00 p.m., Nurse B wants a two-and-a-half-week vacation 
from X date to Y date, Doctor C requires Nurse D and Nurse 
E to be assigned to his Operating Room team, orders for top 
accounts are always prioritized for fulfillment and shipment, 
transition time of Product A from Machine A to Machine B is 
nonstandard, and so on.
•	 Goals	(Individual	or	In	Combination): minimize empty or 
total mileage, one cost or total costs, handling, idle or total 
cycle time, particular risks or total risk. Maximize revenue, 
throughput, profitability, customer satisfaction, or employee 
preferences.
•  Key	Performance	Indicators	(KPIs): metrics about the 
solution that supplement the optimized plan or schedule, or 
Figure 1: The Structure of Optimization Models
When these components are put together into an optimization 
model and executed using one or multiple optimization 
engines, the result is the best possible plan, schedule or set of 
schedules to achieve the goal or set of goals. For example, the 
final output could be a supply chain network design; a 
multiyear production plan; a detailed, to the minute, 
production schedule for the week; a one-month workforce 
schedule; a set of routes to deliver a day’s worth of goods or 
services; a set of trades to bring a stock index fund back into 
compliance; a set of price offers or marketing offer assignments 
that will produce the best results, and so on.
Two Key Optimization Technologies
Optimization problems come in many forms and there are two 
distinct ways to approach solving them.
Mathematical Programming (MP) 
The first optimization technology is Mathematical 
Programming (MP), which is a branch of Applied 
Mathematics. It finds mathematical optimality by applying 
equations to a large search space of potential solutions. Algebra 
and analytical geometry form the core, but they are assisted by 
a large number of algorithms and heuristics (rules of thumb) 
that take advantage of concepts and methods developed in both 
mathematics and computer science over the past 20 years.
“meta data” about the solution. The complete profile of a 
solution includes these calculations summarizing how efficient 
the plan or schedule is in operational, financial or hybrid 
terms.
6     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology7
Linear equations are the dominant language of optimization, 
which is why the term Linear Programming (LP) is used 
interchangeably when talking about MP; however, some 
models also require the use of quadratic equations (ax2 + bx + c 
= 0) which are not linear. More important, most business 
problems can only be solved if you can adjust all or some of the 
solution recommendations to whole numbers—because in the 
real world, most machines, people and activities come in whole 
numbers. These two extensions may sound like simple 
adjustments, but it has actually taken over 50 years of 
continuous effort for LP to fully support Quadratic 
Programming (QP) and Mixed Integer Programming (MIP or 
MIQP).
Given the number of constraints that need to be satisfied, the 
decisions that need to be made, and the goals that need to be 
balanced, optimization as we know it today would not be 
possible without modern computing power. With today’s 
computing power, it is now possible to execute millions of 
calculations and generate thousands of trial solutions on the 
road to finding the optimal solution.
Figure 2: Optimization Technologies
Constraint Programming (CP)
The second major technology for optimization is Constraint 
Programming (CP), which is a branch of Computer Science 
(also known as Logic Programming) with roots in the Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and Expert System efforts of the 1980s and 
the move to object-oriented approaches to software 
development in the 1990s. Its approach to optimization is 
completely different from the approach of MP. Simply put, CP 
finds feasible solutions by rapidly eliminating possibilities, 
zeroing in on feasible combinations of resource assignments 
and activities—when there are too many possible combinations 
or too many individual constraints regarding sequence and 
timing for MP to find a solution in an acceptable timeframe. 
This is sometimes referred to as coping with the 
“combinatorial explosion” of possibilities.
CP approaches optimality via a continuous improvement 
process based on the systematic comparison of new solutions 
to a base feasible solution. As a result, CP can find good 
solutions to large, intricate scheduling and routing problems in 
minutes when MP would take hours or even days, assuming 
that an MP model could even find a solution. Note that when 
you run either a CP or MP model, you can instruct the solving 
engine to give you its best result after a set time limit—often 
the extra time the engine spends searching is only gaining you 
a small additional improvement.
The easiest way to understand the sort of problem CP 
technology is good at solving is to think of a Gantt chart. It is a 
time-honored way to visualize “what is being done where” on a 
project—a complete picture of all of the available resources 
and all of the necessary activities done using the available 
resources over a period of time. It is no surprise that when 
there are many interdependencies between activities and 
numerous operating constraints, it can be very difficult to find 
a feasible solution, much less an optimal one. Add the pursuit 
and balancing of multiple goals, and it becomes even more 
difficult. CP technology was designed to handle these tough 
scheduling problems, finding feasibility first and then polishing 
the solution to near optimality. 
6     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology7 IBM Software     7
The Gantt chart below shows a detailed manufacturing 
schedule for finished goods production in a process 
manufacturing environment that has tanks filled with 
intermediate products, equipment connections, mandatory 
cleaning activities, batch tracing, and shelf-life management 
challenges. This schedule was generated using CP technology.
To appreciate the range of problems that exist in the world of 
scheduling, consider the following examples. Some of these can 
be more efficiently solved with either MP or CP.
Example 1 – Production Planning
You run a large paper mill that makes standard and specialty 
papers. The production process involves a variety of specialized 
equipment and each product must be made in fairly large 
batches on six-meter-long rolls weighing several tons. 
Individual customer orders can be accommodated by making 
rolls of different diameters and by cutting the rolls into 
segments of varying widths. 
Goal – Maximize margin dollars given that:
• Production must be scheduled by machine and sequenced, 
respecting different switchover costs (the setup time for a 
product varies from 15 to 120 minutes)• Rolls must be cut 
with minimum scrap loss (waste)• Paper rolls are sent to 
cutters, coaters and sheet-cutting machines to produce the 
various individual products for customer orders, and there are 
different setup times for each product on each downstream 
machine
• The entire schedule should minimize idle time
Example 2 – Nurse Scheduling
You need to schedule staff for a large operating room 
environment at a major hospital. There are 40 individual 
operating rooms scheduled 12 hours per day. Over 350 people 
are scheduled in a month to do all the different jobs. Most are 
fully credentialed nurses, but there are also other, less-broadly 
trained people. In addition, many of the nurses must have 
specializations in specific clinical areas or procedures. Surgeons 
are assigned operating room time in blocks that do not align 
perfectly with staff shifts. The schedule is a monthly schedule 
and is posted one month in advance, although adjustments are 
made after posting.
Goal – Minimize labor costs while satisfying the following 
constraints:
• A nurse’s weekly schedule must be for one and only one shift 
(day, evening or night)
• A nurse’s weekly schedule can only be one shift away from his/
her previous weekly schedule and it must support circadian 
rhythms (Week Two can be evening if Week One was day, but 
it cannot be night)
• A nurse’s shift can be for 6, 8, 10 or 12 hours
• A nurse may not work more than three 12-hour shifts in a row 
within a week
• There must be at least 24 hours between the end of the last 
shift in a week and the start of a new one in the next week
• Clinical certification requirements must be respected• Nurse 
shift and vacation requests should be respected based on 
seniority
• Surgeon A requires Nurse D and Nurse F to be on his 
operating room team
8     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology9
Example 3 – Truck Loading
You are a planner/dispatcher at a major manufacturing plant 
with nine packaging lines that produce finished product for 
inventory and immediate shipment. You need to schedule the 
loading and departure of 1,200 trucks a week to get 4,000 
deliveries made to 150 distributors and 10 regional warehouses. 
The plant makes 125 individual products that are shipped on 
pallets in five different cubic shapes. Individual customer 
deliveries can be for as many as 40 different products, but the 
average is 10. The plant can make a lot more product than it 
can warehouse on site. 
Goal – Maximize truck capacity utilization while satisfying the 
following constraints and sub-goals:
• Maximize the percentage of product that is loaded directly 
from the packaging lines vs. from warehouse inven
• Maximize the percentage of orders that are shipped 100 
percent complete for a single delivery
• Minimize truck time at loading dock
• Minimize the number of different products on a truck to 
minimize handling costs
• Ensure that no truck is loaded with more weight than can be 
safely carriedtory
• Ensure that loading instructions respect the three truck sizes 
with their individual lengths, capacities and weight restrictions
• Customer A’s delivery dock cannot handle Truck Type 2
• Customer B’s delivery dock is not available between 11:00am 
and 1:00pm
• • Customer C is a regional warehouse that wants to ship 
excess inventory back to the main
The Business Value of Optimization
When we talk about the business value of optimization, we 
mean finding the best balance between conflicting goals. We 
often want to maximize customer service, profitability and 
employee satisfaction or fairness at the same time. 
Optimization can find this balance. More specifically, 
optimization can help organizations:
• Lower unit operating costs
• Postpone capital expenses• Increase asset utilization
• Shorten production and service delivery cycle times
• Provide better, more flexible and precise service to customers
• Provide more flexible and personalized schedules to 
employees
• Manage risk
• Reduce inventories
• Maximize profitability
• See into the future
The value of using optimization technology is twofold — it 
helps you gain a better understanding of your business’ 
economics and operational options while it helps you actually 
generate the best possible plans and schedules. And the 
combination of these two things is very powerful for any 
organization
Creating a great optimization model will always require a deep 
understanding of the business — its products and services, and 
its goals and operational processes. Fortunately, optimization 
technology now provides a complete set of tools to help 
companies develop powerful and flexible planning and 
scheduling applications based on that deep understanding. 
These applications not only help find the best approach to 
sometimes extremely complex problems, but they also make it 
possible for operations managers, planners and strategists to 
explore the entire universe of possible scenarios and solutions. 
Now, a wider range of personnel can take greater advantage of 
the power of optimization technology, without becoming 
mathematicians or programmers.
8     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology9 IBM Software     9
Table 3: Documented ROI INFORMS Edelman Award Finalists Using IBM ILOG CPLEX
Business Process ROI
•	Air	Network	design
•	Procurement	Management
•	Semiconductor	Manufacturing
•	Crew	Re-scheduling
•	Network	Recovery
•	Force/Equipment	Planning
•	Scheduling	and	Pricing
•	Portfolio	Optimization
•	Timber	Harvesting
•	US	$87m/2yrs	+	10	percent	fewer	planes
•	US	$100-150	million/year
•	Fifty	percent	reduction	in	cycle	times
•	US	$40	million	in	one	year
•	Thirty	five	percent	reduction	spare	capacity
•	US	$1.1	billion/year
•	US	$1.1	billion/year
•	US	$	4	million/year
•	US	$	20	million/year	+	30	percent	fewer	trucks
The ROI of Optimization 
One of the great things about optimization technology is that 
its use is measurable. It is either making you more efficient 
with demonstrable financial and operational results or it isn’t. 
The business benefits are measurable. The gains can be 
significant and the return on investment (ROI) large. The next 
figure shows the ROI achieved and documented by a set of 
INFORMS Franz Edelman Award finalists. This award is given 
annually to the most successful and innovative use of OR 
techniques in industry. Finalists must submit papers that 
document the business benefits realized and the mathematical 
models built. Papers are available at the INFORMS “Science 
of Better” website for business people. 
ROI can be especially high in capital-intensive situations, 
where optimization can result in large savings for money not 
spent. Given the cost of capital, these savings will often exceed 
the margin improvements from greater efficiency in the use of 
existing assets. Note that operating efficiencies can result in 
both lower unit costs and increased revenues. Let’s look at 
three examples in more detail.
Japanese Carmaker
Considered among the most efficient automobile plants in 
Europe, this carmaker’s UK factory was able to make more 
than 200,000 cars per year, building two models on two 
different production lines. Despite this outstanding record, top 
management wanted to begin production of a third model – 
without constructing a third production line.
Ordinarily, a demand like this would seem impossible. But by 
building a custom scheduling system, the factory was able to 
accomplish the goal. In addition, the “straight-through 
ratio”—the percentage of cars produced on schedule—jumped 
from 3 to 95 percent. Productivity increased by 30 percent 
without a major investment in plant retooling.
The project also reduced the time needed to produce a 
schedule by a factor of 10—from one week to four person-
hours. Needless to say, the value of the efficiency gains was 
dwarfed by the savings associated with avoiding the US$500 
million cost of a third production line.
Package Delivery Company
A subsidiary of the package delivery company operates as one 
of the largest airlines in the world. The airline is the backbone 
that enables the package delivery company to provide 
expedited package delivery services.
10     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology1
Here, the optimization problem was to determine the 
minimum-cost set of routes, fleet assignments and package 
flows that still satisfied a number of key operating constraints, 
including:
• Limits on the number and capacities of each type of aircraft
•  Landing restrictions at airports
• Aircraft operating characteristics, such as range, speed and 
load capacity
• Continuous aircraft flow requirements (that is balance of flow)
• Time windows for pickup and delivery
• Sorting capacities and hours of operation for each hub 
In addition, packages needed to arrive at the hubs in a 
staggered manner so that package volume could be spread 
across the entire sorting period, and the next-day-air network 
flying at night needed to interface with the daytime aircraft 
network used for the standard second-day-air network.The 
optimization model the company built had a direct financial 
impact:
• Operating costs in the first two years were reduced by US$87 
million.
• Major additional aircraft ownership costs were avoided. In 
early results, the optimization model reduced by 16 the 
number of aircraft needed to operate the network. With each 
plane costing in excess of US $100 million, the long-term 
savings in aircraft ownership costs exceeded the savings in 
operating costs.
Broadcasting Company
A U.S. television network had an advertising inventory 
management problem and a pricing problem. Advertising slots 
on certain television shows are always more or less valuable 
than slots on other shows. And certain weeks are more or less 
valuable than others. Individual advertisers purchase blocks of 
advertising time and have negotiated terms and demographic 
coverage requirements. The newtwork needed a scheduling 
system that would fill contractual obligations at lowest cost in 
terms of slot inventory consumption. The effect of the system 
was to enable the network to maintain or even raise prices 
while preserving some of the best slots for enticing new 
customers.
By generating better ad schedules, the network increased 
revenues by over US$50 million per year. The sales staff, 
backed by an efficient and nimble pricing and allocation 
system, was able to compete for new customers while meeting 
contractual obligations to existing customers.
Why Business Managers Should Look at 
Optimization Technology Now
Most business managers and financial analysts have a general 
idea of what optimization is about—that it somehow concerns 
planning or scheduling and efficiency. Some managers may 
even remember something about linear programming from 
college or business school. But few know how it really works, 
and most are unaware of recent developments in the field. 
There are four key reasons why business managers and 
planners should take a look at the current state-of-the-art in 
optimization technology
•	 Changes	in	the	economy	and	in	business	process	
management	are	making	smart,	agile	economic	planning	
and	scenario	comparison	a	necessity. Mergers and 
acquisitions are on the rise, forcing the integration and 
rationalization of supply chains. The growth of Asian 
manufacturing and the emergence of the European Union are 
completely changing transportation networks in North 
America and Europe. Every company is fighting to keep or 
gain share in an increasingly flat world. Finance professionals 
are expected to manage increasingly international portfolios 
with a finely tuned balance between risk and return. The list 
goes on.
•	 The	efficient	use	of	resources	has	never	been	more	
critical	in	terms	of	impact	on	profitability. And the need to 
reschedule is constant. The demand for electricity grows every 
year, requiring more careful management of generation and 
distribution. The explosion of healthcare costs from advances 
in drugs, technology and procedures is increasing pressure to 
maximize hospital throughput. Demand-driven manufacturing 
10     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology1 IBM Software     11
initiatives coupled with the constant manufacturing imperative 
to be the low-cost producer are making detailed scheduling an 
area of increasing focus. Almost every organization of any size 
can find some process that can benefit from more efficient 
scheduling of certain resources
•	 Advances	in	computer	hardware	and	optimization	
software	have	made	it	possible	to	evaluate	large	planning	
and	scheduling	problems	that	were	too	difficult	for	
computers	as	recently	as	five	years	ago. Some problems 
involve thousands of individual decisions with many more 
constraints. Others involve tens or hundreds of thousands of 
decisions that create millions of possible combina-tions. 
Think of a marketing campaign aimed at 200,000 consumers, 
each with a probability of acceptance and a probability of 
lifetime customer value.  If there are five offers that can be 
made to the consumers, there are hundreds of millions of 
possible offer combinations that need to be evaluated for 
overall profitability and revenue impact. Even if you replace 
the 200,000 consumers with 50 marketing segments, it is a 
very big problem. The possibilities must be narrowed 
systematically.  
 
Fortunately, between the advances in processing power and 
memory availability and the improvements in search 
techniques and algorithms, there are few problems that 
cannot be solved today within a reasonable timeframe—no 
matter how many activities must be scheduled, resources 
assigned or offers made. Still, some problems take less than a 
minute, others two or three minutes, and still others a few 
hours. When a major airline schedules crews for a large 
portion of its entire route system, it can take three or four 
hours.
•	 Advances	in	software	technology	are	making	optimization	
accessible	to	nontechnical	planners,	schedulers	and	
managers	who	make	the	decisions	in	most	organizations. 
In other words, the use of state-of-the-art optimization 
technology is no longer restricted to mathematicians and 
advanced computer scientists. More on this below.
Challenges to Using Optimization
Making the most efficient use of resources and developing the 
most sophisticated business strategies are obvious goals for 
most organizations. So, what problems do businesses encounter 
in practice? 
•	 Problems	building	optimal	schedules.	With complex 
schedules, businesses can face difficulties when attempting to 
build models that take into account a wide range of resources 
with their individual capabilities and costs, and that process a 
large number of product orders, deliveries, staff assignments, 
and so on; and that schedule a number of activities over a 
fine-grained set of time periods. Certainly scheduling to the 
minute is harder than scheduling to the day. 
• Examples of very difficult schedules would be enforcing a shift 
schedule where assignments must respect complex time-off 
rules or a manufacturing schedule where Activity Two may not 
start until Activity One is completed or Tank 3 is cleaned and 
refilled. If your schedule needs to support precedence 
constraints for individual resources or activities, such as an 
individual machine having a particular setup activity for a 
particular product manufacturing step or an individual 
customer delivery being before or after lunch, the problem is 
challenging.
•	 Problems	building	planning	applications	that	effectively	
compare	scenarios. Good planning requires the ability to 
easily create multiple scenarios that solve a problem with 
different assumptions and/or goals. And the best planning 
usually requires the careful review of all of the dif ferences 
between the scenarios. Even experienced analysts cannot do 
this in spreadsheets. Managers often face difficulties even 
creating scenarios, much less comparing them systematically. 
The decisions that are being made are complex and 
optimization models are highly structured. Specialized 
software is needed not only to support what-if analysis and 
scenario comparison, but also to provide explanations of 
which constraints are binding and may need to be relaxed. 
Options for Planning and Scheduling Solutions
Today, many business managers use the planning and 
scheduling modules of the applications they are already using 
12     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology3
to manage daily operations, or they make do with home-grown 
spreadsheet-based applications. Others employ more flexible 
and powerful decision-making applications that were built 
using custom optimization-based models and integrate with 
the applications that provide the input data or receive the 
recommended plans or schedules. But historically, most 
organizations have behaved conservatively in an area as 
complex as optimization, preferring to accept the limitations of 
spreadsheets or generic applications to the uncertainties and 
risks associated with custom application development. The fact 
that many companies do not have OR experts on staff is 
another reason people have turned away from this option. But 
now there are good reasons to take a closer look at custom 
application development. 
The following diagram summarizes the set of choices that are 
available today with their respective advantages and 
disadvantages. What is important to note is that there have 
been significant advances in the ease of model development. 
and the quality of the decision support applications that can be 
built on top of optimization models.
Figure 4: Options for Planning and Scheduling Solutions
With spreadsheet-based solutions, it is extremely difficult for 
anyone other than the spreadsheet author to know what is 
going on inside the spreadsheet’s calculations. Even for the 
original author, there is little support for documentation. Then 
there are the well-known size limitations which are a roadblock 
in many scheduling problems. Finally, the virtues of a 
spreadsheet are also a danger. It is actually not a good idea for 
enterprise-class planning or scheduling to be done by any 
person using any version of a spreadsheet without any 
documentation or any explanations of the decisions made. 
Production planning and scheduling are important applications 
and greater control is necessary in most situations. 
Planning and scheduling applications based on generic models 
can be very effective. Let us look at one example to review the 
strengths and weaknesses of this approach. SAP’s Advanced 
Production and Optimization (APO) application is a very 
successful and widely used application that has a generic supply 
network planning model that optimizes a supply chain using 
IBM® ILOG CPLEX. Specifically, it optimizes the flow of 
products through a network of suppliers, manufacturers, 
distribution centers and even customers. The optimization 
model built by SAP reduces overall costs (global costs) while 
respecting operational constraints and customer service goals. 
A partial summary of this can be seen in table 4:
Two points are worth noting about this very successful and 
pervasive optimization-based planning application. First, if you 
need additional costs, constraints, prioritization rules or goals, 
you are out of luck. Simple examples would be the penalty cost 
difference between a non-delivery and a late delivery or the 
service difference between generic product delivery priorities 
and specific customer product delivery priorities. In both cases, 
SAP supports the first but not the second. Second, if you need 
a different application environment and greater ease of use in 
exercising and understanding the model, it is equally 
impossible. The optimization model and the style of 
interaction are both fixed. Certain parameters are exposed for 
scenario-creation purposes, but that is pretty much it. For 
many people using SAP APO-SNP, the functionality and ease 
of use are sufficient. But for others, the limitations are 
significant. For these people, there are two options: purchase a 
“best of breed” supply chain network planning application such 
as IBM ILOG LogicNet Plus XE, which also uses CPLEX, or 
build a custom decision support application based on a custom 
model. 
12     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology3 IBM Software     13
Table 4: Cost, Constraints and Goals
Cost Constraints Goals
•	Production
•	Inventory	carrying
•	Transportation	between	locations
•	Labor	overtime
•	Non-delivery	penalties
•	Production	capacity
•	Transportation	capacity
•	Lot	sizes
•	Safety	stock	requirements
•	Product	shelf	life
•	Product	priorities
•	Customer	category	priorities
•	Minimize	costs
•	Maximize	customer	services
Taking maximum advantage of optimization requires having 
the right optimization model or models to perfectly capture an 
organization’s decision-making parameters. And the models 
may need to be modified at some point in their service life. 
Business does not stand still. As a result, custom applications 
should be considered if they can be based on better models 
that can be changed over time, and if they can provide the ease 
of use that people need to take full advantage of the power of 
optimization.
What Business Managers Need in a Planning or 
Scheduling Application
Let us now review the two foundations for effective 
optimization-based planning and scheduling applications: 
•	 Carefully	Developed	Optimization	Models – Complete 
sets of equations and instructions that can find the best 
possible plan or schedule for a set of goals while taking into 
consideration a large number of costs, constraints and 
preferences. These models tell the optimization engines what 
problem to solve.  
Great models are often worth millions of dollars to an 
organization. But how are great models built? What skills are 
needed? What does the process look like? It is probably fair to 
say that the process is 75 percent management consulting and 
25 percent optimization expertise. It is fundamentally a 
manage ment consulting process because many people must be 
interviewed and many views of a problem assembled and 
structured. Data must be analyzed to obtain correct costs and 
yields. The business must be analyzed to define the exact 
decisions that need to be made and the metrics that should be 
part of the model. The process involves economic analysis, 
cost accounting, business strategy and process modeling. 
When all of this is done, an optimization expert creates 
mathematical models that capture all of the inputs and 
generate all of the outputs.
•	 What-if	Analysis,	Sensitivity	Analysis	and	Scenario	
Comparison – This is the ability to create a new scenario by 
modifying the assumptions and/or goals, and then seeing what 
happens to the solution as a whole and the metrics associated 
with it. This requires a very specialized type of decision 
support application—one designed to explore all of the 
underlying economics of a planning or scheduling problem, 
and one that interacts with the optimization engines and 
displays data, explanations and metrics in interesting and 
useful ways. Achieving excellence in scenario exploration can 
also be worth many millions of dollars to an organization. Key 
features include:
14     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology5
To expand on this second success factor a bit further, below is a 
more detailed list of the specific requirements for effective 
everyday use of the technology: 
•	 The	visual	display	of	complex	data	sets – individually and 
in relationship to each other 
•	 Scenario	definition: the ease with which you can build a 
scenario, without any significant limits on the adjustments that 
can be accommodated, adjustments to any of the input 
datasets, constraints, business policies and preferences, costs, 
assumptions or goals
•	 Scenario	comparison: seeing exactly what is different 
between two solutions in each area of inputs, outputs and 
output metrics
•	 Explanations	of	binding	constraints: the quality of the 
messages the user receives when the optimization process hits 
an infeasibility
•	 The	controlled	relaxation	of	constraints	by	group: the 
ability to easily organize your operating constraints, business 
policies and preferences into groups with finely grained 
priorities that instruct the optimization engine to relax 
constraints in an order that makes sense to the business; 
constraint relaxation should be business driven not math 
driven
•	 Manual	adjustment: the ability to modify a recommended 
plan or schedule, adding human knowledge and judgment to 
the mathematics and optimization, and then receive useful 
feedback on the consequences of the changes 
•	 Interoperability: the solution can be easily exported to a 
spreadsheet for further analysis or reporting, or to an 
operational application that will execute the plan; similarly, 
input data can be easily imported from spreadsheets, data 
warehouses or production “system of record” databases
•	 Engine	visibility: the ability to monitor the progress of the 
optimization process (the solution of the model for the dataset 
provided) and understand the rate of progress 
If these usability features are present, nontechnical people will 
be successful with optimization.
Building Successful Planning and 
Scheduling Applications
For individuals not familiar with the application development 
process required for a custom planning or scheduling solution, 
the following illustration may prove helpful. The process 
requires both optimization and IT expertise.
The keys to success in developing a custom planning or 
scheduling application lie in three major areas:
•	 Iterative	model	development with the full participation of 
the necessary range of stakeholders from multiple functions
•	 An	integrated	application	development	system supporting 
the entire process from model development to application 
generation to appli-cation refinement and data integration
• The ability to find and work with experienced people who 
have built custom planning and scheduling applications before
An Iterative, Cooperative Modeling Process
To develop good planning or scheduling models, operational 
managers, financial analysts and business planners all may be 
required to participate in the modeling process in order to 
confirm that the operational constraints, costs and yield 
assumptions are correct, and that the goals are accurately 
categorized and can be balanced properly. This is not a 
one-step process and it must be one that allows people with 
different backgrounds to discuss the data, costs and 
relationships between variables associated with planning or 
scheduling problems without being an expert in OR or IT. 
Figure 5: The Complete Custom Planning and Scheduling Application 
Development Process 
14     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology5 IBM Software     15
In fact, this is such an iterative process that the biggest key to 
success is application prototyping. This important step allows 
business people to review the model in a decision support 
application environment. Instead of reviewing the model’s 
equations, analysts and managers are reviewing the model’s 
inputs and outputs in natural language and in the context of 
actual decision-making scenarios with real data.
A Complete, Integrated System
A modern optimization-based application development system 
combines tools for optimization experts with tools for 
generating the graphical user interfaces (GUIs) that allow 
nontechnical people to exercise an optimization model fully. 
These tools work together and ensure that businesses can 
generate high-quality decision-support applications on top of 
high-quality optimization models. An obvious additional 
benefit is that the entire application is more maintainable—
more able to grow and change with the organization it serves.
This concept can be visualized in Figure 6 depicting IBM 
ILOG ODM Enterprise, a platform for supporting the entire 
model and application development process.
As can be seen, a complete system features three essential 
components:
Specialized Application Development Tools.
 In order to make optimization accessible for analysts and 
managers without advanced degrees in mathematics or 
computer science, the system must translate the structure of 
the optimization models into model input and output displays, 
and also generate a set of interactive application screens that 
will satisfy user requirements. In particular, it should allow 
nontechnical business users to:
• Participate actively in the model refinement process: test a 
model with easily prototyped application forms and displays 
that help them identify missing inputs or goals, ensuring that 
costs, yields and other assumptions are accurate and complete
• Create and store scenarios: easily modify input data, 
constraints, costs and/or goals without optimization expertise; 
they can store multiple scenarios and track input differences, 
plans or schedules, and metrics over time
• Compare scenarios: see exactly what the difference is between 
two solutions or plans; compare the goals, constraints, 
assumptions, available resources and recommended solutions 
with their operational and financial metrics
• Use recommended plans and schedules as a beginning: freeze 
part of a solution, make manual changes, and then regenerate 
a plan or schedule with information about the impact of these 
overrides
• Relax binding constraints in an orderly fashion: set constraint 
groupings and constraint enforcement priorities to manage 
solution gen eration, and receive straightforward explanations 
of binding or unsatisfiable constraints
• Balance goals: set minimums and maximums for individual 
goals as well as place different weights on the individual goals 
in a set
• Work with spreadsheets: import input data and export 
solutions as required
Optimization Model Development Tools for OR 
Professionals
The “optimization experts,” whether they are in-house staff or 
outside professionals, need a complete, integrated development 
environment (IDE) designed specifically for optimization 
model development. This is analogous to the environments 
provided by SAS Enterprise Miner and SPSS Clementine for 
the development of models in the arena of predictive analytics. 
Figure 6: IBM ILOG ODM Enterprise 
16     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology7
For optimization models, key capabilities can be summarized 
as follows:
•	 A	specialized	optimization	language/syntax:	allowing OR 
professionals to build models faster with fewer lines of code 
•	 An	IDE	for	iterative	model	development: supporting the 
visualization of data, performance tuning, debugging, 
monitoring of engine solving progress, relaxing constraints to 
force a solution, and an ability to change data sources easily as 
data is moved from Access or Excel-based data to production 
data in enterprise databases
•	 Scripting	capability: supporting the definition of data 
preprocessing steps, special optimization solution search 
instructions, and solution post-processing
•	 Integration	with	the	application	development	process: 
allowing the optimization expert to easily identify the portions 
of the model that need to be exposed to the business user and 
define the data display column labels, messages, constraint 
groups, and so on that will make the model accessible to the 
nontechnical community
A Set of High-Performance Optimization Engines
Of course, none of the models or applications would be 
operational without the optimization engines that are able to 
actually solve these complex problems. It is difficult to explain 
quickly everything that goes into a high-performance 
optimization engine, but for the nontechnical reader, the 
following can be easily appreciated:
•	 The	best	possible	performance especially on large problems 
and on difficult scheduling challenges. Achieving this is a 
journey. You are always working toward the next step-function 
improvement in solving power and speed. An optimization 
engine is a coordinated set of approaches that orchestrate the 
use of thousands of algorithms and instructions. They are the 
result of years of focused kaizen by teams of people composed 
of mathematicians with a flare for software methods and 
advanced logic programmers with a flare for mathematics. 
Kaizen is the Japanese word for continuous improvement.
•  The	highest	quality	recommendations because 
optimization engines are solving problems that may have 
never been solved before, it is important for them to be tested 
and exercised on a wide range of problems as part of an 
effective QA process. You need a large library of models to test 
this sort of software properly. 
•	 The	most	information	possible to fully trust a 
recommended solution and to compare options properly, you 
need detailed explanations of bind-ing constraints, calculated 
solution metrics and sensitivity analysis. Providing this 
information is on top of finding the best possible solution to a 
planning or scheduling problem.
Experienced Assistance
It goes without saying that the number one form of assistance 
that most companies need is optimization expertise — help in 
building the model of the problem. But for a successful 
decision-support application project that is based on a custom 
optimization model and integrated into an ERP environment, 
you need five key things:
• Expertise in facilitating the cross-functional model definition 
and refinement process
• OR expertise in building, testing and debugging the model 
• Expertise in data preparation, manipulation and testing
• Expertise with mapping optimization data arrays to tables
Project management 
Optimization experts are not common, but they are more 
widely available than most managers realize. They can be 
found in universities, consulting firms, and in the Professional 
Services groups of some software companies. Managers should 
interview them for industry experience and number of real-
world business problems successfully modeled.Keys to success 
in the integration of optimization model-based applications 
into enterprise application architectures are the subject of 
another white paper. It is mentioned here only in making the 
general observation that experience—having done it before—is 
useful. To take one example, a planning or scheduling 
application might need data from SAP. What is important to 
understand is that there is a conversion process. In this case, an 
IBM ILOG SAP Adapter pulls the data out of SAP and 
converts it into the format needed by the optimization engines. 
16     Solve your Toughest Planning and Scheduling Problems: How Business Managers can use Mathematical Optimization Technology7 IBM Software     17
Once the optimization process is completed, the planning or 
scheduling application can send selected data updates back to 
SAP via the same adapter, performing the same data mapping 
in reverse. A real-world example would be getting master data 
and production orders from SAP and sending updated 
production orders back to SAP.
For those interested in looking at this process in a bit more 
detail, the following picture may be helpful. 
Figure 7: SAP Integration Architecture 
Figure 8: Using IBM ILOG Optimization in an SAP Environment
Here the emphasis is on explaining the steps in the process if 
an SAP user wants to invoke an IBM ILOG analytic 
application from the SAP environment, taking advantage of 
NetWeaver and SAP’s support for SOA-based interoperability. 
In current terminology, this picture illustrates how an IBM 
ILOG analytic application can serve as an “X-App” in the SAP 
world. Note: an IBM ILOG analytic application generally has 
no database of its own, although it can be easily set up to store 
run scenarios in a file system. 
Next Steps
Request a custom demo
Our interactive demonstrations are performed either online or 
on site and are scheduled at your convenience (depending on 
the availability of our product experts). We will be happy to 
travel to your site for groups of five or more.
Request a Discovery Workshop
Two day, complimentary workshop designed to help teams 
work through their project questions together, ensuring that 
IBM ILOG Optimization is the right solution to your 
problems before making an investment.
Talk to a live person
These specialists are available to assist you in your IBM ILOG 
Optimization solution identification and research. You can 
email or phone them directly.
Contact us
We will respond within 48 hours. For general questions:
• 1-800-FOR-ILOG
• ilogcc@us.ibm.com
© Copyright IBM Corporation 2010
IBM Global Services 
Route 100 
Somers, NY 10589 
U.S.A.
Produced in the United States of America  
March 2010  
All Rights Reserved
IBM, the IBM logo, ibm.com, CPLEX, and ILOG are trademarks or 
registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in 
the United States, other countries, or both. These and other IBM 
trademarked terms are marked on their first occurrence in this information 
with the appropriate symbol (® or ™), indicating US registered or common 
law trademarks owned by IBM at the time this information was published. 
Such trademarks may also be registered or common law trademarks in 
other countries. A current list of IBM trademarks is available on the Web at 
ibm.com/legal/copytrade.shtml.
Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States, other 
countries, or both.
.NET is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other 
countries, or both.
Other company, product or service names may be trademarks or service 
marks of others.
References in this publication to IBM products or services do not imply 
that IBM intends to make them available in all countries in which IBM 
operates.
WSW14093-USEN-02

