1030 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
Just Relax: Convex Programming Methods for
Identifying Sparse Signals in Noise
Joel A. Tropp, Student Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper studies a difficult and fundamental
problem that arises throughout electrical engineering, applied
mathematics, and statistics. Suppose that one forms a short linear
combination of elementary signals drawn from a large, fixed
collection. Given an observation of the linear combination that
has been contaminated with additive noise, the goal is to identify
which elementary signals participated and to approximate their
coefficients. Although many algorithms have been proposed,
there is little theory which guarantees that these algorithms can
accurately and efficiently solve the problem.
This paper studies a method called convex relaxation, which at-
tempts to recover the ideal sparse signal by solving a convex pro-
gram. This approach is powerful because the optimization can be
completed in polynomial time with standard scientific software.
The paper provides general conditions which ensure that convex
relaxation succeeds. As evidence of the broad impact of these re-
sults, the paper describes how convex relaxation can be used for
several concrete signal recovery problems. It also describes appli-
cations to channel coding, linear regression, and numerical anal-
ysis.
Index Terms—Algorithms, approximation methods, basis pur-
suit, convex program, linear regression, optimization methods, or-
thogonal matching pursuit, sparse representations.
I. INTRODUCTION
LATELY, there has been a lot of fuss about sparse approx-imation. This class of problems has two defining charac-
teristics.
1) An input signal is approximated by a linear combination
of elementary signals. In many modern applications, the
elementary signals are drawn from a large, linearly depen-
dent collection.
2) A preference for “sparse” linear combinations is imposed
by penalizing nonzero coefficients. The most common
penalty is the number of elementary signals that partic-
ipate in the approximation.
Sparse approximation problems arise throughout electrical
engineering, statistics, and applied mathematics. One of the
most common applications is to compress audio [1], images [2],
and video [3]. Sparsity criteria also arise in linear regression
[4], deconvolution [5], signal modeling [6], preconditioning
[7], machine learning [8], denoising [9], and regularization
[10].
Manuscript received June 7, 2004; revised February 1, 2005. This work was
supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship.
The author was with the Institute for Computational Engineering and Sci-
ences (ICES), The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA. He is
now with the Department of Mathematics, The University of Michigan at Ann
Arbor, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: jtropp@umich.edu).
Communicated by V. V. Vaishampayan, Associate Editor At Large.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.864420
A. The Model Problem
In this work, we will concentrate on the model problem of
identifying a sparse linear combination of elementary signals
that has been contaminated with additive noise. The literature
on inverse problems tends to assume that the noise is an arbi-
trary vector of bounded norm, while the signal processing lit-
erature usually models the noise statistically; we will consider
both possibilities.
To be precise, suppose we measure a signal of the form
(1)
where is a known matrix with unit-norm columns, is
a sparse coefficient vector (i.e., few components are nonzero),
and is an unknown noise vector. Given the signal , our goal
is to approximate the coefficient vector . In particular, it is
essential that we correctly identify the nonzero components of
the coefficient vector because they determine which columns of
the matrix participate in the signal.
Initially, linear algebra seems to preclude a solution—when-
ever has a nontrivial null space, we face an ill-posed inverse
problem. Even worse, the sparsity of the coefficient vector intro-
duces a combinatorial aspect to the problem. Nevertheless, if the
optimal coefficient vector is sufficiently sparse, it turns out
that we can accurately and efficiently approximate given
the noisy observation .
B. Convex Relaxation
The literature contains many types of algorithms for ap-
proaching the model problem, including brute force [4, Sec.
3.7–3.9], nonlinear programming [11], and greedy pursuit
[12]–[14]. In this paper, we concentrate on a powerful method
called convex relaxation. Although this technique was intro-
duced over 30 years ago in [15], the theoretical justifications are
still shaky. This paper attempts to lay a more solid foundation.
Let us explain the intuition behind convex relaxation
methods. Suppose we are given a signal of the form (1) along
with a bound on the norm of the noise vector, say .
At first, it is tempting to look for the sparsest coefficient vector
that generates a signal within distance of the input. This idea
can be phrased as a mathematical program
subject to (2)
where the quasi-norm counts the number of nonzero
components in its argument. To solve (2) directly, one must sift
through all possible disbursements of the nonzero components
in . This method is intractable because the search space is ex-
ponentially large [12], [16].
0018-9448/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1031
To surmount this obstacle, one might replace the quasi-
norm with the norm to obtain a convex optimization problem
subject to -
where the tolerance is related to the error bound . Intuitively,
the norm is the convex function closest to the quasi-norm,
so this substitution is referred to as convex relaxation. One hopes
that the solution to the relaxation will yield a good approxima-
tion of the ideal coefficient vector . The advantage of the
new formulation is that it can be solved in polynomial time with
standard scientific software [17].
We have found that it is more natural to study the closely
related convex program
-
As before, one can interpret the norm as a convex relaxation
of the quasi-norm. So the parameter manages a tradeoff be-
tween the approximation error and the sparsity of the coefficient
vector. This optimization problem can also be solved efficiently,
and one expects that the minimizer will approximate the ideal
coefficient vector .
Appendix I offers an excursus on the history of convex relax-
ation methods for identifying sparse signals.
C. Contributions
The primary contribution of this paper is to justify the
intuition that convex relaxation can solve the model problem.
Our two major theorems describe the behavior of solutions to
( - ) and solutions to ( - ). We apply this theory
to several concrete instances of the model problem.
Let us summarize our results on the performance of convex
relaxation. Suppose that we measure a signal of the form (1) and
that we solve one of the convex programs with an appropriate
choice of or to obtain a minimizer . Theorems 8 and 14
demonstrate that
• the vector is close to the ideal coefficient vector ;
• the support of (i.e., the indices of its nonzero compo-
nents) is a subset of the support of ;
• moreover, the minimizer is unique.
In words, the solution to the convex relaxation identifies every
sufficiently large component of , and it never mistakenly
identifies a column of that did not participate in the signal.
As other authors have written, “It seems quite surprising that
any result of this kind is possible” [18, Sec. 6].
The conditions under which the convex relaxations solve the
model problem are geometric in nature. Section III-C describes
the primary factors influencing their success.
• Small sets of the columns from should be well condi-
tioned.
• The noise vector should be weakly correlated with all the
columns of .
These properties can be difficult to check in general. This paper
relies on a simple approach based on the coherence parameter
of , which measures the cosine of the minimal angle between
a pair of columns. It may be possible to improve these results
using techniques from Banach space geometry.
As an application of the theory, we will see that convex relax-
ation can be used to solve three versions of the model problem.
If the coherence parameter is small
• both convex programs can identify a sufficiently sparse
signal corrupted by an arbitrary vector of bounded
norm (Sections IV-C and V-B);
• the program ( - ) can identify a sparse signal in
additive white Gaussian noise (Section IV-D);
• the program ( - ) can identify a sparse signal in uni-
form noise of bounded norm (Section V-C).
In addition, Section IV-E shows that ( - ) can be used
for subset selection, a sparse approximation problem that arises
in statistics. Section V-D demonstrates that ( - ) can solve
another sparse approximation problem from numerical analysis.
This paper is among the first to analyze the behavior of convex
relaxation when noise is present. Prior theoretical work has fo-
cused on a special case of the model problem where the noise
vector . See, for example, [14], [19]–[23]. Although these
results are beautiful, they simply do not apply to real-world
signal processing problems. We expect that our work will have
a significant practical impact because so many applications re-
quire sparse approximation in the presence of noise. As an ex-
ample, Dossal and Mallat have used our results to study the per-
formance of convex relaxation for a problem in seismics [24].
After the first draft [25] of this paper had been completed, it
came to the author’s attention that several other researchers were
preparing papers on the performance of convex relaxation in the
presence of noise [18], [26], [27]. These manuscripts are signif-
icantly different from the present work, and they also deserve
attention. Turn to Section VI-B for comparisons and contrasts.
D. Channel Coding
It may be illuminating to view the model problem in the con-
text of channel coding. The Gaussian channel allows us to send
one real number during each transmission, but this number is
corrupted by the addition of a zero-mean Gaussian random vari-
able. Shannon’s channel coding theorem [28, Ch. 10] shows that
the capacity of the Gaussian channel can be achieved (asymptot-
ically) by grouping the transmissions into long blocks and using
a random code whose size is exponential in the block length. A
major practical problem with this approach is that decoding re-
quires an exponentially large lookup table.
In contrast, we could also construct a large code by forming
sparse linear combinations of vectors from a fixed codebook .
Both the choice of vectors and the nonzero coefficients carry
information. The vector length is analogous with the block
length. When we transmit a codeword through the channel, it is
contaminated by a zero-mean, white Gaussian random vector.
To identify the codeword, it is necessary to solve the model
problem. Therefore, any sparse approximation algorithm—such
as convex relaxation—can potentially be used for decoding.
To see that this coding scheme is practical, one must show that
the codewords carry almost as much information as the channel
permits. One must also demonstrate that the decoding algorithm
can reliably recover the noisy codewords.
1032 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
We believe that channel coding is a novel application of
sparse approximation algorithms. In certain settings, these
algorithms may provide a very competitive approach. Sections
IV-D and V-C present some simple examples that take a first
step in this direction. See [29] for some more discussion of
these ideas.
E. Outline
The paper continues with notation and background material
in Section II. Section III develops the fundamental lemmata that
undergird our major results. The two subsequent sections pro-
vide the major theoretical results for ( - ) and ( -
). Both these sections describe several specific applications in
signal recovery, approximation theory, statistics, and numer-
ical analysis. The body of the paper concludes with Section
VI, which surveys extensions and related work. The appendices
present several additional topics and some supporting analysis.
II. BACKGROUND
This section furnishes the mathematical mise en scène. We
have adopted an abstract point of view that facilitates our treat-
ment of convex relaxation methods. Most of the material here
may be found in any book on matrix theory or functional anal-
ysis, such as [30]–[32].
A. The Dictionary
We will work in the finite-dimensional, complex inner-
product space , which will be called the signal space.1 The
usual Hermitian inner product for will be written as ,
and we will denote the corresponding norm by . A dictio-
nary for the signal space is a finite collection of unit-norm
elementary signals. The elementary signals are called atoms,
and each is denoted by , where the parameter is drawn
from an index set . The indices may have an interpretation,
such as the time–frequency or time–scale localization of an
atom, or they may simply be labels without an underlying
metaphysics. The whole dictionary structure is written as
The letter will denote the number of atoms in the dictionary. It
is evident that , where returns the cardinality
of a finite set.
B. The Coherence Parameter
A summary parameter of the dictionary is the coherence,
which is defined as the maximum absolute inner product be-
tween two distinct atoms [12], [19]
(3)
When the coherence is small, the atoms look very different from
each other, which makes them easy to distinguish. It is common
that the coherence satisfies . We say informally
that a dictionary is incoherent when we judge that the coherence
1Modifications for real signal spaces should be transparent, but the apotheosis
to infinite dimensions may take additional effort.
parameter is small. An incoherent dictionary may contain far
more atoms than an orthonormal basis (i.e., ) [14, Sec.
II-D].
The literature also contains a generalization of the coherence
parameter called the cumulative coherence function [14], [21].
For each natural number , this function is defined as
This function will often provide better estimates than the coher-
ence parameter. For clarity of exposition, we only present results
in terms of the coherence parameter. Parallel results using cu-
mulative coherence are not hard to develop [25].
It is essential to be aware that coherence is not fundamental
to sparse approximation. Rather, it offers a quick way to check
the hypotheses of our theorems. It is possible to provide much
stronger results using more sophisticated techniques.
C. Coefficient Space
Every linear combination of atoms is parameterized by a list
of coefficients. We may collect them into a coefficient vector,
which formally belongs to the linear space2 . The standard
basis for this space is given by the vectors whose coordinate
projections are identically zero, except for one unit coordinate.
The th standard basis vector will be denoted .
Given a coefficient vector , the expressions and both
represent its th coordinate. We will alternate between them,
depending on what is most typographically felicitous.
The support of a coefficient vector is the set of indices at
which it is nonzero
(4)
Suppose that . Without notice, we may embed “short”
coefficient vectors from into by extending them with
zeros. Likewise, we may restrict “long” coefficient vectors from
to their support. Both transubstantiations will be natural in
context.
D. Sparsity and Diversity
The sparsity of a coefficient vector is the number of places
where it equals zero. The complementary notion, diversity,
counts the number of places where the coefficient vector does
not equal zero. Diversity is calculated with the quasi-norm
(5)
For any positive number , define
(6)
with the convention that . As one might
expect, there is an intimate connection between the definitions
(5) and (6). Indeed, . It is well known that
2In case this notation is unfamiliar, is the collection of functions from 

to . It is equipped with the usual addition and scalar multiplication to form a
linear space.
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1033
the function (6) is convex if and only if , in which case it
describes the norm.
From this vantage, one can see that the norm is the convex
function “closest” to the quasi-norm (subject to the same nor-
malization on the zero vector and the standard basis vectors).
For a more rigorous approach to this idea, see [33, Proposi-
tion 2.1] and also [21].
E. Dictionary Matrices
Let us define a matrix , called the dictionary synthesis ma-
trix, that maps coefficient vectors to signals. Formally
via
The matrix describes the action of this linear transformation
in the standard bases of the underlying vector spaces. Therefore,
the columns of are the atoms. The conjugate transpose of is
called the dictionary analysis matrix, and it maps each signal
to a coefficient vector that lists the inner products between signal
and atoms
The rows of are atoms, conjugate-transposed.
F. Subdictionaries
A subdictionary is a linearly independent collection of atoms.
We will exploit the linear independence repeatedly. If the atoms
in a subdictionary are indexed by the set , then we define
a synthesis matrix and an analysis matrix
. These matrices are entirely analogous with the
dictionary synthesis and analysis matrices. We will frequently
use the fact that the synthesis matrix has full column rank.
Let index a subdictionary. The Gram matrix of the subdic-
tionary is given by . This matrix is Hermitian, it has a unit
diagonal, and it is invertible. The pseudoinverse of the synthesis
matrix is denoted by , and it may be calculated using the for-
mula . The matrix will denote the or-
thogonal projector onto the span of the subdictionary. This pro-
jector may be expressed using the pseudoinverse: .
On occasion, the distinguished index set is instead of
. In this case, the synthesis matrix is written as , and the
orthogonal projector is denoted .
G. Signals, Approximations, and Coefficients
Let be a subdictionary, and let be a fixed input signal.
This signal has a unique best approximation using the
atoms in , which is determined by . Note that the
approximation is orthogonal to the residual . There
is a unique coefficient vector supported on that synthe-
sizes the approximation: . We may calculate that
.
H. Operator Norms
The operator norm of a matrix is given by
An immediate consequence is the upper norm bound
Suppose that and . Then we
have the identity
(7)
We also have the following lower norm bound, which is proved
in [25, Sec. 3.3].
Proposition 1: For every matrix
(8)
If has full row rank, equality holds in (8). When is invert-
ible, this result implies
The symbol denotes the range (i.e., column span) of a
matrix.
III. FUNDAMENTAL LEMMATA
Fix an input signal and a positive parameter . Define the
convex function
(L)
In this section, we study the minimizers of this function. These
results are important to us because (L) is the objective function
of the convex program ( - ), and it is essentially the
Lagrangian function of ( - ). By analyzing the behavior
of (L), we can understand the performance of convex relaxation
methods.
The major lemma of this section provides a sufficient condi-
tion which ensures that the minimizer of (L) is supported on a
given index set . To develop this result, we first characterize
the (unique) minimizer of (L) when it is restricted to coefficient
vectors supported on . We use this characterization to obtain
a condition under which every perturbation away from the re-
stricted minimizer must increase the value of the objective func-
tion. When this condition is in force, the global minimizer of (L)
must be supported on .
A. Convex Analysis
The proof relies on standard results from convex analysis. As
it is usually presented, this subject addresses the properties of
real-valued convex functions defined on real vector spaces. Nev-
ertheless, it is possible to transport these results to the complex
1034 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
setting by defining an appropriate real-linear structure on the
complex vector space. In this subsection, therefore, we use the
bilinear inner product instead of the usual sesquilinear
(i.e., Hermitian) inner product. Note that both inner products
generate the norm.
Suppose that is a convex function from a real-linear inner-
product space to . The gradient of the function
at the point is defined as the usual (Fréchet) derivative, com-
puted with respect to the real-linear inner product. Even when
the gradient does not exist, we may define the subdifferential of
at a point
for every
The elements of the subdifferential are called subgradients. If
possesses a gradient at , the unique subgradient is the gradient.
That is,
The subdifferential of a sum is the (Minkowski) sum of the sub-
differentials. Finally, if is a closed, proper convex function
then is a global minimizer of if and only if . The
standard reference for this material is [34].
Remark 2: The subdifferential of a convex function provides
a dual description of the function in terms of its supporting hy-
perplanes. In consequence, the appearance of the subdifferential
in our proof is analogous with the familiar technique of studying
the dual of a convex program.
B. Restricted Minimizers
First, we must characterize the minimizers of the objective
function (L). Fuchs developed the following result in the real
setting using essentially the same method [23].
Lemma 3: Suppose that indexes a linearly independent
collection of atoms, and let minimize the objective function
(L) over all coefficient vectors supported on . A necessary and
sufficient condition on such a minimizer is that
(9)
where the vector is drawn from . Moreover, the mini-
mizer is unique.
Proof: Suppose that . Then the vectors
and are orthogonal to each other. Apply the
Pythagorean Theorem to see that minimizing (L) over coeffi-
cient vectors supported on is equivalent to minimizing the
function
(10)
over coefficient vectors from . Recall that has full column
rank. It follows that the quadratic term in (10) is strictly convex,
and so the whole function must also be strictly convex. There-
fore, its minimizer is unique.
The function is convex and unconstrained, so
is a necessary and sufficient condition for the coefficient vector
to minimize . The gradient of the first term of at equals
. From the additivity of subdifferentials, it
follows that
for some vector drawn from the subdifferential . We
premultiply this relation by to reach
Apply the fact that to reach the conclusion.
Now we identify the subdifferential of the norm. To that
end, define the signum function as
for
for
One may extend the signum function to vectors by applying it
to each component.
Proposition 4: Let be a complex vector. The complex
vector lies in the subdifferential if and only if
• whenever , and
• whenever .
Indeed, unless , in which case .
We omit the proof. At last, we may develop bounds on how
much a solution to the restricted problem varies from the desired
solution .
Corollary 5 (Upper Bounds): Suppose that indexes a sub-
dictionary, and let minimize the function (L) over all coeffi-
cient vectors supported on . The following bounds are in force:
(11)
(12)
Proof: We begin with the necessary and sufficient condi-
tion
(13)
where . To obtain (11), we take the norm of (13)
and apply the upper norm bound
Proposition 4 shows that , which proves the result.
To develop the second bound (12), we premultiply (13) by the
matrix and compute the norm
As before, . Finally, we apply the identity (7) to
switch from the norm to the norm.
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1035
C. The Correlation Condition
Now, we develop a condition which ensures that the global
minimizer of (L) is supported inside a given index set. This re-
sult is the soul of the analysis.
Lemma 6 (Correlation Condition): Assume that indexes a
linearly independent collection of atoms. Let minimize the
function (L) over all coefficient vectors supported on . Sup-
pose that
where is determined by (9). It follows that is the
unique global minimizer of (L). In particular, the condition
guarantees that is the unique global minimizer of (L).
In this work, we will concentrate on the second sufficient
condition because it is easier to work with. Nevertheless, the
first condition is significantly more powerful. Note that either
sufficient condition becomes worthless when the bracket on its
right-hand side is negative.
We typically abbreviate the bracket in the second condition
as
The notation “ ” stands for exact recovery coefficient, which
reflects the fact that is a sufficient condition for
several different algorithms to recover the optimal representa-
tion of an exactly sparse signal [14]. Roughly, mea-
sures how distinct the atoms in are from the remaining atoms.
Observe that if the index set satisfies , then the suf-
ficient condition of the lemma will hold as soon as becomes
large enough. But if is too large, then .
Given a nonzero signal , define the function
and place the convention that . This quantity
measures the maximum correlation between the signal and
any atom in the dictionary. To interpret the left-hand side of the
sufficient conditions in the lemma, observe that
Therefore, the lemma is strongest when the magnitude of the
residual and its maximum correlation with the dictionary are
both small. If the dictionary is not exponentially large, a generic
vector is weakly correlated with the dictionary on account of
measure concentration phenomena. Since the atoms are nor-
malized, the maximum correlation never exceeds one. This fact
yields a (much weaker) result that depends only on the magni-
tude of the residual.
Corollary 7: Let index a subdictionary, and let be an
input signal. Suppose that the residual vector satisfies
Then, any coefficient vector that minimizes the function (L)
must be supported inside .
One might wonder whether the condition is
really necessary to develop results of this type. The answer is
a qualified affirmative. Appendix II offers a partial converse of
Lemma 6.
D. Proof of the Correlation Condition Lemma
We now establish Lemma 6. The argument presented here is
different from the original proof in the technical report [25].
It relies on a perturbation technique that can be traced to the
independent works [18], [25].
Proof of Lemma 6: Let be the unique minimizer of the
objective function (L) over coefficient vectors supported on .
In particular, the value of the objective function increases if we
change any coordinate of indexed in . We will develop a
condition which guarantees that the value of the objective func-
tion also increases when we change any other component of .
Since (L) is convex, these two facts will imply that is the
global minimizer.
Choose an index not listed in , and let be a nonzero
scalar. We must develop a condition which ensures that
where is the th standard basis vector. To that end, expand
the left-hand side of this relation to obtain
Next, simplify the first bracket by expanding the norms and
canceling like terms. Simplify the second bracket by recog-
nizing that since the two vectors
have disjoint supports. Hence,
Add and subtract in the left-hand side of the inner product,
and use linearity to split the inner product into two pieces. We
reach
We will bound the right-hand side below. To that end, observe
that the first term is strictly positive, so we may discard it. Then
invoke the lower triangle inequality, and use the linearity of the
inner products to draw out
(14)
It remains to rewrite (14) in a favorable manner.
First, identify in the last term on the right-hand
side of (14). Next, let us examine the second term. Lemma 3
characterizes the difference . Introduce this character-
ization, and identify the pseudoinverse of to discover that
(15)
1036 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
where is determined by (9). Substitute (15) into the
bound (14)
(16)
Our final goal is to ensure that the left-hand side of (16) is
strictly positive. This situation occurs whenever the bracket is
nonnegative. Therefore, we need
We require this expression to hold for every index that does
not belong to . Optimizing each side over in yields
the more restrictive condition
Since is orthogonal to the atoms listed in , the left-
hand side does not change if we maximize over all from .
Therefore,
We conclude that the relation
is a sufficient condition for every perturbation away from to
increase the objective function. Since (L) is convex, it follows
that is the unique global minimizer of (L).
In particular, since , it is also sufficient that
This completes the argument.
IV. PENALIZATION
Suppose that is an input signal. In this section, we study
applications of the convex program
-
The parameter controls the tradeoff between the error in ap-
proximating the input signal and the sparsity of the approxima-
tion.
We begin with a theorem that provides significant informa-
tion about the solution to ( - ). Afterward, this theorem
is applied to several important problems. As a first example, we
show that the convex program can identify the sparsest repre-
sentation of an exactly sparse signal. Our second example shows
that ( - ) can be used to recover a sparse signal contam-
inated by an unknown noise vector of bounded norm, which is
a well-known inverse problem. We will also see that a statistical
model for the noise vector allows us to provide more refined re-
sults. In particular, we will discover that ( - ) is quite
effective for recovering sparse signals corrupted with Gaussian
noise. The section concludes with an application of the convex
program to the subset selection problem from statistics.
The reader should also be aware that convex programs of
the form ( - ) have been proposed for numerous other
applications. Geophysicists have long used them for deconvo-
lution [5], [35]. Certain support vector machines, which arise
in machine learning, can be reduced to this form [8]. Chen,
Donoho, and Saunders have applied ( - ) to denoise
signals [9], and Fuchs has put it forth for several other signal
processing problems, e.g., in [36], [37]. Daubechies, Defrise,
and De Mol have suggested a related convex program to reg-
ularize ill-posed linear inverse problems [10]. Most intriguing,
perhaps, Olshausen and Field have argued that the mammalian
visual cortex may solve similar optimization problems to pro-
duce sparse representations of images [38].
Even before we begin our analysis, we can make a few im-
mediate remarks about ( - ). Observe that, as the pa-
rameter tends to zero, the solution to the convex program ap-
proaches a point of minimal norm in the affine space
. It can be shown that, except when belongs to a set
of signals with Lebesgue measure zero in , no point of the
affine space has fewer than nonzero components [14, Propo-
sition 4.1]. So the minimizer of ( - ) is generically non-
sparse when is small. In contrast, as approaches infinity, the
solution tends toward the zero vector.
It is also worth noting that ( - ) has an analytical so-
lution whenever is unitary. One simply computes the or-
thogonal expansion of the signal with respect to the columns
of and applies the soft thresholding operator to each coeffi-
cient. More precisely, where
if
otherwise.
This result will be familiar to anyone who has studied the
process of shrinking empirical wavelet coefficients to denoise
functions [39], [40].
A. Performance of ( - )
Our major theorem on the behavior of ( - ) simply
collects the lemmata from the last section.
Theorem 8: Let index a linearly independent collection
of atoms for which . Suppose that is an input
signal whose best approximation over satisfies the correla-
tion condition
Let solve the convex program ( - ) with parameter
. We may conclude the following.
• The support of is contained in , and
• the distance between and the optimal coefficient vector
satisfies
• In particular, contains every index in for
which
• Moreover, the minimizer is unique.
In words, we approximate the input signal over , and we
suppose that the remaining atoms are weakly correlated with
the residual. It follows then that the minimizer of the convex
program involves only atoms in and that this minimizer is not
far from the coefficient vector that synthesizes the best approx-
imation of the signal over .
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1037
To check the hypotheses of this theorem, one must carefully
choose the index set and leverage information about the rela-
tionship between the signal and its approximation over . Our
examples will show how to apply the theorem in several specific
cases. At this point, we can also state a simpler version of this
theorem that uses the coherence parameter to estimate some of
the key quantities. One advantage of this formulation is that the
index set plays a smaller role.
Corollary 9: Suppose that , and assume that con-
tains no more than indices. Suppose that is an input signal
whose best approximation over satisfies the correlation
condition
Let solve ( - ) with parameter . We may conclude
the following.
• The support of is contained in , and
• the distance between and the optimal coefficient vector
satisfies
• In particular, contains every index in for
which
• Moreover, the minimizer is unique.
Proof: The corollary follows directly from the theorem
when we apply the coherence bounds of Appendix III.
This corollary takes an especially pleasing form if we assume
that . In that case, the right-hand side of the correlation
condition is no smaller than . Meanwhile, the coefficient vec-
tors and differ in norm by no more than .
Note that, when is unitary, the coherence parameter .
Corollary 9 allows us to conclude that the solution to the convex
program identifies precisely those atoms whose inner products
against the signal exceed in magnitude. Their coefficients are
reduced in magnitude by at most . This description matches
the performance of the soft thresholding operator.
B. Example: Identifying Sparse Signals
As a simple application of the foregoing theorem, we offer
a new proof that one can recover an exactly sparse signal by
solving the convex program ( - ). Fuchs has already
established this result in the real case [22].
Corollary 10 (Fuchs): Assume that indexes a linearly in-
dependent collection of atoms for which . Choose
an arbitrary coefficient vector supported on , and fix an
input signal . Let denote the unique minimizer
of ( - ) with parameter . We may conclude the fol-
lowing.
• There is a positive number for which implies
that .
• In the limit as , we have .
Proof: First, note that the best approximation of the signal
over satisfies and that the corresponding coefficient
vector . Therefore, . The Corre-
lation Condition is in force for every positive , so Theorem 8
implies that the minimizer of the program ( - )
must be supported inside . Moreover, the distance from
to the optimal coefficient vector satisfies
It is immediate that as the parameter . Fi-
nally, observe that contains every index in provided
that
Note that the left-hand side of this inequality furnishes an ex-
plicit value for .
As a further corollary, we obtain a familiar result for Basis
Pursuit that was developed independently in [14], [23], gener-
alizing the work in [19]–[22]. We will require this corollary in
the sequel.
Corollary 11 (Fuchs, Tropp): Assume that .
Let be supported on , and fix a signal . Then
is the unique solution to
subject to (BP)
Proof: As , the solutions to ( - ) approach
a point of minimum norm in the affine space .
Since is the limit of these minimizers, it follows that
must also solve (BP). The uniqueness claim seems to require a
separate argument and the assumption that is strictly
positive. See [23], [41] for two different proofs.
C. Example: Identifying Sparse Signals in Noise
This subsection shows how ( - ) can be applied to
the inverse problem of recovering a sparse signal contaminated
with an arbitrary noise vector of bounded norm.
Let us begin with a model for our ideal signals. We will use
this model for examples throughout the paper. Fix a -coherent
dictionary containing atoms in a real signal space of di-
mension , and place the coherence bound .
Each ideal signal is a linear combination of atoms with
coefficients of . To formalize things, select to be any
nonempty index set containing atoms. Let be a coeffi-
cient vector supported on , and let the nonzero entries of
equal . Then each ideal signal takes the form .
To correctly recover one of these signals, it is necessary to
determine the support set of the optimal coefficient vector as
well as the signs of the nonzero coefficients.
Observe that the total number of ideal signals is
since the choice of atoms and the choice of coefficients both
carry information. The coherence estimate in Proposition 26 al-
lows us to establish that the power of each ideal signal
satisfies
1038 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
Similarly, no ideal signal has power less than .
In this example, we will form input signals by contaminating
the ideal signals with an arbitrary noise vector of bounded
norm, say . Therefore, we measure a signal of the
form
We would like to apply Corollary 9 to find circumstances in
which the minimizer of ( - ) identifies the ideal
signal. That is, . Observe that this is a
concrete example of the model problem from the Introduction.
First, let us determine when the Correlation Condition holds
for . According to the Pythagorean Theorem
Therefore, . Each atom has unit norm, so
Referring to the paragraph after Corollary 9, we see that the
correlation condition is in force if we select . Invoking
Corollary 9, we discover that the minimizer of ( - )
with parameter is supported inside and also that
(17)
Meanwhile, we may calculate that
The coherence bound in Proposition 26 delivers
(18)
In consequence of the triangle inequality and the bounds (17)
and (18)
It follows that provided that
In conclusion, the convex program ( - ) can always re-
cover the ideal signals provided that the norm of the noise is
less than . At this noise level, the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) is no greater than
SNR
Similarly, the SNR is no smaller than . Note that
the SNR grows linearly with the number of atoms in the signal.
Let us consider some specific numbers. Suppose that we are
working in a signal space with dimension , that the dic-
tionary contains atoms, that the coherence ,
and that the sparsity level . We can recover any of the
ideal signals provided that the noise level . For the
supremal value of , the SNR lies between 17.74 and 20.76 dB.
The total number of ideal signals is just over , so each one
encodes 68 bits of information.
On the other hand, if we have a statistical model for the noise,
we can obtain good performance even when the noise level is
substantially higher. In the next subsection, we will describe an
example of this stunning phenomenon.
D. Example: The Gaussian Channel
A striking application of penalization is to recover a sparse
signal contaminated with Gaussian noise. The fundamental
reason this method succeeds is that, with high probability, the
noise is weakly correlated with every atom in the dictionary
(provided that the number of atoms is subexponential in the
dimension ). Note that Fuchs has developed qualitative results
for this type of problem in his conference publication [26]; see
Section VI-B for some additional details on his work.
Let us continue with the ideal signals described in the last
subsection. This time, the ideal signals are corrupted by adding
a zero-mean Gaussian random vector with covariance matrix
. We measure the signal
and we wish to identify . In other words, a codeword is sent
through a Gaussian channel, and we must decode the transmis-
sion. We will approach this problem by solving the convex pro-
gram ( - ) with an appropriate choice of to obtain a
minimizer .
One may establish the following facts about this signal model
and the performance of convex relaxation.
• For each ideal signal, the SNR satisfies
SNR
• The capacity of a Gaussian channel [28, Ch. 10] at this
SNR is no greater than
• For our ideal signals, the number of bits per transmission
equals
• The probability that convex relaxation correctly identifies
the ideal signal exceeds
It follows that the failure probability decays exponentially
as the noise power drops to zero.
To establish the first item, we compare the power of the ideal sig-
nals against the power of the noise, which is . To determine
the likelihood of success, we must find the probability (over the
noise) that the Correlation Condition is in force so that we can
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1039
invoke Corollary 9. Then, we must ensure that the noise does
not corrupt the coefficients enough to obscure their signs. The
difficult calculations are consigned to Appendix IV-A.
We return to the same example from the last subsection. Sup-
pose that we are working in a signal space with dimension
, that the dictionary contains atoms, that the coher-
ence , and that the sparsity level is . Assume
that the noise level , which is about as large as we
can reliably handle. In this case, a good choice for the param-
eter is . With these selections, the SNR is between 7.17
and 10.18 dB, and the channel capacity does not exceed 1.757
bits per transmission. Meanwhile, we are sending about 0.267
bits per transmission, and the probability of perfect recovery ex-
ceeds 95% over the noise. Although there is now a small failure
probability, let us emphasize that the SNR in this example is
over 10 dB lower than in the last example. This improvement
is possible because we have accounted for the direction of the
noise.
Let us be honest. This example still does not inspire much
confidence in our coding scheme: the theoretical rate we have
established is nowhere near the actual capacity of the channel.
The shortcoming, however, is not intrinsic to the coding scheme.
To obtain rates close to capacity, it is necessary to send linear
combinations whose length is on the order of the signal di-
mension . Experiments indicate that convex relaxation can in-
deed recover linear combinations of this length. But the anal-
ysis to support these empirical results requires tools much more
sophisticated than the coherence parameter. We hope to pursue
these ideas in a later work.
E. Example: Subset Selection
Statisticians often wish to predict the value of one random
variable using a linear combination of other random variables.
At the same time, they must negotiate a compromise between
the number of variables involved and the mean-squared predic-
tion error to avoid overfitting. The problem of determining the
correct variables is called subset selection, and it was probably
the first type of sparse approximation to be studied in depth.
As Miller laments, statisticians have made limited theoretical
progress due to numerous complications that arise in the sto-
chastic setting [4, Prefaces].
We will consider a deterministic version of subset selection
that manages a simple tradeoff between the squared approxi-
mation error and the number of atoms that participate. Let be
an arbitrary input signal. Suppose is a threshold that quantifies
how much improvement in the approximation error is necessary
before we admit an additional term into the approximation. We
may state the formal problem
(Subset)
Were the support of fixed, then (Subset) would be a
least-squares problem. Selecting the optimal support, how-
ever, is a combinatorial nightmare. In fact, if the dictionary is
unrestricted, it must be NP-hard to solve (Subset) in conse-
quence of results from [12], [16].
The statistics literature contains dozens of algorithmic ap-
proaches to subset selection, which [4] describes in detail. A
method that has recently become popular is the lasso, which
replaces the difficult subset selection problem with a convex re-
laxation of the form ( - ) in hope that the solutions will
be related [42]. Our example provides a rigorous justification
that this approach can succeed. If we have some basic informa-
tion about the solution to (Subset), then we may approximate
this solution using ( - ) with an appropriate choice of
.
We will invoke Theorem 8 to show that the solution to the
convex relaxation has the desired properties. To do so, we re-
quire a theorem about the behavior of solutions to the subset
selection problem. The proof appears in Appendix V.
Theorem 12: Fix an input signal , and choose a threshold .
Suppose that the coefficient vector solves the subset selec-
tion problem, and set .
• For , we have .
• For , we have .
In consequence of this theorem, any solution to the
subset selection problem satisfies the Correlation Condition
with , provided that is chosen so that
Applying Theorem 8 yields the following result.
Corollary 13 (Relaxed Subset Selection): Fix an input signal
. Suppose that
• the vector solves (Subset) with threshold ;
• the set satisfies ; and
• the coefficient vector solves ( - ) with param-
eter .
Then it follows that
• the relaxation never selects a nonoptimal atom since
• the solution to the relaxation is nearly optimal since
• In particular, contains every index for which
• Moreover, is the unique solution to ( - ).
In words, if any solution to the subset selection problem sat-
isfies a condition on the Exact Recovery Coefficient, then the
solution to the convex relaxation ( - ) for an appropri-
ately chosen parameter will identify every significant atom in
that solution to (Subset) and it will never involve any atom that
does not belong in that optimal solution.
It is true that, in the present form, the hypotheses of this corol-
lary may be difficult to verify. Invoking Corollary 9 instead of
Theorem 8 would yield a more practical result involving the co-
herence parameter. Nevertheless, this result would still involve
a strong assumption on the sparsity of an optimal solution to the
subset selection problem. It is not clear that one could verify this
hypothesis in practice, so it may be better to view these results
as philosophical support for the practice of convex relaxation.
1040 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
For an incoherent dictionary, one could develop a converse
result of the following shape.
Suppose that the solution to the convex relaxation
( - ) is sufficiently sparse, has large enough
coefficients, and yields a good approximation of the input
signal. Then the solution to the relaxation must approxi-
mate an optimal solution to (Subset).
As this paper was being completed, it came to the author’s at-
tention that Gribonval et al. have developed some results of this
type [43]. Their theory should complement the present work
nicely.
V. ERROR-CONSTRAINED MINIMIZATION
Suppose that is an input signal. In this section, we study
applications of the convex program.
subject to -
Minimizing the norm of the coefficients promotes sparsity,
while the parameter controls how much approximation error
we are willing to tolerate.
We will begin with a theorem that yields significant informa-
tion about the solution to ( - ). Then, we will tour several
different applications of this optimization problem. As a first
example, we will see that it can recover a sparse signal that has
been contaminated with an arbitrary noise vector of bounded
norm. Afterward, we show that a statistical model for the
bounded noise allows us to sharpen our analysis significantly.
Third, we describe an application to a sparse approximation
problem that arises in numerical analysis.
The literature does not contain many papers that apply the
convex program ( - ). Indeed, the other optimization
problem ( - ) is probably more useful. Nevertheless,
there is one notable study [18] of the theoretical performance
of ( - ). This article will be discussed in more detail in
Section VI-B.
Let us conclude this introduction by mentioning some of the
basic properties of ( - ). As the parameter approaches
zero, the solutions will approach a point of minimal norm
in the affine space . On the other hand, as soon
as exceeds , the unique solution to ( - ) is the zero
vector.
A. Performance of ( - )
The following theorem describes the behavior of a minimizer
of ( - ). In particular, it provides conditions under which
the support of the minimizer is contained in a specific index set
. We reserve the proof until Section V-E.
Theorem 14: Let index a linearly independent collection
of atoms for which , and fix an input signal .
Select an error tolerance no smaller than
Let solve the convex program ( - ) with tolerance .
We may conclude the following.
• The support of is contained in , and
• the distance between and the optimal coefficient vector
satisfies
• In particular, contains every index from for which
• Moreover, the minimizer is unique.
In words, if the parameter is chosen somewhat larger than
the error in the optimal approximation , then the solution to
( - ) identifies every significant atom in and it never
picks an incorrect atom. Note that the manuscript [18] refers to
the first conclusion as a support result and the second conclusion
as a stability result.
To invoke the theorem, it is necessary to choose the param-
eter carefully. Our examples will show how this can be accom-
plished in several specific cases. Using the coherence parameter,
it is possible to state a somewhat simpler result.
Corollary 15: Suppose that , and assume that lists
no more than atoms. Suppose that is an input signal, and
choose the error tolerance no smaller than
Let solve ( - ) with tolerance . We may conclude that
. Furthermore, we have
Proof: The corollary follows directly from the theorem
when we apply the coherence bounds from Appendix III.
This corollary takes a most satisfying form under the assump-
tion that . In that case, if we choose the tolerance
then we may conclude that .
B. Example: Identifying Sparse Signals in Noise (Redux)
In Section IV-C, we showed that ( - ) can be used to
solve the inverse problem of recovering sparse signals corrupted
with arbitrary noise of bounded magnitude. This example will
demonstrate that ( - ) can be applied to the same problem.
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1041
We proceed with the same ideal signals described in Sec-
tion IV-C. For reference, we quickly repeat the particulars. Fix
a -coherent dictionary containing atoms in a -dimen-
sional real signal space, and assume that . Let index
atoms, and let be a coefficient vector supported on
whose nonzero entries equal . Each ideal signal takes the
form .
In this example, the ideal signals are contaminated by an un-
known vector with norm no greater than to obtain an input
signal
We wish to apply Corollary 15 to determine when the minimizer
of ( - ) can identify the ideal signals. That is,
.
First, we must determine what tolerance to use for the
convex program. Since there is no information on the direction
of the residual, we must use the bound . As
in Section IV-C, the norm of the residual satisfies .
Therefore, we may choose .
Invoke Corollary 15 to determine that the support of is
contained in and that
A modification of the argument in Section IV-C yields
Proposition 26 provides an upper bound for this operator norm,
from which we conclude that
The triangle inequality furnishes
Recalling the value of , we have
Therefore, provided that
Note that this upper bound decreases as increases.
Let us consider the same specific example as before. Suppose
that we are working in a real signal space of dimension
, that the dictionary contains atoms, that the coherence
level , and that the level of sparsity . Then we
may select . To recover the sign of each
coefficient, we need . At this noise level, the SNR
is between 23.34 and 26.35 dB. On comparing this example
with Section IV-C, it appears that ( - ) provides a more
robust method for recovering our ideal signals.
The manuscript [18] of Donoho et al. contains some results
related to Corollary 15. That article splits Corollary 15 into
two pieces. Their Theorem 6.1 guarantees that the minimizer of
( - ) has the desired support properties, while their The-
orem 3.1 ensures that the minimizer approximates , the op-
timal coefficient vector. We will use our running example to il-
lustrate a difference between their theory and ours. Their sup-
port result also requires that to ensure that the support
of the minimizer is contained in the ideal support. Their sta-
bility result requires that , so it does not allow us to
reach any conclusions about the distance between and .
C. Example: A Uniform Channel
A compelling application of Theorem 14 is to recover a sparse
signal that is polluted by uniform noise with bounded norm.
As before, the fundamental reason that convex relaxation suc-
ceeds is that, with high probability, the noise is weakly cor-
related with every atom in the dictionary. This subsection de-
scribes a simple example that parallels the case of Gaussian
noise.
We retain the same model for our ideal signals. This time, we
add a random vector that is uniformly distributed over the
ball of radius . The measured signals look like
In words, we transmit a codeword through a (somewhat un-
usual) communication channel. Of course, we will attempt to re-
cover the ideal signal by solving ( - ) with an appropriate
tolerance to obtain a minimizer . The minimizer cor-
rectly identifies the optimal coefficients if and only if
.
Let be an auxiliary parameter, and suppose that we choose
the tolerance
We may establish the following facts about the minimizer of
( - ).
• The probability (over the noise) that we may invoke
Corollary 15 exceeds
• In this event, we conclude that and that
• the distance between the coefficient vectors satisfies
In particular, whenever
To calculate the success probability, we must study the distri-
bution of the correlation between the noise and the nonoptimal
atoms. We relegate the difficult calculations to Appendix IV-B.
The other two items were established in the last subsection.
Let us do the numbers. Suppose that we are working in a real
signal space of dimension , that the dictionary contains
atoms, that the coherence level , and that
the level of sparsity . To invoke Corollary 15 with prob-
ability greater than 95% over the noise, it suffices to choose
1042 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
. This corresponds to the selection .
In the event that the corollary applies, we recover the index set
and the signs of the coefficients provided that . At
this noise level, the SNR is between 16.79 and 19.80 dB.
Once again, by taking the direction of the noise into account,
we have been able to improve substantially on the more naïve
approach described in the last subsection. In contrast, none of
the results in [18] account for the direction of the noise.
D. Example: Error-Constrained Sparse Approximation
In numerical analysis, a common problem is to approximate
or interpolate a complicated function using a short linear combi-
nation of more elementary functions. The approximation must
not commit too great an error. At the same time, one pays for
each additional term in the linear combination whenever the ap-
proximation is evaluated. Therefore, one may wish to maximize
the sparsity of the approximation subject to an error constraint
[16].
Suppose that is an arbitrary input signal, and fix an error
level . The sparse approximation problem we have described
may be stated as
subject to (19)
Observe that this mathematical program will generally have
many solutions that use the same number of atoms but yield dif-
ferent approximation errors. The solutions will always become
sparser as the error tolerance increases. Instead, we consider
the more convoluted mathematical program
subject to ( Error)
Any minimizer of (Error) also solves (19), but it produces the
smallest approximation error possible at that level of sparsity.
We will attempt to produce a solution to the error-constrained
sparse approximation problem by solving the convex program
( - ) for a value of somewhat larger than . Our major
result shows that, under appropriate conditions, this procedure
approximates the solution of (Error).
Corollary 16 (Relaxed Sparse Approximation): Fix an input
signal . Suppose that
• the vector solves (Error) with tolerance ;
• the set satisfies the condition
; and
• the vector solves the convex relaxation ( - ) with
threshold such that
Then it follows that
• the relaxation never selects a nonoptimal atom since
• yet is no sparser than a solution to (Error) with toler-
ance ;
• the solution of the relaxation is nearly optimal since
• in particular, contains every index for which
• Moreover, is the unique solution of ( - ).
Proof: Note that (Error) delivers a maximally sparse
vector in the set . Since is also in
this set, it certainly cannot be any sparser. The other claims
follow directly by applying Theorem 14 to with the index set
. We also use the facts that
and that the maximum correlation function never exceeds one.
Thus, we conclude the proof.
It may be somewhat difficult to verify the hypotheses of this
corollary. In consequence, it might be better to view the result
as a philosophical justification for the practice of convex relax-
ation.
In the present setting, there is a sort of converse to Corollary
16 that follows from the work in [18]. This result allows us to
verify that a solution to the convex relaxation approximates the
solution to (Error).
Proposition 17: Assume that the dictionary has coherence
, and let be an input signal. Suppose that is a coefficient
vector whose support contains indices, where , and
suppose that
Then we may conclude that the optimal solution to (Error)
with tolerance satisfies
Proof: Theorem 2.12 of [18] can be rephrased as follows.
Suppose that
and
and
Then . We may apply this result in the
present context by making several observations.
If has sparsity level , then the optimal solution to
(Error) with tolerance certainly has a sparsity level no greater
than . Set , and apply [18, Lemma 2.8] to see
that .
More results of this type would be extremely valuable, be-
cause they make it possible to verify that a given coefficient
vector approximates the solution to (Error). For the most recent
developments, we refer the reader to the report [43].
E. Proof of Theorem 14
Now we demonstrate that Theorem 14 holds. This argument
takes some work because we must check the KKT necessary
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1043
and sufficient conditions for a solution to the convex program
( - ).
Proof: Suppose that indexes a linearly independent col-
lection of atoms and that . Fix an input signal ,
and choose a tolerance so that
(20)
This is the same bound as in the statement of the theorem, but
it has been rewritten in a more convenient fashion. Without loss
of generality, take . Otherwise, the unique solution to
( - ) is the zero vector.
Consider the restricted minimization problem
subject to (21)
Since the objective function and the constraint set are both
convex, the KKT conditions are necessary and sufficient [34,
Ch. 28]. They guarantee that the (unique) minimizer of the
program (21) satisfies
(22)
(23)
where is a strictly positive Lagrange multiplier. If we define
, then we may rewrite (22) as
(24)
We will show that is also a global minimizer of the convex
program ( - ).
Since is the best approximation of using the atoms
in and the signal is also a linear combination of atoms
in , it follows that the vectors and are
orthogonal to each other. Applying the Pythagorean Theorem to
(23), we obtain
whence
(25)
The coefficient vector also satisfies the hypotheses of Corol-
lary 5, and therefore we obtain
Substituting (25) into this relation, we obtain a lower bound
on
Next, we introduce (20) into this inequality and make extensive
(but obvious) simplifications to reach
In view of this fact, the Correlation Condition Lemma allows
us to conclude that is the (unique) global minimizer of the
convex program
Dividing through by , we discover that
Since we also have (23) and , it follows that satisfies
the KKT sufficient conditions for a minimizer of
subject to -
Therefore, we have identified a global minimizer of ( - ).
Now we must demonstrate that the coefficient vector pro-
vides the unique minimizer of the convex program. This requires
some work because we have not shown that every minimizer
must be supported on .
Suppose that is another coefficient vector that solves
( - ). First, we argue that by assuming the
contrary. Since , the error constraint in ( - ) is
binding at every solution. In particular, we must have
Since balls are strictly convex
It follows that the coefficient vector cannot solve
( - ). Yet the solutions to a convex program must form a
convex set, which is a contradiction.
Next, observe that and share the same norm be-
cause they both solve ( - ). Under our hypothesis that
, Corollary 11 states that is the unique solu-
tion to the program
subject to
Thus, . We conclude that is the unique minimizer of
the convex relaxation.
Finally, let us estimate how far deviates from . We begin
with (25), which can be written as
The right-hand side clearly does not exceed , while the left-
hand side may be bounded below as
Combine the two bounds and rearrange to complete the
argument.
VI. DISCUSSION
This final section attempts to situate the work of this paper
in context. To that end, it describes some results for another
sparse approximation algorithm, Orthogonal Matching Pursuit,
that are parallel with our results for convex relaxation. Then
1044 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
we discuss some recent manuscripts that contain closely related
results for convex relaxation. Afterward, some extensions and
new directions for research are presented. We conclude with a
vision for the future of sparse approximation.
A. Related Results for Orthogonal Matching Pursuit
Another basic technique for sparse approximation is a greedy
algorithm called Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) [12],
[44]. At each iteration, this method selects the atom most
strongly correlated with the residual part of the signal. Then
it forms the best approximation of the signal using the atoms
already chosen, and it repeats the process until a stopping
criterion is met.
The author feels that it is instructive to compare the the-
oretical performance of convex relaxation against OMP, so
this subsection offers two theorems about the behavior of the
greedy algorithm. We extract the following result from [45,
Theorem 5.3].
Theorem 18 (Tropp–Gilbert–Strauss): Suppose that con-
tains no more than indices, where . Suppose that
is an input signal whose best approximation over satisfies the
correlation condition
Apply OMP to the input signal, and halt the algorithm at the end
of iteration if the maximum correlation between the computed
residual and the dictionary satisfies
We may conclude the following.
• The algorithm has selected indices from , and
• it has chosen every index from for which
• Moreover, the absolute error in the computed approxima-
tion satisfies
Note that this theorem relies on the coherence parameter, and
no available version describes the behavior of the algorithm in
terms of more fundamental dictionary attributes. Compare this
result with Corollary 9 for ( - ).
There is also a result for OMP that parallels Corollary 15 for
( - ). We quote Theorem 5.9 from [33].
Theorem 19 (Tropp): Let index a linearly independent col-
lection of atoms for which . Suppose that is an
input signal, and let be a number no smaller than
Suppose that we apply OMP to the input signal, and we halt the
algorithm at the end of iteration if the norm of the computed
residual satisfies
Then we may conclude that the algorithm has chosen indices
from , and (obviously) the error in the calculated approxima-
tion satisfies .
It is remarkable how closely results for the greedy algorithm
correspond with our theory for convex relaxation. The paper
[18] contains some related results for OMP.
B. Comparison With Related Work
As the first draft [25] of the present work was being released,
several other researchers independently developed some closely
related results [18], [26], [27]. This subsection provides a short
guide to these other manuscripts.
In [26], Fuchs has studied the qualitative performance of the
penalty method for the problem of recovering a sparse signal
contaminated with zero-mean, white Gaussian noise. Fuchs
shows that the minimizer of ( - ) correctly identifies
all of the atoms that participate in the sparse signal, provided
that the SNR is high enough and the parameter is suitably
chosen. He suggests that quantifying the analysis would be
difficult. The example in Section IV-D of this paper shows that
his pessimism is unwarranted.
Later, Fuchs extended his approach to study the behavior of
the penalty method for recovering a sparse signal corrupted
by an unknown noise vector of bounded norm [26]. Theorem
4 of his paper provides a quantitative result in terms of the co-
herence parameter. The theorem states that solving ( - )
correctly identifies all of the atoms that participate in the sparse
signal, provided that none of the ideal coefficients are too small
and that the parameter is chosen correctly. It is possible to ob-
tain the same result as an application of our Theorem 8.
The third manuscript [18] provides a sprawling analysis of
the performance of (19), ( - ), and OMP for the problem
of recovering a sparse signal polluted by an unknown
noise vector whose norm does not exceed . It is difficult to
summarize their work in such a small space, but we will touch
on the highlights.
• Their Theorem 2.1 shows that any solution to (19) with
tolerance satisfies
where the constant depends on the coherence of the
dictionary and the sparsity of the ideal signal.
• Theorem 3.1 shows that any solution to ( - ) with
tolerance satisfies
where the constant also depends on the coherence and
the sparsity levels.
• Theorem 6.1 is analogous with Corollary 15 of this paper.
Their result, however, is much weaker because it does not
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1045
take into account the direction of the noise, and it esti-
mates everything in terms of the coherence parameter.
The most significant contributions of [18], therefore, are prob-
ably their stability results, Theorems 2.1 and 3.1, which are not
paralleled elsewhere.
We hope this section indicates how these three papers illumi-
nate different facets of convex relaxation. Along with the present
work, they form a strong foundation for the theoretical perfor-
mance of convex relaxation methods.
C. Extensions
There are many different ways to generalize the work in this
paper. This subsection surveys some of the most promising di-
rections.
1) The Correlation Condition: In this paper, we have not
used the full power of Lemma 6, the Correlation Condition. In
particular, we never exploited the subgradient that appears in the
first sufficient condition. It is possible to strengthen our results
significantly by taking this subgradient into account. Due to the
breadth of the present work, we have chosen not to burden the
reader with these results.
2) Beyond Coherence: Another shortcoming of the present
approach is the heavy reliance on the coherence parameter to
make estimates. Several recent works [46]–[50] have exploited
methods from Banach space geometry to study the average-case
performance of convex relaxation, and they have obtained re-
sults that far outstrip simple coherence bounds. None of these
works, however, contains theory about recovering the correct
support of a synthetic sparse signal polluted with noise. The au-
thor considers this to be one of the most important open ques-
tions in sparse approximation.
3) Other Error Norms: One can imagine situations where
the norm is not the most appropriate way to measure the error
in approximating the input signal. Indeed, it may be more effec-
tive to use the convex program
(26)
where . Intuitively, large will force the approxima-
tion to be close to the signal in every component, while small
will make the approximation more tolerant to outliers. Mean-
while, the penalty on the coefficients will promote sparsity
of the coefficients. The case has recently been studied
in [51]. See also [52], [53].
To analyze the behavior of (26), we might follow the same
path as in Section III. For a given index set , we would charac-
terize the solution to the convex program when the feasible set is
restricted to vectors supported on . Afterward, we would per-
turb this solution in a single component outside to develop a
condition which ensures that the restricted minimizer is indeed
the global minimizer. The author has made some progress with
this approach for the case , but no detailed results are
presently available.
4) Bregman Divergences: Suppose that is a differentiable,
convex function. Associated with is a directed distance mea-
sure called a Bregman divergence. The divergence of from
is defined as
The most common examples of Bregman divergences are
the squared distance and the (generalized) information
divergence. Like these prototypes, a Bregman divergence has
many attractive properties with respect to best approximation
[54]. Moreover, there is a one-to-one correspondence between
Bregman divergences and exponential families of probability
distributions [55].
In the model problem, suppose that the noise vector is
drawn from the exponential family connected with the Bregman
divergence . To solve the problem, it is natural to apply the
convex program
(27)
Remarkably, the results in this paper can be adapted for (27)
with very little effort. This coup is possible because Bregman di-
vergences exhibit behavior perfectly analogous with the squared
norm.
5) The Elastic Net: The statistics literature contains several
variants of ( - ). In particular, Zuo and Hastie have
studied the following convex relaxation method for subset se-
lection [56]:
(28)
They call this optimization problem the elastic net. Roughly
speaking, it promotes sparsity without permitting the coeffi-
cients to become too large. It would be valuable to study the
solutions to (28) using our methods.
6) Simultaneous Sparse Approximation: Suppose that we
had several different observations of a sparse signal contami-
nated with additive noise. One imagines that we could use the
extra observations to produce a better estimate for the ideal
signal. This problem is called simultaneous sparse approx-
imation. The papers [45], [57]–[60] discuss algorithms for
approaching this challenging problem.
D. Conclusions
Even though convex relaxation has been applied for more
than 30 years, the present results have little precedent in the
published literature because they apply to the important case
where a sparse signal is contaminated by noise. Indeed, we
have seen conclusively that convex relaxation can be used to
solve the model problem in a variety of concrete situations. We
have also shown that convex relaxation offers a viable approach
to the subset selection problem and the error-constrained sparse
approximation problem. These examples were based on de-
tailed general theory that describes the behavior of minimizers
to the optimization problems ( - ) and ( - ). This
theory also demonstrates that the efficacy of convex relaxation
is related intimately to the geometric properties of the dictio-
nary. We hope that this report will have a significant impact on
the practice of convex relaxation because it proves how these
methods will behave in realistic problem settings.
Nevertheless, this discussion section makes it clear that there
is an enormous amount of work that remains to be done. But
as Vergil reminds us, “Tantae molis erat Romanam condere
gentem.” Such a burden it was to establish the Roman race.
1046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
APPENDIX I
A BRIEF HISTORY OF RELAXATION
The ascendance of convex relaxation for sparse approx-
imation was propelled by two theoretical–technological
developments of the last half century. First, the philosophy and
methodology of robust statistics—which derive from work of
von Neumann, Tukey, and Huber—show that loss criteria
can be applied to defend statistical estimators against outlying
data points. Robust estimators qualitatively prefer a few large
errors and many tiny errors to the armada of moderate devia-
tions introduced by mean-squared-error criteria. Second, the
elevation during the 1950s of linear programming to the level of
technology and the interior-point revolution of the 1980s have
made it both tractable and commonplace to solve the large-scale
optimization problems that arise from convex relaxation.
It appears that a 1973 paper of Claerbout and Muir is the cru-
cible in which these reagents were first combined for the express
goal of yielding a sparse representation [15]. They write:
In deconvolving any observed seismic trace, it is rather
disappointing to discover that there is a nonzero spike at
every point in time regardless of the data sampling rate.
One might hope to find spikes only where real geologic
discontinuities take place. Perhaps the norm can be uti-
lized to give a [sparse] output trace .
This idea was subsequently developed in the geophysics lit-
erature [5], [61], [62]. Santosa and Symes, in 1986, proposed
the convex relaxation ( - ) as a method for recovering
sparse spike trains, and they proved that the method succeeds
under moderate restrictions [35].
Around 1990, the work on criteria in signal processing re-
cycled to the statistics community. Donoho and Johnstone wrote
a trailbreaking paper which proved that one could determine
a nearly optimal minimax estimate of a smooth function con-
taminated with noise by solving ( - ) with the dictio-
nary an appropriate wavelet basis and the parameter related
to the variance of the noise. Slightly later, Tibshirani proposed
this convex program, which he calls the lasso, as a method for
solving the subset selection problems in linear regression [42].
From here, it is only a short step to Basis Pursuit and Basis Pur-
suit denoising [9].
This history could not be complete without mention of
parallel developments in the theoretical computer sciences. It
has long been known that some combinatorial problems are
intimately bound up with continuous convex programming
problems. In particular, the problem of determining the max-
imum value that an affine function attains at some vertex of a
polytope can be solved using a linear program [63]. A major
theme in modern computer science is that many other combi-
natorial problems can be solved approximately by means of
convex relaxation. For example, a celebrated paper of Goemans
and Williamson proves that a certain convex program can be
used to produce a graph cut whose weight exceeds 87% of
the maximum cut [64]. The present work draws deeply on the
fundamental idea that a combinatorial problem and its convex
relaxation often have closely related solutions.
APPENDIX II
IS THE ERC NECESSARY?
Corollary 10 shows that if , then any superpo-
sition of atoms from can be recovered using ( - ) for
a sufficiently small penalty . The following theorem demon-
strates that this type of result cannot hold if . It
follows from results of Feuer and Nemirovsky [65] that there
are dictionaries in which some sparse signals cannot be recov-
ered by means of ( - ).
Theorem 20: Suppose that . Then we may con-
struct an input signal that has an exact representation using the
atoms in and yet the minimizer of the function (L) is not sup-
ported on when is small.
Proof: Since , there must exist an atom
for which even though . Perversely, we
select the input signal to be . We can synthesize
exactly with the atoms in by means of the coefficient vector
.
According to Corollary 5, the minimizer of the function
over all coefficient vectors supported on must satisfy
Since by construction, we may choose small
enough that the bound is also in force. Define the
corresponding approximation .
Now we construct a parameterized coefficient vector
for in
For positive , it is clear that the support of is not contained
in . We will prove that for small, positive .
Since minimizes over all coefficient vectors supported on
, no global minimizer of can be supported on .
To proceed, calculate that
Differentiate this expression with respect to and evaluate the
derivative at
By construction of , the second term is negative. The first term
is nonpositive because
Therefore, the derivative is negative, and
for small, positive . Observe that to complete the
argument.
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1047
APPENDIX III
COHERENCE BOUNDS
In this appendix, we collect some coherence bounds from
Section III of the technical report [25]. These results help us
to understand the behavior of subdictionary synthesis matrices.
We begin with a bound for the singular values.
Proposition 21: Suppose that , and assume
that . Each singular value of the matrix satisfies
The last result yields a useful new estimate.
Proposition 22: Suppose that , and assume that
. Then . Equivalently,
the rows have norms no greater than .
Proof: Recall that the operator norm calculates
the maximum norm among the rows of . It is easy to see
that this operator norm is bounded above by , the max-
imum singular value of . But the maximum singular value
of is the reciprocal of the minimum singular value of .
Proposition 21 provides a lower bound on this singular value,
which completes the argument.
We also require another norm estimate on the pseudoinverse.
Proposition 23: Suppose that and .
Then
The next result bounds an operator norm of the Gram matrix.
Proposition 24: Suppose that and .
Then
We conclude by estimating the Exact Recovery Coefficient.
Proposition 25: Suppose that , where . A
lower bound on the Exact Recovery Coefficient is
APPENDIX IV
DETAILS OF CHANNEL CODING EXAMPLES
This appendix contains the gory details behind the channel
coding examples from Sections IV-D and V-C. In preparation,
let us recall the model for ideal signals. We work with a -co-
herent dictionary containing atoms in a -dimensional real
signal space. For each set that lists atoms, we consider coef-
ficient vectors supported on whose nonzero entries equal
. Each ideal signal has the form .
It will be handy to have some numerical bounds on the quan-
tities that arise. Using the estimates in Appendix III, we obtain
the following bounds.
Proposition 26: Suppose that indexes a subdictionary con-
taining atoms, where . Then the following bounds
are in force.
• .
• .
• .
• The rows of have norms no greater than .
A. The Gaussian Channel
In this example, we attempt to recover an ideal signal from a
measurement of the form
where is a zero-mean Gaussian random vector with covariance
matrix . We study the performance of ( - ) for this
problem.
First, consider the event that Corollary 9 applies. In other
words, it is necessary to compute the probability that the Corre-
lation Condition is in force, i.e.,
where . To that end, we will develop a lower
bound on the probability
Observe that . Use ad-
jointness to transfer the projector to the other side of the inner
product, and scale by to obtain
where is a zero-mean Gaussian vector with identity covari-
ance. A direct application of Sidak’s lemma [66, Lemma 2]
yields a lower bound on this probability
The atoms have unit norm, so the norm of does not
exceed one. Therefore,
Suppose that is an arbitrary unit vector. Integrating the
Gaussian kernel over the hyperplane yields the bound
(29)
Apply (29) in our bound for , and exploit the fact that the
product contains identical terms to reach
1048 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
In words, we have developed a lower bound on the probability
that the correlation condition holds so that we may apply Corol-
lary 9.
Assume that the conclusions of Corollary 9 are in force. In
particular, and also . The
upper triangle inequality implies that
Each nonzero component of equals , so the corre-
sponding component of has the same sign provided that
We will bound the probability that this event occurs. By defini-
tion, , which yields
It follows that the noise contaminating depends only on ,
which is independent from . We calculate
that
where is a Gaussian random vector with identity covariance.
Applying Sidak’s lemma again, we obtain
The norm of each row of is bounded above by .
Renormalizing each row and applying (29) gives
where denotes any fixed unit vector.
The event that we may apply the corollary and the event that
the coefficients in are sufficiently large are independent from
each other. We may conclude that the probability of both events
occurring is . Hence,
Using the inequality , which holds for
and , we see that the failure probability satisfies
In particular, the failure probability decays exponentially as the
noise power approaches zero. If the noise level is known, it is
possible to optimize this expression over to find the parameter
that minimizes the probability of failure.
B. A Uniform Channel
In this example, we attempt to recover ideal signals from mea-
surements of the form
where is uniformly distributed on the ball of radius . We
study the performance of ( - ) for this problem.
Let . First, observe that the residual vector
can be rewritten as
so the norm of the residual does not exceed . According to
the remarks after Corollary 15, we should select no smaller
than
The rest of the example will prove that the maximum correla-
tion exhibits a concentration phenomenon: it is rather small with
high probability. Therefore, we can choose much closer to
than a naïve analysis would suggest.
To begin the calculation, rewrite
It is not hard to check that is a spherically symmetric
random variable on the orthogonal complement of .
Therefore, the random variable
is uniformly distributed on the unit sphere of , which is
a -dimensional subspace. In consequence,
has the same distribution as the random variable
Now, let us bound the probability that the maximum correla-
tion is larger than some number . In symbols, we seek
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1049
Fix an index , and consider
Since is spherically symmetric, this probability cannot depend
on the direction of the vector . Moreover, the proba-
bility only increases when we increase the length of this vector.
It follows that we may replace by an arbitrary unit
vector from . Therefore,
The probability can be interpreted geometrically as the fraction
of the sphere covered by a pair of spherical caps. Since we are
working in a subspace of dimension , each of the two
caps covers no more than of the sphere [67,
Lemma 2.2]. Therefore,
Since we can write , we
conclude that the choice
allows us to invoke Theorem 14 with probability greater than
over the noise.
APPENDIX V
SOLUTIONS TO (Subset)
In this appendix, we establish Theorem 12, a structural result
for solutions to the subset selection problem. Recall that the
problem is
(Subset)
Now we restate the theorem and prove it.
Theorem 27: Fix an input signal and choose a threshold .
Suppose that the coefficient vector solves the subset selec-
tion problem, and set .
• For , we have .
• For , we have .
Proof: For a given input signal , suppose that the coeffi-
cient vector is a solution of (Subset) with threshold , and
define . Put , and let de-
note the orthogonal projector onto the span of the atoms in .
A quick inspection of the objective function makes it clear that
must be the best approximation of using the atoms in
. Therefore, .
We begin with the second conclusion of the theorem. Take
any index outside . The best approximation of using
the atoms in is
Orthogonal projectors are self-adjoint, so
Since the two terms are orthogonal, the Pythagorean Theorem
furnishes
The second term on the right-hand side measures how much
the squared approximation error diminishes if we add to the
approximation. Notice that the second term must be less than or
equal to , or else we could immediately construct a solution
to (Subset) that is strictly better than by using the additional
atom. Therefore,
Atoms have unit norm, and the projector only attenuates
their norms. It follows that , and so
.
The argument behind the first conclusion of the theorem is
similar. Choose an index from , and let denote the or-
thogonal projector onto the span of the atoms in .
Since , the best approximation of using
the reduced set of indices is given by
Thus, removing the atom from the approximation would in-
crease the squared error by exactly
This quantity must be at least , or else the reduced set of
atoms would afford a strictly better solution to (Subset) than
the original set. Since is an orthogonal projector,
. We conclude that .
One could obviously prove much more about the solutions of
the subset selection problem using similar techniques, but these
results are too tangential to pursue here.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to thank A. C. Gilbert and M. J. Strauss for
their patience and encouragement. The detailed and insightful
remarks of the anonymous referees prompted the author to see
his results de novo. He believes that the current work is immea-
surably better than the original submission on account of their
attention and care. Thanks also to the Austinites, who have told
the author for years that he should just relax.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gribonval and E. Bacry, “Harmonic decomposition of audio signals
with matching pursuit,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 51, no. 1, pp.
101–111, Jan. 2003.
[2] P. Frossard, P. Vandergheynst, R. M. F. i. Ventura, and M. Kunt, “A
posteriori quantization of progressive matching pursuit streams,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 525–535, Feb. 2004.
1050 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2006
[3] T. Nguyen and A. Zakhor, “matching pursuits based multiple description
video coding for lossy environments,” presented at the 2003 IEEE Int.
Conf. Image Processing, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, Sep. 2003.
[4] A. J. Miller, Subset Selection in Regression, 2nd ed. London, U.K.:
Chapman and Hall, 2002.
[5] H. L. Taylor, S. C. Banks, and J. F. McCoy, “Deconvolution with the `
norm,” Geophysics, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 39–52, 1979.
[6] J. Rissanen, “Modeling by shortest data description,” Automatica, vol.
14, pp. 465–471, 1979.
[7] M. Grote and T. Huckle, “Parallel preconditioning with sparse approxi-
mate inverses,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 838–853, 1997.
[8] F. Girosi, “An equivalence between sparse approximation and support
vector machines,” Neural Comput., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1455–1480, 1998.
[9] S. S. Chen, D. L. Donoho, and M. A. Saunders, “Atomic decomposition
by basis pursuit,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 33–61, 1999.
[10] I. Daubechies, M. Defrise, and C. D. Mol, “An iterative thresholding al-
gorithm for linear inverse problems with a sparsity constraint,” Commun.
Pure Appl. Math., vol. 57, pp. 1413–1457, 2004.
[11] B. D. Rao and K. Kreutz-Delgado, “An affine scaling methodology for
best basis selection,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 47, no. 1, pp.
187–200, Jan. 1999.
[12] G. Davis, S. Mallat, and M. Avellaneda, “Greedy adaptive approxima-
tion,” J. Constr. Approx., vol. 13, pp. 57–98, 1997.
[13] V. Temlyakov, “Nonlinear methods of approximation,” Foundations
Comput. Math., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 33–107, Jul. 2002.
[14] J. A. Tropp, “Greed is good: Algorithmic results for sparse approxima-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2231–2242, Oct. 2004.
[15] J. F. Claerbout and F. Muir, “Robust modeling of erratic data,” Geo-
physics, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 826–844, Oct. 1973.
[16] B. K. Natarajan, “Sparse approximate solutions to linear systems,” SIAM
J. Comput., vol. 24, pp. 227–234, 1995.
[17] S. Boyd and L. Vanderberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[18] D. L. Donoho, M. Elad, and V. N. Temlyakov, “Stable recovery of sparse
overcomplete representations in the presence of noise,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 6–18, Jan. 2006.
[19] D. L. Donoho and X. Huo, “Uncertainty principles and ideal atomic de-
composition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2845–2862,
Nov. 2001.
[20] M. Elad and A. M. Bruckstein, “A generalized uncertainty principle and
sparse representation in pairs of bases,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48,
no. 9, pp. 2558–2567, Sep. 2002.
[21] D. L. Donoho and M. Elad, “Maximal sparsity representation via ` min-
imization,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 100, pp. 2197–2202, Mar. 2003.
[22] R. Gribonval and M. Nielsen, “Sparse representations in unions of
bases,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3320–3325, Dec.
2003.
[23] J.-J. Fuchs, “On sparse representations in arbitrary redundant bases,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1341–1344, Jun. 2004.
[24] C. Dossal and S. Mallat, “Sparse spike deconvolution with minimum
scale,” in Proc. Signal Processing with Adaptive Sparse Structured Rep-
resentations 2005. Rennes, France, Nov. 2005, pp. 123–126.
[25] J. A. Tropp, “Just Relax: Convex Programming Methods for Subset Se-
lection and Sparse Approximation,” The Univ. Texas at Austin, ICES
Rep. 04-04, 2004.
[26] J.-J. Fuchs, “Recovery of exact sparse representations in the presence
of noise,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 2004.
[27] , “Recovery of exact sparse representations in the presence
of bounded noise,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 10, pp.
3601–3608, Oct. 2005.
[28] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New
York: Wiley, 1991.
[29] A. C. Gilbert and J. A. Tropp, “Applications of sparse approximation in
communications,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,
Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1000–1004.
[30] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985.
[31] E. Kreyszig, Introductory Functional Analysis with Applications. New
York: Wiley, 1989.
[32] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, 3rd ed. Balti-
more, MD: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1996.
[33] J. A. Tropp, “Topics in Sparse Approximation,” Ph.D. dissertation, Com-
putational and Applied Mathematics, The Univ. Texas at Austin, Aug.
2004.
[34] R. T. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ.
Press, 1970.
[35] F. Santosa and W. W. Symes, “Linear inversion of band-limited re-
flection seismograms,” SIAM J. Sci. Statist. Comput., vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
1307–1330, 1986.
[36] J.-J. Fuchs, “Extension of the Pisarenko method to sparse linear arrays,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 2413–2421, Oct. 1997.
[37] , “On the application of the global matched filter to DOA estimation
with uniform circular arrays,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 49, no.
4, pp. 702–709, Apr. 2001.
[38] B. A. Olshausen and D. J. Field, “Emergence of simple-cell receptive
field properties by learning a sparse code for natural images,” Nature,
vol. 381, pp. 607–609, 1996.
[39] D. L. Donoho and I. M. Johnstone, “Minimax Estimation via Wavelet
Shrinkage,” Stanford Univ., Statistics Dept. Tech. Rep., 1992.
[40] S. Mallat, A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, 2nd ed. London, U.K.:
Academic, 1999.
[41] J. A. Tropp, “Recovery of short, complex linear combinations via `
minimization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1568–1570,
Apr. 2005.
[42] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” J. Roy.
Statist. Soc., vol. 58, 1996.
[43] R. Gribonval, R. F. i. Venturas, and P. Vandergheynst, “A Simple Test to
Check the Optimality of a Sparse Signal Approximation,” Université de
Rennes I, Tech. Rep. 1661, Nov. 2004.
[44] Y. C. Pati, R. Rezaiifar, and P. S. Krishnaprasad, “Orthogonal matching
pursuit: Recursive function approximation with applications to wavelet
decomposition,” in Proc. 27th Annu. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems
and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 1993, pp. 40–44.
[45] J. A. Tropp, A. C. Gilbert, and M. J. Strauss, “Algorithms for simulta-
neous sparse approximation. Part I: Greedy pursuit,” EURASIP J. Signal
Process., to be published.
[46] E. Candès, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Exact Signal Reconstruction From
Highly Incomplete Frequency Information,” manuscript submitted for
publication, June 2004.
[47] E. J. Candès and J. Romberg, “Quantitative Robust Uncertainty Princi-
ples and Optimally Sparse Decompositions,” manuscript submitted for
publication, Nov. 2004.
[48] E. J. Candès and T. Tao, “Near Optimal Signal Recovery from Random
Projections: Universal Encoding Strategies?,” manuscript submitted for
publication, Nov. 2004.
[49] D. Donoho, “For Most Large Underdetermined Systems of Linear Equa-
tions, the Mimimal ` -Norm Solution is Also the Sparsest Solution,” un-
published manuscript, Sep. 2004.
[50] , “For Most Large Underdetermined Systems of Linear Equations,
the Mimimal ` -Norm Solution Approximates the Sparsest Near-Solu-
tion,” unpublished manuscript, Sep. 2004.
[51] D. L. Donoho and M. Elad, On the Stability of Basis Pursuit in the Pres-
ence of Noise, unpublished manuscript, Nov. 2004.
[52] J.-J. Fuchs, “Some further results on the recovery algorithms,” in Proc.
Signal Processing with Adaptive Sparse Structured Representations
2005. Rennes, France, Nov. 2005, pp. 87–90.
[53] L. Granai and P. Vandergheynst, “Sparse approximation by linear pro-
gramming using an l data-fidelity term,” in Proc. Signal Processing
with Adaptive Sparse Structured Representations 2005. Rennes, France,
Nov. 2005, pp. 135–138.
[54] H. H. Bauschke and J. M. Borewein, “Legendre functions and the
method of random Bregman projections,” J. Convex Anal., vol. 4, no.
1, pp. 27–67, 1997.
[55] A. Banerjee, S. Merugu, I. S. Dhillon, and J. Ghosh, “Clustering
with Bregman divergences,” in Proc. 4th SIAM Int. Conf. Data
Mining. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM, Apr. 2004.
[56] H. Zuo and T. Hastie, “Regularization and Variable Selection via the
Elastic Net,” unpublished manuscript, Sep. 2004.
[57] D. Leviatan and V. N. Temlyakov, “Simultaneous Approximation by
Greedy Algorithms,” Univ. South Carolina at Columbia, IMI Rep.
2003:02, 2003.
[58] S. Cotter, B. D. Rao, K. Engan, and K. Kreutz-Delgado, “Sparse so-
lutions of linear inverse problems with multiple measurement vectors,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2477–2488, Jul. 2005.
[59] J. Chen and X. Huo, “Theoretical Results About Finding the Sparsest
Representations of Multiple Measurement Vectors (MMV) in an Over-
complete Dictionary Using ` Minimization and Greedy Algorithms,”
manuscript submitted for publication, Oct. 2004.
[60] J. A. Tropp, “Algorithms for simultaneous sparse approximation. Part
II: Convex relaxation,” EURASIP J. Signal Process., to be published.
[61] S. Levy and P. K. Fullagar, “Reconstruction of a sparse spike train from
a portion of its spectrum and application to high-resolution deconvolu-
tion,” Geophysics, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 1235–1243, 1981.
TROPP: CONVEX PROGRAMMING METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING SPARSE SIGNALS IN NOISE 1051
[62] D. W. Oldenburg, T. Scheuer, and S. Levy, “Recovery of the acoustic
impedance from reflection seismograms,” Geophysics, vol. 48, pp.
1318–1337, 1983.
[63] C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steiglitz, Combinatorial Optimization: Al-
gorithms and Complexity. New York: Dover, 1998. Corrected republi-
cation.
[64] M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson, “Improved approximation algo-
rithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite
programming,” J. Assoc. Comput. Mach., vol. 42, pp. 1115–1145, 1995.
[65] A. Feuer and A. Nemirovsky, “On sparse representation in pairs of
bases,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 1579–1581, Jun.
2003.
[66] K. Ball, “Convex geometry and functional analysis,” in Handbook
of Banach Space Geometry, W. B. Johnson and J. Lindenstrauss,
Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2002, pp. 161–193.
[67] , “An elementary introduction to modern convex geometry,” in Fla-
vors of Geometry, ser. MSRI Publications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1997, vol. 31, pp. 1–58.

