December 2015  
Name 
 
                 
Donald K. Wagner 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
Director, Mathematical, Computer, and Information Sciences Division 
Office of Naval Research 
 
Dr. Donald K. Wagner serves as the Director for the Mathematical, Computer, and Information Sciences 
(MCIS) Division at the Office of Naval Research (ONR) in Arlington, Virginia.  MCIS is a component of 
ONR’s Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
(C4ISR) Department.  Dr. Wagner leads the planning, execution, and management of a science-and-
technology portfolio of programs in basic research, applied research, and advanced technology 
development that enable naval capabilities in C4ISR, with an approximate annual budget of $90M.  Dr. 
Wagner entered the Senior Executive Service in November 2015. 
 
Dr. Wagner first joined the Federal Civilian Service in August 1990 as the Program Officer for ONR’s 
Operations Research Program, directing basic and applied research programs in mathematical 
optimization and discrete mathematics with applications in command and control, mission planning, and 
surveillance.  In addition to his Program Officer duties, from September 2004 to September 2006, and 
again from September 2014 to October 2015, Dr. Wagner also served as the acting director for the MCIS 
division at ONR. 
 
From 1982 to 1990, prior to joining the federal government, Dr. Wagner was on the faculty of Purdue 
University in the School of Industrial Engineering.  While at Purdue University, his research was funded 
by the National Science Foundation and the Office of Naval Research.  In 1986, he took leave from 
Purdue to serve as a NATO Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institut für Operations Research und Ökonometrie 
at the Universität Bonn in Germany.  He also has held teaching positions at George Washington 
University and George Mason University (GMU), and currently is a visiting research professor at GMU. 
 
Dr. Wagner received his Bachelor’s degree from the University of Wisconsin in Mathematics in 1978. He 
received his Master’s and Doctorate degree in Operations Research from the Northwestern University in 
1980 and 1983, respectively.  
 
Dr. Wagner is the author or co-author of more than 30 journal articles and professional conference 
proceedings. He is on the Editorial Advisory Board of Naval Research Logistics, and previously held 
positions on the editorial boards of Operations Research, Mathematical Programming, Series A, and 
Mathematical Programming, Series B.  He is a member of the Mathematical Optimization Society. 

