4.  Computer Communication
     Network: E-Mail & INTERNET
Mrs. Indu Gupta
State Informatics Officer, Rajasthan
National Informatics Centre, Jaipur
India
1.  Introduction
Low cost, high computation power user friendly inter-
faces in desktops have made computers a very popular
and useful tool for wide areas of activity.  This power
remains localised at the desktop, creating an artificial
restrictive atmosphere in this age of open interactive
systems.  Communication merged with computers
makes it possible to share developments, thoughts, and
costly resources resulting in optimum utilisationof
available technology.
Any two or more computers connected together form a
computer network, which can share resources and files
with each other.  Communication models essentially
means an exchange of information using a commonly
understood set of norms known as protocols.  Because
of varied platforms and internal architecture of the sys-
tems, varied communication architecture is available
such as DNA (DEC's Distributed Network Architec-
ture), SNA (Systems Network Architecture) etc.
International Standards Organisation (ISO) developed a
reference model called OSI, Open Systems Interconnec-
tion which permits  interconnection of systems of
different options by respecting the standards and pro-
tocols of this model.  This model consists of seven
layers:
Layer 7:   the application layer, provides an interface
with the OSI transfer mechanism for the user
of an open system (such as an operator or an
application programme).
Layer 6:  the presentation layer, permits systems
which exchange data to interpret these
independently of their syntactical represen-
tation in the system.
Layer 5:  the session layer, defines the organisation
of the dialogue between distant applications.
Layer 4:  the transport layer, guarantees a constant
quality of service for data transfer to the
higher layer, regardless of the type of
network actually used.
Layer 3:  the network layer, defines the protocol
capable of routing the data through  one or
more intermediate communication nodes.
Layer 2:   the data link layer, permits the exchange of
data without change between adjacent
equipment.
* Presented at LRC Training Workshop in Jaipur, India (26 Sep. - 5 Oct. 1996)
Layer 1:  the physical layer, provides physical
support (the communication channel) to
transfer the data between two pieces of
equipment.
2. Local Area Network (LAN)
Computer networks having a small number of nodes,
located either in an office or in a building normally within
a limited geographical area of a few kilometres is called a
LAN.  Such networks are owned by organisation them-
selves.  They have high data transfer rates of 10 Mbps
(Megabits per second).
3. Wide Area Network (WAN)
Computer networks consisting of nodes spread over a
wide geographical area like different cities or far off
places is called a WAN.  The data transfer speeds are
relatively lower.  National Informatics Centre’s
NICNET which connects all District and State Head-
quarters is an example of such a WAN.
4. Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
A need was felt for connecting the LAN owned by vari-
ous users within one city.  This is possible by laying of
optical fibre cables or by laying high speed dedicated
telecommunication lines.  The MAN are useful as they
handle most of the local data traffic thus reducing the
effective WAN load, e.g., connecting ministries in New
Delhi to the host computer in New Delhi itself.
The wide area network cost is very high and it is more
economical to share the network by setting up close
user groups or virtual networks for the organisation
from the managed data network services.  The local
area network owned by the organisation could have the
network connected using routers etc.
5. Services on Computer Networks
(1) On-Line Databases Access
(2) E-mail
(3) INTERNET
(4) EDI
(5) Remote login facility
6. E-Mail
Mail provides a comfortable, flexible environment for
sending and receiving electronically.  Simply speaking,
E-mail is nothing but sending a file from your account
across the Internet to someone else’s account.
The general format of mail command is:
Mail [options][recipients….]
1
 Resource Papers
D. On Literacy Database
2
 Resource Papers
Layer 1:  the physical layer, provides physical
support (the communication channel) to
transfer the data between two pieces of
equipment.
2. Local Area Network (LAN)
Computer networks having a small number of nodes,
located either in an office or in a building normally within
a limited geographical area of a few kilometres is called a
LAN.  Such networks are owned by organisation them-
selves.  They have high data transfer rates of 10 Mbps
(Megabits per second).
3. Wide Area Network (WAN)
Computer networks consisting of nodes spread over a
wide geographical area like different cities or far off
places is called a WAN.  The data transfer speeds are
relatively lower.  National Informatics Centre’s
NICNET which connects all District and State Head-
quarters is an example of such a WAN.
4. Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
A need was felt for connecting the LAN owned by vari-
ous users within one city.  This is possible by laying of
optical fibre cables or by laying high speed dedicated
telecommunication lines.  The MAN are useful as they
handle most of the local data traffic thus reducing the
effective WAN load, e.g., connecting ministries in New
Delhi to the host computer in New Delhi itself.
The wide area network cost is very high and it is more
economical to share the network by setting up close
user groups or virtual networks for the organisation
from the managed data network services.  The local
area network owned by the organisation could have the
network connected using routers etc.
5. Services on Computer Networks
(1) On-Line Databases Access
(2) E-mail
(3) INTERNET
(4) EDI
(5) Remote login facility
6. E-Mail
Mail provides a comfortable, flexible environment for
sending and receiving electronically.  Simply speaking,
E-mail is nothing but sending a file from your account
across the Internet to someone else’s account.
The general format of mail command is:
Mail [options][recipients….]
"Recipients" mean the receivers of the message.  Incom-
ing mail is stored in a standard file for each user, called
mailbox for that user.  When mail is called to read
messages, the mailbox is the default place to find
them.  As messages are read, they are marked to be
moved to secondary file for storage, unless specific
action is taken, so that the messages need not be seen
again. This secondary file is called the box and is nor-
mally located in the user’s HOME directory.  Messages
can also be saved in the files named by the user.  Mes-
sages remain in secondary file until forcibly removed.
7.  Options
The options start with a dash (-).  Some of the impor-
tant options are:
-e Test for presence of mail
-f [file name] Read messages from file name instead of
mailbox, mail box is the default name.
-H Print header summary only.
-i Ignore interrupts.
-N Do not print initial header summary.
-u user Read User’s mailbox.  This is only
effective as user’s mailbox is not read
protected.
-U Convert uucp style of addresses to
Internet standards.
8. E-mail practice session #1
   (Send yourself a Message)
Notes: Please assume <CR> as Press <Enter Key>
(1)   $mail loginname <CR>
        The host will reply with a new line saying:
Subject: (System)
(2)   Test Message Number One <CR>
        (This is the subject of you message).
        This will move the cursor to the line below
Subject:
          Note that, unlike most word processors, the mail
program will not wrap your text at the end of the
line.  Use the <enter> at the end of each line to
keep all your text on the screen.
(3)   This is my first test message via
electronic mail (e-mail) <CR>
         This is my first message via electronic (e-mail).
As I type this I am learning the basics of com-
posing and sending text messages.  Soon I will be
able to send e-mail like this to anyone with an e-
mail address.
                                                  Resource Papers
4)   Press  <ctrl d>
        The system will reply with EOT (end of text)
and the host prompts will appear.  These four
steps will constitute the sending of mail to a user
in general.
9. Input Mode Commands (Tilde Escapes)
The following important commands may be entered only
from input mode by beginning a line with the tilde es-
cape character (~)
~! Shell-command
Execute the shell command and return.
~. Simulate end of file (terminate message input)
~? Print a summary of tilde escapes.
~c name…
Add the names to the carbon copy (cc) list.
~f (msglist)
Forward the specified messages.
The messages are inserted into the message
without alternation.
~r filename
~< filename
Read in the text from specified file.
~s string…
Set the subject line to string.
~t name…Add the given names to the To list.
10.   E-Mail Practice Session #2
     (Send a message to some user say ‘guest’
and yourself. The message text is already
ready in a file ‘xx’)
(1)     $ mail guest loginname <CR>
          The system will prompt with string.
          Subject: (system)
(2)    Test message Number two <CR>
          (This is the subject of your message)
(3)     ~r xx <CR>
          (This will include a message from the file ‘xx’)
(4)     Press <ctrl d>
         EOT message will come from system and the host
prompt ‘$’ will appear.
Note: Before pressing  <ctrl d>,  you can try other in-
put mode commands.  Be sure that all the commands
should be given at first column if a line i.e. a the begin-
ning of a line.
11. E-MAIL PRACTICE SESSION #3
     (Reading your messages)
When reading mails, mail is in command mode.  A header
summary of the first several messages are displayed,
followed by a prompt indicating mail can accept regular
commands.  If there is no mail, the system will prompt
that there is no mail and host prompt will reappear.
Ex
Step 1 $ mail <CR>
The system will display the following;
Mail version SMT 4.0 Thu Jan 1 12:00:00 EST
 type? for help
“/var/mail/loginname”: 1 mes-
sage 1 new
>N 1 Logname  Sun Jan 1   17:54     30/852
            Text Message Number One
>N 2 Logname  Sun Jan 1   18:00     20/600
Text Message Number Two
N2 New message
                                   Message number in the message
list. Command prompt of the
mail program.
Logname tells from whom you the mail.
Sun Jan 1 18.00
Day, date and time the message
was sent.
20/600 number of lines/number of
characters in the message.
Text Message… Subject of the message.
Step 2: t1<CR>
It will display message number 1 on the
screen. (The number of following the ‘t’ or ‘p’
tells the mail program which message to type
out.  If you do not use a number, it will tell the
“current” message ).
Message 1:
From loginname Sun Jan 1 17:54:50
Return-Path:<loginname>
:
:
To: loginname
Subject: Test Message Number One
Status: R
This is my first test message via electronic
mail (e-mail).  As I type this I am learning the
basics of composing and sending test
messages.  Soon I will be able to send e-mail
like this to anyone with an e-mail address.
?
3
4
 Resource Papers
Note: to see message No. 2,  you can use t2
or p2.
Regular command (command at ? prompt) are
of the form:
[command] [msglist] [arguments]
If no command is specified in command mode,
print is assumed.
A msglist is a list of message identifies sepa-
rated by spaces, which may include:
n Message number n
. The current message.
^ The first undeleted message.
$ The last message.
* All messages.
n-m An inclusive range of message
numbers.
user All messages from user.
/string All messages with string in the
subject line (case ignored).
:c All messages of type c, where c is one
of:
d deleted messages
n new messages
o old messages
r read messages
u unread messages
Note that the context of the command deter-
mines whether this type of message specifica-
tion makes sense.  Default for msglist if the
current message.  Other arguments are usually
arbitrary whose usage depends on the
command involved.
Some of the important mail commands
(commands at ?) are:
! Shell-command
Execute shall command and return.
# Comment
Null command (comment). This may be
useful in -mailrc files.
= Print the current message number.
? Print a summary of commands.
copy [filename]
copy [msglist] filename
Copy messages to the file without
marking the messages as saved.
Otherwise equivalent to the save
command.
delete [msglist]
Delete messages from the mailbox. If
autoprint is set, the next message after
the last one is printed.
dp [msglist]
dt [msglist]
Delete the specified messages from the
mailbox and print the next message
after the last one deleted. Roughly
equivalent to a delete command
followed by a print command.
edit [msglist]
Edit the given messages.
exit
xit
Exit from mail without changing the
mailbox. No messages are saved in the
mbox.
from ‘[msglist]
Prints the header summary for the
specified message.
help
prints a summary of commands.
hold [msglist]
preserve [msglist]
Holds the specified messages in the
mailbox.
list Prints all commands available. No
explanation is given.
print [msglist]
type [msglist]
Print the specified messages. If crt is
set, the messages longer than the
number of lines specified by the crt
variable are paged through the
command specified by the PAGER
variable. The default command is
"more"pg.
quit Exit from mail, storing messages that
were read in mbox and unread messages
in the mailbox.  Messages that have
been explicitly saved in a file are
deleted.
reply [msglist]
respond [msglist]
Send a response to the author of each
message in the msglist. The subject line
is taken from the first message. If
records is set to a file name, the
response is saved at the end of that file.
save [msglist]
Save the specified messages in a file
whose name is, derived from the author
of the first message. The name of the
file is taken to be the author’s name
with all network addressing stripped
off. See  also the Copy commands and
outfolder.
save [filename]
save [msglist] filename
Save the specified messages in the give
file. The file is created if it does not
exist.  The message is deleted from the
mailbox when mail terminates unless
keep save is set.
                                                 Resource Papers
undelete [msglist]
Restore the specified deleted messages.
Will only restore messages deleted in
the current mail session. If autoprint is
set, the last message of those restored is
printed.
write [msglist] filename
Write the given messages on the
specified file, minus the header and
training blank line.  Otherwise
equivalent to the save command.
Ex 4:  Keeping Your Message
Step 1: $mail <CR>
Step 2: p1 <CR>
Step 3: ? preserve <CR>
Step 4: ? q <CR>
The system will display following
message.
"Held 1 message in/var/mail/loginname”
      $
Ex 5:  Answering a mail.
       Step 1: $mail <CR>
       Step 2: ? Reply [message] <CR>
       The system will fill ‘To’ and subject line,
       you have to enter the message text only.
       Step 3: Here is an answer to our
       original message. <CR>
       Step 4: <ctrl d>
Ex 6: Saving a mail message.
Step 1: $mail <CR>
Step 2: ?save 1 <CR>
      This will save message ‘1’ or current
      message in the ‘mbox’. The message will
      be appended.
Step 3: ? preserve <CR>
Step 4: ? q <CR>
      The system will display following
      message.
     "Held 1 message in/var/mail/loginname”
$
Ex 7: Saving a message in a file.
Step 1: $mail <CR>
Step 2: ?save 1 myfile <CR>
      This will save the message ‘1’ in the file
‘myfile’.
Ex 8: Deleting a mail message.
Step 1: $small <CR>
Step 2:  & delete 1 <CR>
This will erase the message ‘1’.
Ex 9: Viewing mail commands.
Step 1: $mail <CR>
Step 2: ?? <CR>
       It will display mail commands.
mail commands
type print messages
next goto and type next
message
edit [msglist] edit messages
from [msglist] give header lines of
messages
delete [msglist] delete messages
undelete [msglist] restore delete messages
save [msglist] fileappend messages to file
reply [msglist] reply to message, includ-
ing all recipients
Reply [msglist] reply to the authors of the
messages
preserve [msglist] preserve messages in
mailbox
mail user mail to specific user
quit quit, preserving unread
messages
xit quit, preserving all
messages
header print page of active
message headers
!command shell escape
cd [directory] chdir to directory or home
if none given
list list all commands
(no explanations)
top [msglist] print top 5 lines of messages
z [+/–] display next [last] page of 10
headers
[msglist] is optional and specifies messages by
number, author, subject or type. The default is
the current message.
Internet E-mail Addresses
An Internet E-mail address consists of
(i) login name
(ii) host name and
(iii) domain name
General format of E-mail address is:
@host_name.domain_name .logname
The host_name .domain_name makes full host name of sys-
tem e.g.
user1@alpha.nic.in
guest@hub.nic.in
user5@beta.nic.in
In the above E-mail address:
user1, guest and user5 Login names.
Alpha, hub and beta Systems names
nic.in             Domain name.
Ex 10: Sending a mail to another system.
As an example, let us send an E-mail to the address
guest@hub.nic.in
Step 1:  $ mail guest@hub.nic.in <CR>
The system will display ‘Subject :’string and
ask you to enter subject of the message (step 2)
Step 2:  This is a test mail from alpha m/c.
<CR> (subject of the message) <CR>
Step 3:  Enter following text in the body of
  message.
Step 4:  <ctrl d>
5
6
Resource Papers
INTERNET NAVIGATING TOOLS
With a resource as large as the Internet, just finding the
information or software or resources we need can be
quite challenging. Fortunately, there is a set of tools that
enables us to find what we are looking for in a relatively
comfortable and productive way. In particular, we will
focus on four tools:
1. Gopher - A utility that permits us to ‘go for’
          information  in lots of places.
2. Archie - A utility that permits us to find files that we
        can then ‘send’ to our own computer.
3. WAIS - A Wide Area Information Server utility that
       permits us to look for information on a
       variety of hosts without having to  be
      connected with where the information is
      located, or how to get to it.
4. World Wide Web -  A system that provides access
     to documents wherever they
     are located.
Each one of these serves a particular purpose. Mastery
of all four of them can directly enhance our ability to
use the Internet more effectively.
GOPHER PRACTICE SESSION #1
Step 1.   Login to your host computer.
Step 2.   Type the following command: (at the
   command prompt: $)
   Gopher <CR>
Step 3.   You will get a screen as follows:
Root gopher server: gopher.tc.umn.edu.
1. Information About Gopher/
2. Computer Information/
3. Internet file server (ftp) sites/
•
•
Press? For help, q to Quit, u to go up a menu
Page: 1/1  The Main Gopher Screen.
Note: To select any item in the menu, use up or down
arrow keys to move the ‘pointer’ (— >) up or down.
Press <CR> to select, or, you may just type the num-
ber of your selection, and then press <CR>.
Step 4:  Select any item.
Step 5:  Press q to Quit.
You should be back at your host prompt.
GOPHER PRACTICE SESSION #2
Step 1.  To start the Gopher program again,
  type the command and gopher at the
  UNIX system prompt. The main
  Gopher screen appears.
     Gopher <Press Enter Key>
At the end of each menu choices is a special character
(or group of characters) that tells you what the menu
item will do.  Menu items that end with a slash (/) will
take you to another menu with more choices. Menu
items that end with the characters <?> allow you to
search through a database. Menu items that end with a
period (.) are files that will be down loaded (with D op-
tion) and displayed when you select them.
Step 2.  Select item 1, which gives more
  information about Gopher.
 Select item 1 <CR>
Step 3.  Move back to the main menu by using
  the u command.
 Type u <CR>
Step 4.  Select item 8, other Gopher and
  Information Servers, to see another
  interesting screen.
 Select item 8 <CR>
Step 5.  On this menu, select item 1 (All the
  Gopher Servers in the World). This
  menu alphabetically lists Gopher
  servers set up around the World.
 Select Item 1 <CR>
Step 6.  Return to the other Gopher and
  Information Servers screen by typing
  u.
 Type u <CR>
Step.7.  Selecting item 3 on this menu brings
  up the Search titles in Gopherspace
  using veronica menu.
  Select Item 3 <CR>
Step 8.  Select item 10, FAQ (Frequently-
  Asked Questions about veronica) to
  know more about veronica (another
  navigating tool).
  Select Item 10 <CR>
Step 9.  Press S to Save or D to Download
  this FAQ file.
Step 10.  As an example search, you should
    select item 3.
Find GOPHER DIRECTORIES by Title Word(s)
(Via NYSERNet)
Step 11. When the system asks what you want
    to search or, type Clinton. Press
    Enter to begin the search, <space> to
    move to next screen of menu, b for
    previous screen and u to exit.
You can use similar techniques to look for Gopher
menu titles for almost any topic.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR INTERNET
RESOURCES
Archie – A tool (software) for finding files stored on
anonymous FTP sites. You need to know the exact file
name or a sub-string of it.
ARPANet (Advanced Research Projects Administra-
tion Network) – The precursor to the Internet.
                                                
7
Developed in the 60’s and early 70‘s by the US Depart-
ment of Defence as an experiment in side-area
networking that would survive a nuclear war.
Anonymous FTP (File Transfer Protocol) – The
procedure of connecting to a remote computer, as an
anonymous or guest user, in order to transfer public
files back to your local computer. (See also: FTP and
Protocols)
Bandwidth – A measure of how much “stuff” you can
send thorough a connection. Usually measured in bits-
per-second.
BBS (Bulletin Board System) – A computerised meet-
ing and announcement system that allows people to
carry on discussions, upload and download files and
make announcements without the people being con-
nected to the computer at the same time.
BITNET – A cooperative computer network intercon-
necting over 2,300 academic and research institutions in
32 countries. Originally based on IBM’s RSCS network-
ing protocol. BITNET supports mail, mailing lists, and
file transfer. Now merging with CSNET and running the
RSCS protocol over TCP/IP protocol (BITNET II), the
network will be called Computer Research and Educa-
tion Network (CREN).
Client-Server Interface – A programme that provides
an interface to remote programmes (called clients), most
commonly across a network, in order to provide these
clients with access to some service such as databases,
printing, etc. In general, the clients act on behalf of a
human end-user (perhaps indirectly).
CREN – Computer Research and Education Network
is the new name for the merged computer networks,
BITNET and Computer Science Network (CSNET). It
supports electronic mail and file transfer.
Domain Name System (DNS) – The Internet naming
scheme which consists of a hierarchical sequence of
names, from the most specific to the most general
(left to right), separated by dots, for example
nic.ddn.mil. (See also: IP Address).
Downloading – The electronic transfer of informa-
tion from one computer to another, generally from a
larger computer to a smaller one such as a microcom-
puter.
Electronic Bulletin Board – A shared file where users
can enter information for other users to read or down-
load. Many bulletin boards are set up according to
general topics and are accessible throughout a network.
FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) – FAQs are docu-
ments that lit and answer the most common questions
on a particular subject. There are hundreds of FAQs on
diverse subjects. FAQs are usually written by people
who have tired of answering the same question over and
over.
FTP – File Transfer Protocol allows a user to transfer
files electronically from remote computers back to
the user’s computer. Part of the TCP/IP/TELNET soft-
ware suite.
Gateway – Used in different senses (e.g., Mail Gate-
way, IP Gateway), but most generally, a computer that
forwards and routes data between two or more networks
of any size.
Gopher – Gopher is a client-server program which
provides a way to access what we want without having
to know where it is. Gopher systems are topical and
menu-based; they let you navigate to the information
you are looking for on the basis of what kind of infor-
mation it is, and what subject it is about.
Host Computer – In the context of networks, a com-
puter that directly provides service to a user. In contrast
to a network server, which provides services to a user
through an intermediary host computer.
HTML (HyperText Markup Language) – The coding
language used to crate Hypertext documents for use on
the World Wide Web. In  HTML you can specify that a
block of text or a word is ‘linked’ to another file on the
Internet by surrounding them with codes called "tags",
which indicates how they should appear. HTML files
are meant to be viewed using a World Wide Web client
program, such as Lynx, Mosaic, Netscape, etc.
HTTP (HyperText Transport Protocol) – The pro-
tocol for moving hypertext files across the Internet.
Requires a HTTP Client programme on one end and an
HTTP Server programme on the other end. HTTP is the
most important protocol used in the World Wide Web
Hypertext – Generally, any text that contains “links”
to other documents words or phrases in the document
that can be chosen by a reader and which cause another
document to be retrieved and displayed.
Internet – The series of interconnected networks that
includes local area, regional, and national backbone net-
works. Networks in the Internet use the same
telecommunications protocol (TCP/IP) and provide
electronic mail, remote login, and file transfer services.
IP (Internet protocol) – The Internet standard protocol
that provides a common layer over dissimilar networks,
used to move packets among host computers and
through gateways if necessary.
 Resource Papers
7
8
 Resource Papers
IP Address – The numeric address of a computer con-
nected to the Internet, also called Internet address.
Jughead – Jughead, developed at the University of
Utah, is a software programme which allows for search-
ing in Gopher menus (see Veronica). It is different from
Veronica in that Jughead typically limits searches to the
menus of a local on-site Gopher or to the top few levels
of Gopher menus around the world.
Listserve Lists (or listservers) – Electronic discussion
of technical and non-technical issues conducted by
electronic mail over BITNET using LISTSERVE proto-
cols. Similar lists, often using the UNIX readnews or rn
facility, are available exclusively on the Internet.
Internet users may subscribe to BITNET listservers.
Participants subscribes via a central service, and lists
often have a moderator who manages the information
flow and content.
NIC (Network Information Centre) – A NIC pro-
vides administrative support, user support, and
information services for a network.
NREN – The National Research and Education Net-
work is a proposed national computer network to be
build upon the foundation of the NSF backbone net-
work, NSFnet. NREN would provide high speed
interconnection between other national and regional
networks. SB 1067 is the legislative bill proposing
NREN.
OPAC – Online Public Access Catalog, a term used to
describe any type of computerised library catalog.
OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) – This is the
evolving international standard under development at
ISO (International Standards Organisation) for the in-
terconnection of co-operative computer systems. An
open system is one that conforms to OSI standards in
its communications with other systems.
Protocol – A mutually determined set of formats and
procedures governing the exchange of information be-
tween systems.
Remote Access – The ability to access a computer from
outside a building in which it is housed, or outside the
library. Remote access requires communications hard-
ware, software, and actual physical links, although this
can be as simple as common carrier (telephone) lines or
as complex as Telnet login to another computer across
the Internet.
Shareware – Microcomputer software, distributed
through public domain channels, for which the author
expects to receive compensation. 
NOTE:
1   EDSTATS-Plus is developed by UNESCO, Paris
and is available free of chargefrom UNESCO
Division of Statistics, 7 Place de Fontenoy,
75732 Paris 07SP, France, Fax (33)1-45-66-48-
44.
2   UNESCO (1995): Guidelines on Preparing a
National EDI Report, UNESCO Division of
Statistics, Paris.
3   PopMap software is developed by the United
Nation Funds for Population Activities and can
be obtained free of charge from United Nations,
Statistics Division, New York, 10017 (USA),
  FAX - 1 (212) 963-4116

