156    See Catalog addendum at http://www.palomar.edu/catalog
CSNT 141  Linux Networking and Security (3)
2 hours lecture - 3 hours laboratory 
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 140   
Transfer acceptability: CSU
A hands on introduction to important administration activities required to man-
age a Linux network configuration. Course will cover topics configuring TCP/IP, 
DNS, PPP, send mail,  Apache Web Server and the firewall.
CSNT 160    Cisco Networking Fundamentals (3)
2½ hours lecture - 2 hours laboratory
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 110
Recommended preparation: CSNT 111 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
Emphasis on the OSI model and industry standards. Includes network topologies, 
IP addressing, subnet masks, basic network design and cable installation. This 70 
hour course of instruction prepares the student for Cisco certification examina-
tion. 
CSNT 161   Cisco Router Configuration (3)
2½ hours lecture - 2 hours laboratory 
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 160 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
Development of knowledge and skills to install, configure, customize, maintain and 
troubleshoot Cisco routers and components. This 70-hour course of instruction 
prepares the student for Cisco certification examination. 
CSNT 180   Wireless Networking  (3)
2½ hours lecture - 2 hours laboratory
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 110, and CSNT 111 or CSNT 160  
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
Provides a hands-on guide to planning, designing, installing and configuring wire-
less LANs  that prepares students for the Certified Wireless Network Adminis-
trator (CWNA) certification.  In-depth coverage of wireless networks with ex-
tensive step-by-step coverage of IEEE 802.11  b/a/g/pre-n  implementation,  design, 
security,  and  troubleshooting.    Material is reinforced with hands-on projects at 
the end of each chapter from two of the principal wireless LAN vendors, Cisco 
and Linksys.  
CSNT 181  Hacker Prevention/Security  (3)
2½ hours lecture - 2 hours laboratory
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 110, and CSNT 111 or CSNT 160 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
In-depth analysis and hands-on experience in PC and network security concepts 
specific to Microsoft, Unix-based and Cisco systems. Various topics including 
hacker prevention and intrusion detection, firewall installation and configuration, 
wireless network security, disaster recovery, access control lists, identification of 
malicious code, cryptography and forensics. Team dynamics in a lab environment, 
planning, installing, and configuring various network security elements regarding 
hardware, software, and media. Understand and demonstrate proper planning and 
implementation of a secure network, document and offer training to end- users, 
executives, and human resources on the proper maintenance of a secure network.
CSNT 260   Cisco Advanced Routing and Switching (3)
2½ hours lecture - 2 hours laboratory 
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 161 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
Development of knowledge and skills to configure advanced routing protocols, 
Local Area Networks (LANs), and LAN switching. Design and management of 
advanced networks. This 70-hour course of instruction prepares the student for 
Cisco certification examination. 
CSNT 261   Cisco Wide Area Network Design and Support (3)
2½ hours lecture - 2 hours laboratory 
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSNT 260 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
Development of knowledge and skills to design and configure advanced Wide 
Area Network (WAN) projects using Cisco IOS command set. This 70-hour 
course of instruction prepares the student for Cisco certification examination.
CSNT 280  Computer Forensics Fundamentals  (3)
2 hours lecture - 3 hours laboratory 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
Introduces methods used to properly conduct a computer forensics investigation 
beginning with a discussion of ethics, while mapping to the objectives of the In-
ternational Association of Computer Investigative Specialists (IACIS) certification. 
Topics covered include an overview of computer forensics as a profession; the 
computer investigation process; understanding operating systems boot processes 
and disk structures; data acquisition and analysis; technical writing; and a review of 
familiar computer forensics tools.
Computer Science and Information 
Technology - Web Technology 
(CSWB)  
 See also CSIT - Computer Science   
 CSIT - Information Technology, and CSIT - Networking  
Contact the Computer Science and Information Systems Department for 
further information.
(760) 744-1150, ext. 2387 
Office: MD-275
http://www.palomar.edu/csit  
Associate in Science Degrees - 
AS Degree requirements are listed in Section 6 (green pages).
• Information Technology  
Certificates of Achievement - 
Certificate of Achievement requirements are listed in Section 6 (green pages). 
• Information Technology 
Certificates of Proficiency - 
Certificate of Proficiency requirements are listed in Section 6 (green pages).  
• Web Developer with Emphasis in Java/Open Source   
• Web Developer with Emphasis in Windows  
PROGRAMS OF STUDY
Information Technology 
This program prepares students for employment in information systems applica-
tions development in business and industry. The focus is on developing skills in 
programming languages, Internet, spreadsheets, databases, presentation graphics, 
word processing, and database design. See a counselor for additional university 
transfer requirements in this major. 
A.S. DEGREE MAJOR OR
CERTIFICATE OF ACHIEVEMENT
Program Requirements 
CSIT 105   Computer Concepts and Applications   3 
CSIT 120   Computer Applications   3 
CSWB 110   Web Site Development with HTML5/CSS3   3 
CSWB 120   JavaScript   3 
CSIT 150   Introduction to SQL   3 
   or  
CSIT 160   Database Management Systems using Oracle   3 
CSIT 180   C# Programming I   3 
CSIT 280   C# Programming II   3 
CSWB 150   PHP with MySQL   3 
   or  
CSWB 210   Active Server Pages   3 
CSWB 170   Java for Information Technology   3 
   or  
CSIT 170   Visual Basic I   3 
  
Computer Science and Information Systems: Networking-Web Technology Palomar College 2015-2016 Catalog
157
Electives (Select 1 course)  
CSWB 130   Mobile Web Application Development   3 
CSWB 140   Ruby on Rails Programming   3 
CSWB 220   Advanced JavaScript   3 
CSNT 111   Networking Fundamentals   3 
CSIT 270   Visual Basic II   3 
TOTAL UNITS 30
Information Technology A.A. Degree Major or Certificate of Achievement is also 
listed in Computer Science and Information Technology – Information Technol-
ogy.
Web Developer with Emphasis in  
Java/Open Source 
This program includes the Web page design and programming languages that 
allow a developer to build dynamic Web applications with emphasis in the Java/
Open Source platform.  
CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY
Program Requirements  Units
CSWB 110  Web Site Development with HTML5/CSS3     3
CSWB 120  JavaScript  3
CSWB 150  PHP with MySQL  3
CSWB 170  Java for Information Technology  3
 
Electives (Select 1 course)
CSWB 130  Mobile Web Application Development  3
CSWB 220  Advanced JavaScript  3
CSIT 150  Introduction to SQL  3
CSIT 160  Database Management Systems using Oracle  3 
TOTAL UNITS  15
Web Developer with Emphasis in Windows 
This program includes the Web page design and programming languages that 
allow a developer to build dynamic Web applications with emphasis in the Java/
Open Source platform.  
CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY
Program Requirements  Units
CSWB 110   Web Site Development with HTML5/CSS3 3
CSWB 120  JavaScript 3
CSWB 130  Mobile Web Application Development 3
CSWB 210  Active Server Pages 3
CSIT 180  C# Programming I  3
TOTAL UNITS 15
COURSE OFFERINGS
CSWB 110  Web Site Development with HTML5/CSS3 (3)
2 hours lecture - 3 hours laboratory 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
A foundation course for Internet/Intranet technologies. Skills required to develop 
and publish web sites utilizing HTML, including using HTML tables, web page 
forms, and basic CSS (Cascading Style Sheets).
CSWB 120   JavaScript (3)
2½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory 
Recommended preparation: CSWB 110
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Introduces the skills required to design Web-based applications using the 
JavaScript scripting language such as writing small scripts; working with data types; 
creating interactive forms using various form objects; and using the advanced 
features of JavaScript including loops, frames and cookies. 
CSWB 130  Mobile Web Application Development (3)
2 hours lecture - 3 hours laboratory 
Recommended preparation: CSWB 120 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Mobile Web-based application development using advanced features of HTML5, 
JavaScript/JQuery, and CSS.  
CSWB 140 Ruby on Rails Programming (3)
2½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory 
Recommended preparation: CSWB 110 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Provides the knowledge and skills necessary to use the Ruby on Rails (RoR) 
web application framework to code and deploy web applications. Topics of study 
include working with layouts; using controllers and models; developing with Scaf-
folding and REST; presenting models with forms; managing databases; and using 
Ajax with Rails.  
CSWB 150   PHP with MySQL (3)
2½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory 
Recommended preparation: CSWB 110     
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Provides the knowledge and skills necessary to use the PHP scripting language to 
develop dynamic Web-based applications. Topics of study include the fundamen-
tals of the scripting, using PHP with HTML forms, creating functions, and integrat-
ing with databases using MySQL.
CSWB 160   Perl Programming (2)
1½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Develops basic competency in the Perl programming language. Topics of study 
include scalar and array variables, control structures, file I/O, regular expressions 
and subroutines.  
CSWB 170 Java for Information Technology (3)
2½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Introduction to Java programming with emphasis on the syntax and structure 
of the Java language. Specific topics will include data types, decision statements, 
object-oriented programming, arrays, collections and date handling. 
CSWB 197  Topics in Web Technology      (.5 - 4)
Units awarded in topics courses are dependent upon the number of hours required of 
the student.  Any combination of lecture and/or laboratory may be scheduled by the 
department. Refer to Class Schedule. 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Topics in Web Technology. See class schedule for specific topic offered. Course 
title will designate subject covered.
CSWB 210  Active Server Pages (3)
2½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory 
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSWB 110 and CSIT 170 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Introduction to the technologies and features in Active Server Pages. Topics in-
clude introduction to ASP,  Webforms, controls, events, validation, custom con-
trols, data binding, and various methods of code reuse, state management, con-
figuration, caching, and application deployment.
CSWB 220  Advanced JavaScript (3)
2½ hours lecture - 1½ hours laboratory
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CSWB 120 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Provides the knowledge and skills necessary to use JavaScript, XML, and server-
side languages to develop dynamic Web-based applications. Topics of study include 
the use of asynchronous JavaScript, how to use the Document Object Model, the 
use of XML in Web page requests, how to use server-side languages (e.g. PHP, 
Java) to query and return information from a database and how to design and 
develop new AJAX applications.
Palomar College 2015-2016 Catalog  Computer Science and Information Technology: Web Technology
158    See Catalog addendum at http://www.palomar.edu/catalog
CSWB 295 Directed Study in Web Technology (1, 2, 3)
3, 6, or 9 hours laboratory 
Prerequisite: Approval of project or research by department chairperson/director
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Designed for the student who has demonstrated a proficiency in computer sci-
ence subjects and the initiative to work independently on a particular sustained 
project which does not fit into the context of regularly scheduled classes.
Construction Inspection (CI)
Contact Occupational & Noncredit Programs for further information.
(760) 744-1150, ext. 2284   
Office: AA-135
Associate in Science Degrees - 
AS Degree requirements are listed in Section 6 (green pages).
• Construction Inspection 
 
Certificates of Achievement - 
Certificate of Achievement requirements are listed in Section 6 (green pages). 
• Construction Inspection 
PROGRAM OF STUDY
Construction Inspection
Provide comprehensive education in inspection procedures, California code stan-
dards, and interpretation of construction drawings to a diverse constituency for 
a career in the construction industry.
A.S. DEGREE MAJOR OR
CERTIFICATE OF ACHIEVEMENT
Program Requirements  Units
CI 89 Plumbing Codes 3
CI 90 Mechanical Codes 3
CI 100 Building Codes I 3
CI 101 Building Codes II 3
CI 105 Electrical Codes I 3
CI 106 Electrical Codes II 3
CI 115 Nonstructural Plan Review 3
CI 125 Plan Reading Technologies 3
CI 130 CalGreen Codes  3
TOTAL UNITS  27
COURSE OFFERINGS
Courses numbered under 100 are not intended for transfer credit.
CI 89  Plumbing Codes (3)
3 hours lecture 
An in-depth study of the fundamental concepts and interpretations of current 
state adopted plumbing codes. Topics covered include compliance issues, plumb-
ing specifications, basic plumbing principles, and inspection methods and tech-
niques. International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) 
revisions every three years.
CI 90  Mechanical Codes (3)
3 hours lecture 
An in-depth study of the fundamental concepts and interpretations of current 
state adopted mechanical codes. Topics covered include compliance issues, me-
chanical specifications, basic mechanical principles, and inspection methods and 
techniques.  
CI 100  Building Codes I (3)
3 hours lecture 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Introduction to building code requirements with an emphasis on minimum con-
struction standards and code enforcement. Code requirements controlling the 
design, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy and location of all build-
ings are evaluated. Revisions to the International Building Code are every three 
years. 
CI 101  Building Codes II (3)
3 hours lecture
Transfer acceptability: CSU
A  study of the  requirements  and  standards  for  design, loads, wood, concrete, 
masonry and steel buildings.  The study of exits, roofs, fireplaces, drywall, glass and 
stucco systems are examined.  Interpretation is based on the International Code 
Council (ICC) building code which is revised every three years.   
CI 105  Electrical Codes I (3)
3 hours lecture
Transfer acceptability: CSU
The first half of The National Electrical Code reviewed in an explanatory, easy-to-
understand, yet in-depth manner.  Basic electrical theory as it pertains to building 
construction is discussed with real-life situations used as examples of Code items 
and inspection techniques.  Prepares students for electrical certification tests 
based on the building codes (both the ICC and the IAEI certifications), as well as 
advaning knowledge levels for existing Inspectors.  
CI 106  Electrical Codes II (3)
3 hours lecture 
Prerequisite: A minimum grade of ‘C’ in CI 105 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
The second half of The National Electrical Code reviewed in an explanatory, easy-
to-understand, yet in-depth manner.  Basic electrical theory as it pertains to build-
ing construction is discussed with real-life situations used as examples of Code 
items and inspection techniques.  Prepares students for electrical certification 
tests based on the building codes (both the ICC and the IAEI certifications), as 
well as advancing knowledge levels for existing Inspectors.  
CI 115  Nonstructural Plan Review (3)
3 hours lecture 
Transfer acceptability: CSU 
A study of basic methods used by plans examiners to check the nonstructural de-
tails of construction drawings in compliance with the international building code. 
Topics cover analyzing nonstructural details and determining compliance with the 
minimum requirements for concrete, masonry, wood, and steel structures. 
CI 125  Plan Reading Technologies (3)
3 hours lecture 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
A survey of technologies in the construction inspection industry relating to plan 
reading. Content includes an introduction to construction plan reading; a review 
of the standard details and specifications used in the San Diego region; discussions 
on the various roles of the construction and building inspectors; employment 
opportunities and certifications; an overview of special inspection requirements; 
construction scheduling; and when and how often inspections should be per-
formed. Content also includes an introduction to California Title 24 including the 
building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, California Green Codes, and an intro-
duction to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
CI 130 CalGreen Codes (3)
3 hours lecture 
Transfer acceptability: CSU
Emphasizes the proper interpretation of the California Green Building Code and 
green building technologies. The scope of the course will provide inspectors, de-
signers and contractors with the latest code requirements and national standards 
to promote sustainable communities. Topics include site planning and develop-
ment, energy conservation, storm water pollution prevention and basic sustain-
ability concepts.  
Computer Science and Information Technology: Web Technology-Construction Inspection Palomar College 2015-2016 Catalog

