Existing Trends and Techniques for Web Personalization 
 
Rajesh K Shukla    Dr Sanjay Silakari   Dr P K Chande 
Research Scholor    Professor and Head CSE   Group Director 
RGPV, Bhopal India              UIT, RGPV Bhopal India  Truba Group of Institutes Indore India 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In the recent few decades the World Wide 
Web has become the biggest and most 
popular way of communication and 
information dissemination. World Wide 
Web is a huge repository of web pages and 
links and the volume of information 
available on the internet is increasing 
exponentially as approximately one million 
pages are added daily. The existence of such 
abundance of information, in combination 
with the dynamic and heterogeneous nature 
of the web, makes web site exploration a 
difficult process for the average end user. So 
in spite of the fact that users are provided 
with more information and service options, 
the average end users may not get the 
“right” information only, in what they are 
interested in. with the explosive growth of 
the number and the complexity of 
information resources and the advent of e-
services; it has become more difficult to 
access relevant information from the Web. 
One of the recent advances throughout this 
decade has been the evolution of the web 
personalization to address the requirement 
of effective web navigation and now the 
web personalization has become an 
indispensable tool for both Web-based 
organizations and for the end users to deal 
with the content overload. In this paper we 
highlight a comprehensive overview of the 
personalization process and various web 
personalization Techniques and the 
significance of studying the evolving nature 
of the Web personalization because most 
major internet companies are implementing 
their personalization systems. Since a lot of 
work has already been done and there is still 
much more to do, we are focusing here on 
what we have currently in this area, 
particularly the techniques to highlight the 
prominent features to provide support for 
web personalization.  
INTRODUCTION 
Once Tim Berners-Lee of the Conseil 
European Pour Recherches Nucleaires 
(CERN) announced the World Wide Web 
(WWW) in 1991, the World Wide Web has 
become the most popular way of 
communication and the huge repository of 
information that can come either from the 
Web pages publicly available, or from the 
web usage logs daily collected by all the 
servers around the world to record the users 
accesses. The WWW has been adopted by 
the mass market more quickly than any 
other technology over the past century and 
Every day the millions of pages are added 
and accessed by the users from the different 
part of globe therefore the volume of 
information available on the internet is 
increasing exponentially and web logs files 
are also growing at a faster rate and the size 
is becoming huge.  
Although with the explosive growth in the 
size and uses of the web; the users are 
provided with more information and service 
options but they have to consume their 
precious time more on the web to find the 
“right” or “interesting” information. Without 
proper guidance, a visitor often wonders 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 430
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
aimlessly without visiting important pages, 
loses interest and leaves the site sooner than 
expected because the individual's capacity to 
read and digest the lots of irrelevant 
information is essentially fixed. Therefore it 
has become more difficult for them to access 
and determine the information they are 
interested in before getting frustrated.  The 
tremendous growth in the number, size and 
the complexity of information resources 
available on the world wide web, the users 
find it more difficult to access relevant 
information from the Web and they often 
miss the goal of their inquiry, or receive 
ambiguous results when they try to navigate 
through the World Wide Web therefore 
World Wide Web imposes new methods of 
design and development of online 
information services.  One of the most 
promising approaches to solve this problem 
is web personalization. Web personalization 
is the approach to tackle the problem of 
content overload by predicting the user 
needs by taking advantage of the knowledge 
acquired from the analysis of the users’ 
explicit and/or implicit access behaviors in 
combination with the content and the 
structure of the Web site.  Web 
personalization is the process of customizing 
the content and structure of a web site to 
meet the specific needs of individual users, 
without requiring them to ask for it 
explicitly [1]. 
The Web personalization [1, 25, 26, 27] can 
be defined as any action that tailors the Web 
experience to a particular user, or a set of 
users [6]. Web personalization can be seen 
as broad area that includes several 
interdisciplinary researches domains from 
information retrieval, data mining human-
machine interactions, social networks and 
recommender systems as special cases. 
Amazon is the best example for providing 
personalized information. 
 The objective of a Web 
personalization[25,26,27] system is to 
provide users with the information they want 
or need, without expecting from them to ask 
for it explicitly [1, 13].  Therefore, the 
requirement for predicting user needs in 
order to improve the usability and user 
retention of a Web site can be addressed by 
personalizing it. 
Personalization requires implicitly or 
explicitly collecting visitor information and 
it uses the Users’ behavior in different 
applications such as Personalization, content 
delivery as per users’ interests, e-service 
sectors, e.g. e-commerce, e-business, e-
learning etc to improve the system and to 
improve the system design as per their 
interest because the site owners are more 
interested than ever in making their sites 
automatically predict future navigational 
patterns of the users to improve the 
usability, structure, and user retention of 
their sites. One research area that has 
recently contributed greatly to web 
personalization is web mining [3,6]  
 
FUNDAMENTALS OF WEB MINING 
 
The Web mining[15] research consists of 
research area from several research 
communities, such as Databases, 
Information Retrieval, Machine Learning, 
Artificial Intelligence and Natural Language 
Processing. The web mining (Etzioni, 1996) 
is used to analyze the data collected on the 
web and extract useful knowledge from it. 
The World Wide Web manages three kinds 
of vast, heterogeneous and distributing data 
content, structure and usage data [12]. In 
particular, content data consist of whatever 
is in a web page and Web Content Mining 
deals with the discovery of useful 
information from the web contents; structure 
data refer to the organization of the content 
and Web Structure Mining mines the 
structure of hyperlinks within the web itself; 
usage data are the usage patterns of web 
sites and Web Usage Mining mines the log 
data stored in the web server.  The 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 431
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
application of data mining techniques for 
discovering and extracting information from 
these web data sets is at the basis of the 
three different research directions in the 
field of web mining: web content mining, 
web structure mining and web usage mining  
Web mining techniques have been applied to 
a variety of applications that includes Web 
Search, Classification, E-Learning [28] and 
Personalization etc. Web mining aims to 
discover useful information or knowledge 
from the Web hyperlink structure, page 
content and usage log. Web Mining has a 
broad area of applications from  Intelligent 
Web Search,  Personalization, 
Recommendation Engines, Web commerce 
applications, Building the Semantic Web, 
Web page classification and categorization, 
News classification and clustering[29], 
Information / trend monitoring, Analysis of 
online communities, Web and mail spam 
filtering  etc 
The web mining can be primarily 
categorized into following different 
categories  
 
WEB CONTENT MINING 
Due to the exponential growth of www, the 
contents on the web are also increasing 
rapidly. Web contents encompass a very 
broad range of data and it corresponds to the 
collection of facts a Web page was designed 
to convey to the users. The contents on the 
web page may be in the form of text, image, 
audio, visual and hyperlinks. The Sheer 
number of documents consisting of relevant 
as well as irrelevant information may be 
retrieved in response of the search 
performed by the user. Web content mining 
[13] plays the significant role in addressing 
this problem. Web content mining is the 
process of extracting useful information 
from the     contents of Web documents. 
This deals with the extraction of concept 
hierarchies/relations from the web, and their 
automatic categorization [15], [20].The 
unstructured nature of web content mining 
allows the involvement of techniques from 
other disciplines such as Information 
Retrieval (IR) and natural language 
processing (NLP). The research on web 
content mining can be differentiated from 
two different points of view: IR 
(Information Retrieval) and DB (Database) 
views.  The goal of Web content mining 
from the IR view is mainly to improve the 
required and relevant information retrieval 
from the web content and the goal of Web 
content mining from the DB view is to try to 
model the data on the Web and to integrate 
them for solving the problem of managing 
and querying the information on the web. 
Several frameworks supporting the claim 
that the incorporation of information related 
to the web site’s content enhances the web 
personalization process have been proposed.  
WEB STRUCTURE MINING 
The structure of the web may be represented 
as a graph representing web pages as nodes 
and hyperlinks connecting related pages as 
edges and the content within a Web page 
may also be organized in a tree like 
structured format, based on the various 
HTML(Hyper Text Markup Language)  and 
XML(eXtensible Markup Language)  tags 
within the page. Web Structure mining[13] 
is the process of using graph theory for 
discovering structure information from the 
Web or model underlying the link structures 
of the Web by analyze the node and 
connection structure of a web site therefore 
it generates the structural summery of web 
sites and web pages.  
It is composed of mining the inter-document 
links, provided as a graph of links in a site 
or between sites. WSM pertains to mining 
the structure of hyperlinks within the web 
itself [20]. 
The structural summery consists of 
Interested information of the given 
interconnected web documents discovered 
by using the link information. Web Structure 
Mining can be performed either at the 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 432
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
Document Structure level or at the 
Hyperlink level. The first kind of web 
structure mining is extracting patterns from 
intra page documents in the web. A intra 
page link is a structural component that 
connects the web page to a web page at 
same location. The second kind of web 
structure mining is extracting patterns from 
hyperlinks in the web. A hyperlink or inter-
page link is a structural component that 
connects the web page to a different 
location. This web structure mining is based 
on the topology of the hyperlinks and it can 
be used to categorize Web pages by 
measuring the frequency of local links for 
intra-related pages on the same serve and 
measuring the frequency of links for 
interrelated pages on the different server. 
The connectivity features of the web graph 
have been extensively used for personalizing 
web search results, only a few approaches 
exist that take them into consideration in the 
web site personalization process.  
 
WEB USAGE MINING  
Web usage mining [13] is also known as 
Web log mining because most of the 
information is usually generated 
automatically by Web servers and collected 
in server log. Web usage mining is the 
application of data mining techniques to 
analyze and discover interesting usage 
patterns from these large web access log 
repositories, in order to produce results to 
understand and better serve the needs of 
Web- based applications. The web usage 
mining may use the data from servers access 
logs, proxy server longs, browser logs, user 
profiles[30] registration data, user session or 
transaction cookies , user queries or book 
mark data so it is said that web usage mining 
works on the secondary data. It is made of 
mining the data generated by the users’ 
interactions with the web. It data records the 
identity or origin of Web users along with 
their browsing behavior at a Web site when 
the user browses or makes transactions on 
the web site. A Web server access log 
contains a complete history of file accesses 
by the user. Most WWW access logs follow 
the Common Log Format. Some of the 
typical usage data collected at a Web site 
includes IP addresses, user id, URL page 
references, protocol used and access time of 
the users. The usage data collected at 
different sources will represent the 
navigation patterns of different segments of 
the overall web traffic so it is an activity that 
involves the automatic discovery of patterns 
from one or more Web servers. Web usage 
mining techniques [8,9] capture usage 
patterns from users’ navigational data; have 
achieved great success in various application 
areas such as Web personalization and 
recommender systems, link prediction and 
analysis, Web site evaluation or 
reorganization, and e-commerce[28] data 
analysis, to improve the web performance, 
the search engines, cross marketing 
strategies across products. 
DIFFERENT PHASES OF WEB 
PERSONALISATION  
Web personalization is the process of 
customizing a Web site to the needs of a 
specific user, considering the knowledge 
acquired from the analysis of the user’s 
navigational behavior in to the account in 
correlation with other information collected 
in the form of structure, content, and user 
profile data [3].The web personalization 
process can be alienated into different 
phases [6, 25, 27] namely collection of web 
data, preprocessing of web data, analysis of 
web data, and finally decision making or 
recommendation.  
a. Collections of Web Data/ User 
profiling  
The process of gathering information either 
explicitly or implicitly specific to each 
visitor for recording their interests and 
behavior while they browse a web site.  The 
collection of activities completed in the past 
and recorded in Web server logs is known as 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 433
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
the Implicit data. This activity is performed 
by the web server and the user is not directly 
involved in collection of such data. The 
information submitted by the user at the 
time of registration or in response to the 
rating questionnaires is considered as the 
explicit data and it usually comes from the 
active involvement of the user. Explicit data 
collection requires users to exert most of the 
efforts. Web data in the form of content, 
structure, semantic, usage and user profile 
may be collected and used in the context of 
Web personalization. A user profile includes 
information about users’ interests and 
preferences and it contains demographic 
information for each user of a Web site. 
Preprocessing of Web data  
The data collected consists of various 
irrelevant information for example the log 
data collected from the web server are in the 
form of text files with a row for each http 
transaction. These data need to be cleaned 
before putting them for analysis. The 
Preprocessing task is performed to clean the 
data form inconsistencies. It filters out 
irrelevant information according to the goal 
of analysis  
Log analysis and web usage mining 
 In this phase the specific data mining 
techniques that are popularly used for 
mining of web data or the machine learning 
techniques are applied to the processed data 
to discover interesting usage patterns. These 
usage patterns may form the groups 
according to the users’ behavior. It classifies 
the content of a web site into semantic 
categories in order to make information 
retrieval and presentation easier for the user. 
This step is applied offline for automatic 
user profiling without adding the burden to 
the web server. 
 
b. Decision making/Final 
Recommendation Phase 
This is the last phase deals with the actions 
that should be performed after taking the 
results of the previous analysis step.  
This phase usually performs the 
recommendations to the users by 
determining existing hyperlinks, the 
dynamic insertion of new hyperlinks that 
seems to be of interest for the current user to 
the last web page requested by the user, or 
even the creation of new index pages. This 
phase is generally accomplished by a variety 
of CGI programming. 
 
FUNCTIONS OF WEB 
PERSONALIZATION  
In these days of throat cutting competition; 
the main goal of the web site owner is to 
increase the number of loyal visitors of their 
website. A Web personalization [26] system 
helps in retaining and increasing the number 
of loyal visitors by performing variety of 
functions. A value-added browsing 
experience; may be in terms of money or 
time; is brought to the users of the www by 
the means of these functions. These 
functions may perform the varying degree of 
actions from simple routine actions, to more 
complex ones in order to save the visitors’ 
time and to make the interaction with the 
web site easier. These functions may be 
divided into four categories and ordered as 
below from the simplest like user salutation 
to the most advanced such as personalized 
content delivery.  
 
1. Memorization or ‘User Salutation’ 
This is the simplest and widely used form of 
personalization where basic information 
about the user such as name and browsing 
history is stored in the systems memory 
which is used as a reminder to the returning 
user. Such stored information is used by the 
web site to greet the returning user by 
displaying the use’s name along with the 
welcome message. Most of the commercial 
web sites employ salutation for their 
customers or registered users and this kind 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 434
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
of ‘User Salutation’ helps in increasing the 
loyalty of the visitors, because users feel 
special rather than regular visitors but at the 
same time the memorization of users’ 
information may also jeopardize their 
privacy. For Example rechargeitnow.com 
offers memorization  
2. Customization  
This is more advanced than memorization 
form of personalization where users’ 
preferences, knowledge and interests 
regarding customizing the layout, content or 
structure of the web pages are taken from 
the users’ registration form. Various 
commercial sites such as My Yahoo, 
AltaVista and Google employ customization 
for their visitors through the facilitation of 
the users’ interaction with the site. The 
customization may be done in different ways 
like page layout customization, content 
customization, link customization etc. On 
the basis of the information provided by the 
users in their registration form; the particular 
Web page changes its layout or color in page 
layout customization. For example: Web 
portals of Yahoo and AltaVista. The content 
of the web page changes i.e. the content may 
either be presented in summarized manner, 
expended manner or same content may be 
presented to different users in content 
customization.  An example of such a 
customized Web site is the UM2001 site. 
3. Guidance  
This is the most commonly used and more 
advanced than earlier two web 
personalization function. It refers to 
automatically recommending the hyperlinks 
depending on users past navigational 
behavior. This function also provides the 
alternative set of hyperlinks that are related 
to the interests and preferences of the user. 
This is supported by various systems such as 
the Web Personalizer [6]. It is usually 
implemented on the Web server and is 
described as adaptive web recommendation. 
The adaptive web recommendation may 
guide the individual user at each step of the 
interaction with the web site. This function 
relies on data that reflects the user’s interest 
implicitly or explicitly and can take the form 
of recommendation of links to certain 
products, topics of information 
4. Task Performance Support  
This is the most advanced web 
personalization function where, execution of 
a particular action is performed by the 
personal assistant software on behalf of a 
user. This function is heavily dependent on 
the personnel assistant software to facilitate 
access to relevant information.  These are 
the client-side personalization systems with 
the limited scope that it cannot use 
information about other users with similar 
interests  
RELATED WORK 
The Internet grew from 2000-2009 at an 
estimated rate of 380% [31]. This 
exponential growth of information resources 
and services available on www is making 
web site exploration difficult, therefore new 
information services like Web 
personalization are in high demand and 
distinguished personalization schemes have 
been suggested in the recent decade. 
Personalization can be automatic or 
customized. The web personalization has 
become an important tool for both Web-
based organizations and for the end users. 
The focus of the researchers is on automatic, 
dynamic or a combination of the two 
approaches over customized personalization 
[32]. Web personalization is defined as any 
action that tailors the Web experience to a 
particular user, or set of users by Mobasher, 
Cooley, & Srivastava [3]. Letizia [5] is 
considered to be the first system that records 
the user’s navigation behavior and gives 
interesting recommendations to the user. 
WebWatcher[7] is  web content based 
system that provides navigation hints to the 
user, based on a knowledge acquired about 
user’s interests, the location and relevance 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 435
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
of the items in the site, and the way in which 
other users interacted with the collection in 
the past and  it performs well from the 
perspective of the end user who is searching 
the Web for information but it is less useful 
in E-commerce applications. This system 
uses personal profiles of users and 
recommends other items or pages based on 
their content similarity to the items or pages 
that are in the user’s profile. WebWatcher 
[7] and Letizia [5] generally rely on personal 
profiles and content similarity of Web 
documents to these profiles to make 
recommendations.   
Personalization techniques seek to learning 
about website users and create user 
profiles[30] for personalization of 
navigation or content. The Research in the 
area of web mining and its applications to 
web personalization has been   well 
documented and reported[1].  Analog [30] 
was one of the leading personalization 
systems based on the web usage mining 
methodology. The analysis of log data 
discovers valuable web usage patterns 
[33].In 2000 Mobasher [6] proposed the web 
usage-based Web personalization system 
called Web Personalizer for recommending 
Web pages on Server-Side to users.  The 
Web Personaliser provides a personalization 
framework based on web log mining and 
using data mining techniques for extraction 
of knowledge for generating the 
recommendations to current users based on 
their browsing navigational history. Initially 
the web usage mining was not considered 
extensively for personalization [3] rather its 
primary focus was on the extraction of 
decision-support knowledge, expressed in 
terms of descriptive data models to be 
evaluated and exploited by human experts 
but in the recent time the researcher have 
focused more on the application of web 
usage mining for web personalization to 
acquire the required robustness and 
flexibility. Several web personalization 
projects have been developed correspond to 
the evolution of extensive research in Web 
usage mining. This includes trend analysis, 
and web access association/sequential 
pattern analysis. Good literature of the web 
usage mining field has been made available 
by Eirinaki [1], Koutri [2]. Pierrakos [4]. 
Web usage mining, the main component of a 
web personalization system, is generally, a 
three step process, consisting of data 
preparation, pattern discovery, and pattern 
analysis. The web usage mining extensively 
focus on discovering the interesting patterns 
in order to understand the users’ 
navigational behavior. The navigational 
behavior may play an important role in the 
decisions concerning site restructuring or 
modification [21,22]. The web 
personalization system based on web usage 
mining does not consider the context of the 
web page into account.Some efforts have 
been made to incorporate content [34, 35, 
36] or the structure [37, 38] of the web site 
along with the usage patterns. The web 
semantics defines the context of a web page 
therefore recent researchers have considered 
web semantic as an important concept for 
web personalisation.  Magdalini 
Eirinaki,2006 [39,40] Proposed  a semantic 
web personalization system, focusing on 
word sense disambiguation techniques 
which can be applied in order to 
semantically annotate the web site’s content. 
A semantic web personalization framework 
is also presented [16, 17, 18, 14], which 
enhances the recommendation process with 
content semantics. These have suggested 
that the structural characteristics of Web 
sites, such as the site topology and the 
degree of connectivity, have a significant 
impact on the relative performance of 
recommendation models. The Recent 
Research [9, 10, 39, 40, 41,42] in the area of 
web semantic and its applications to web 
personalization has been   well documented 
While [9, 10,39] have used both web usage 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 436
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
and web semantics mining the others have 
solely concentrated on semantic mining 
where the documents are clustered together 
based on their content and the user is 
recommended pages form the cluster to 
which the current document belongs. This 
method does not take into account the 
activities of previous users found in the web 
logs 
 
The machine learning techniques [3, 6, 11] 
have also been applied to the web 
personalization. The machine learning 
techniques have been applied along with soft 
computing techniques to properly deal with 
the imprecision, uncertainty and partial 
truths underlying the personalization process 
[6]. The fuzzy logic and neuro-fuzzy is 
becoming popular for the web 
personalization system.  The neuro-fuzzy 
strategy [23] has been applied to develop a 
Web personalization system that 
dynamically suggests interesting URLs for 
the current user. G. Castellano[24] proposed 
the web personalization[26] system  using 
fuzzy C-Means clustering algorithm  to 
categorize user sessions[29] in order to 
derive groups of users which exhibit similar 
access patterns. It enables generation of 
overlapping clusters to capture the 
uncertainty among Web user’s navigation 
behavior. He also proposed a usage-based 
Web personalization [26] system called 
NEWER[23] that exploits the potential of 
Computational Intelligence techniques to 
dynamically suggest interesting pages to 
users according to their preferences. 
Veeramalai [43] proposed the Fuzzy-
Temporal Association Rule Mining 
Algorithm (FTARM) to classify the Web 
user profiles dataset periodically to know the 
users behaviors and interests based on 
temporal pattern analysis. FTARM is used 
for reducing the search space of the Web 
user profiles dataset in which Fuzzy logic is 
used for intelligent classification 
APPLICATIONS OF WEB PERSONALIZATION  
Web personalization has been recently 
gaining great momentum in research and in 
various commercial web applications. One 
of the interesting applications of 
personalization on Web is the recommender 
systems [44, 45]. Recommender systems are 
used to provide users with a richer 
experience and help them to make the 
selection process easier. In the web 
personalization, recommendation engines 
recommends object in the form of pages, 
products, advertisements etc depending 
upon the type and taste of the user. Now a 
days countless of new products are being 
advertised over the media everyday.  Hence, 
various business strategies have been 
developed to retain the existing customers as 
well creating new customers. Web 
personalization recommendation is being 
used by various e business applications. 
Examples of some of such recommendation 
systems are Amazon.com, barnesnoble.com 
Ebay.com, FAIRWIS, LIBRA, CDNOW 
etc. The recommendations systems also 
recommend web pages for various web site 
MEMOIR, Phoaks, GAB, Fab, Alexa.com, 
Quickstep, R2P, SOAP. It has also been 
used for recommending music, movies, 
videos or other services. CDNOW, 
Moviefinder.com, Movie lens, 
Moviefinder.com, Firefly, Morse are among 
some systems which suggest interesting 
movies and songs to the users. 
Recommender systems are also used in news 
reading domain as well. Tapestry, 
GroupLens, PHOAKS, WebMate, Alipes 
and Personal View Agent, Lotus Notes, 
PVA are among some systems which 
suggest interesting news to readers. Another 
interesting application of personalization is 
in adaptive hypermedia systems. For 
example WebWatcher helps its users by 
modifying the page that the users browse. 
The web personalization system has also 
been used for e-learning [44,45] 
 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 437
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
CONCLUSION 
World Wide Web has come a long way over 
the last decade and has become one of the 
world’s three major media, with the other 
two being print and television. Web 
Personalization is becoming more and more 
important with the explosive growth of 
information sources available on the World 
Wide Web and with the advent of e-services. 
We have looked at some fundamental 
aspects of personalization  and we have 
outlined the different modes of web mining, 
namely web content mining, web structure 
mining and web usage mining 
[2,30,33,34,35]. We tried to summarize the 
significance of introducing the web mining 
techniques in the area of web 
personalization we also discussed the 
current trends, system proposals and 
approaches in web personalization. Also, we 
have introduced some useful applications of 
personalization that are being used on the 
Web. This paper is based upon the currently 
existing trends in the relevant context.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Eirinaki, M. and Vazirgiannis, M., “Web Mining for 
Web Personalization,” ACM Transactions on Internet 
Technology, Vol. 3, Issue 1, 1-27, Feb2003 Vol.3, No.1, 1-
27 
.[2] M. Koutri, N. Avouris, and S. Daskalaki, “A Survey on 
Web Usage Mining Techniques for Web-Based Adaptive 
Hypermedia Systems,” in S. Y. Chen and G. D. Magoulas 
(ed), Adaptable and Adaptive Hypermedia Systems, 
IRM Press, pp. 125-149, Hershey, 2005 
[3] Jaideep Srivastava, Robert Cooley, Mukund 
Deshpande, and Pang-Ning Tan, “Web usage mining: 
discovery and applications of usage patterns from web 
data,” SIGKDD Explorations, 1(12), Jan. 2000 
[4] Pierrakos, D., Paliouras, G., Papatheodorou, C., and 
Spyropoulos, C. D., “Web Usage Mining as a Tool for 
Personalization: A Survey,” User Modeling and User-
Adapted Interaction, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 311-372, Nov. 
2003.  
[5] H. Lieberman, Letizia: An agent that assists web 
browsing, in: Proceedings of the Fourteenth International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1995, pp. 924–
929 
[6] B. Mobasher, R. Cooley, and J. Srivastava. Automatic 
personalization based on web usage mining. Commun. 
ACM, 43, 142-151, August, 2000. 
[7] T. Joachims, D. Freitag, and T. Mitchell. Webwatcher: 
A tour guide for the world wide web. In the 15th 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Nagoya, 
Japan, 1997. 
 [8] M.D. Mulvenna, S.S. Anand, A.G. Buchner, 
Personalization on the Net using Web Mining, 
Communications of the ACM, August 2000/Vol. 43, No. 8, 
123-125 
[9] Yu, J., Luo, X., Xu, Z., Liu, F., & Li, X; Representation 
and Evolution of User Profile in Web Activity [Electronic 
version]. Semantic Computing and Systems, 2008. WSCS 
‘08. IEEE International Workshop on 14-15 July 2008 
[10] M., Eirinaki, I., Varlamis, M., Vazirgiannis: SEWeP: 
Using Site Semantics and Taxonomy to Enhance the Web 
Personalization Process [Electronic version]. SIGKDD ‘03, 
August 24-27, 2003, Washington, DC, USA. 
 [11] E. Frias-Martinez, G. Magoulas, S. Chen, R. 
Macredie. Modeling human behavior in user-adaptive 
systems: Recent advances using soft computing techniques. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 29, 320–329, 2005 
 [12] Antonio Picariello∗ and Carlo Sansone “A web usage 
mining algorithm for web personalization” Intelligent 
Decision Technologies 2 (2008) 219–230 
[13] R. Kosala, H. Blockeel, “Web Mining Research: A 
Survey,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations, 2000, Vol. 2, pp. 1-
15.  
[14] Ranieri Baraglia and Fabrizio Silvestri. Dynamic 
personalization of web sites without user intervention. 
Commun. ACM, 50(2):63—67, 2007. 
[15] Pal, S.K., V. Talwar, and P. Mitra, Web mining in soft 
computing framework: relevance, state of the art and future 
directions. IEEE Transaction on Neural Networks, 2002. 
13(5): pp. 1163-1177. 
[16] Guandong Xu:Web Mining Techniques for 
Recommendation and Personalization, A Dissertation 
submitted to For the degree of Doctor of Philosophy March 
2008, The School of Computer Science & Mathematics , 
Faculty of Health, Engineering & Science, Victoria 
University, Australia 
 [17] Sarabjot Singh Anand, Patricia Kearney, and Mary 
Shapcott. Gener ating semantically enriched user profiles 
for web personalization. ACM Trans. Interet Technol., 
7(4):22, 2007. 
[18] Sarabjot Singh Anand and Bamshad Mobasher. 
Introduction to intelligent techniques for web 
personalization. ACM Trans. Interet Technol., 7(4):18, 
2007. 
[19] Saudi, A. and M.H.A. Hijazi. Using similarity 
measures and association rule for web personalization. in 
M2USIC. October 2004. Malaysia. pp. 16-19. 
 [20] Arotaritei, D. and S. Mitra, Web mining: a survey in 
the fuzzy framework. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 2004. 148: 
pp. 5-19. 
 [21] B. Berendt, Understanding Web usage at different 
levels of abstraction: coarsening and visualizing 
sequences, in Proc. of the Mining Log Data Across All 
Customer TouchPoints Workshop (WEBKDD‘01), 
San Francisco, CA, August 2001 
 [22] B. Berendt, Web usage mining, site semantics, and the 
support of navigation, in Proc. of the Web Mining for E-
Commerce - Challenges and Opportunities Workshop 
(WEBKDD‘00), Boston, MA, August 2000 
[23] Castellano, A.M. Fanelli, M.A. Torsello∗NEWER: A 
system for NEuro-fuzzy WEb Recommendation G. 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 438
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.
Proceedings of the 7th Asia Pacific Industrial Engineering 
and Management Systems Conference 2006 17-20 
December 2006, Bangkok, Thailand Applied Soft 
Computing 11 (2011) 793–806 
 [24] G. CASTELLANO, A. M. FANELLI, M. A. 
TORSELLOMining usage profiles from access data using 
fuzzy clustering International Journal Multimedia and 
Image Processing (IJMIP), Volume 1, Issue 1, March 2011 
[25] Nasraoui, O. World Wide Web Personalization. 
Encyclopedia of Data Mining and Data Warehousing, J. 
Wang, Ed, 2005, Idea Group. 
[26] Anand, S. S., Mobasher, B., Introduction to Intelligent 
Techniques for Web Personalization, ACM Transactions on 
Internet Technology, Vol.7, Issue 4, Article No.18, 2007.  
[27] Mobasher, B., Web Usage Mining and 
Personalization, in Practical Handbook of Internet 
Computing, M.P. Singh, Editor. 2004, CRC Press. p. 15.1-
37. 
[28] Ioannis Kazanidis, Stavros Valsamidis, “Proposed 
Framework for Data Mining in E-learning: The case of 
Open E-class”, ISBN:978-972-8924-97-3,2009 , pp 254-
258 
[29] Ms.Jyoti,” A Novel Approach for clustering web user 
sessions using RST”, International Journal on Computer 
Science and Engineering Vol.2(1), 2009, pp.56-61 
[30] Nasraoui, O., Soliman, M., Saka, E., Badia, A., & 
Germain, R. (2008). A Web Usage Mining Framework for 
Mining Evolving User Profiles in Dynamic Web Sites. 
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 
20 (2), 202-215. 
 [31] Miniwatts Marketing Group, World Internet Users 
and Population Statistics, (Online) 
www.internetworldstats.com, Accessed: 27.11.2009, 2009. 
[32] Weld, D. S., et al., Automatically Personalizing User 
Interfaces, Proc. International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, 2003, pp. 34-39. 
[33] Abdurraham et al., Web usage mining for analyzing 
unique behavior of web users, Proc. International 
Conference on Electrical Engineering and Informatics, 
2007. pp. 356- 359. 
[34] B. Berendt, Web usage mining, site semantics, and the 
support of navigation, in Proc. of the Web Mining for E-
Commerce - Challenges and Opportunities Workshop 
(WEBKDD‘00), Boston, MA, August 2000 
[35] B. Berendt, Understanding Web usage at different 
levels of abstraction: coarsening and visualizing sequences, 
in Proc. Of the Mining Log Data Across All Customer 
TouchPoints  Workshop (WEBKDD‘01), San Francisco, 
CA, August 2001 
[36] B. Berednt, M. Spiliopoulou, Analysis of navigation 
behavior in web sites integrating multiple information 
systems, The VLDB Journal (2000) 9, 56-75 
[37] R. Cooley, P.N. Tan, J. Srivastava, WebSIFT: The 
Web Site Information Filter System, in Proc. of the Web 
Usage Analysis and User Profiling Workshop 
(WEBKDD'99), San Diego, CA, August 1999 
 [38] F. Coenen, G. Swinnen, K. Vanhoof, G. Wets, A 
Framework for Self Adaptive Websites: Tactical versus 
Strategic Changes, in Proc. of Web Mining for E-
Commerce – Challenges and Opportunities Workshop 
(WEBKDD’00), Boston, MA, August 2000 
[39] Magdalini Eirinaki, Dimitrios Mavroeidis, George 
Tsatsaronis,and Michalis Vazirgiannis : Introducing 
Semantics in Web Personalization: The Role of ontologies, 
M. Ackermann et al. (Eds.): Semantics, Web, and Mining 
2005, LNAI 4289, pp. 147 – 162, 2006.Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg 2006  
[40]Magdalini Eirinaki, Charalainpos La.mpos, Stratos 
Paulakis, and  Michalis Vazirgiannis. Web personalization 
integrating content semantics and navigational patterns. In 
WIDM ‘04: Proceedings of the 6th annual ACM 
international workshop on Web information and data 
management, pages 72—79, New York, NY, USA, 2004. 
ACM. 
[41] X.F Luo, N.Fang, et.al.: Semantic Representation of 
Scientific Documents for the e-Science Knowledge Grid 
[Electronic version]. Concurrency and Computation: 
Practice and Experience. Published online in Wiley 
InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).DOI: 
10.1002/cpe.1271. 
[42] Xiangfeng Luo, ZhengXu, Jie Yu. Discovery of 
Associated Topics for the Intelligent Browsing [Electronic 
version]. The First IEEE International Conference on Ubi-
media Computing (UMedia 2008).Lanzhou University, 
China, July 15-16, 2008 
[43] Veeramalai Sankaradass, Kannan Arputharaj “An 
Intelligent Recommendation System for Web User 
Personalization with Fuzzy Temporal Association Rules” 
European Journal of Scientific Research ISSN 1450-216X 
Vol.51 No.1 (2011), pp.88-96 © EuroJournals Publishing, 
Inc. 2011 
[44] Khribi, M. K., Jemni, M., & Nasraoui. O. (2008). 
Automatic Recommendations for E-Learning 
Personalization Based on Web Usage Mining Techniques 
and Information Retrieval. The 8th IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, July 1-5, 
Santander, Spain  Romero, C., & Ventura, S. (2007). 
Educational data mining: A survey from 1995 to 2005. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 33 (1), 135-146. 
[45] Faten Khalil Jiuyong LiHua Wang,” Integrating 
Recommendation Models for Improved Web Page 
Prediction Accuracy, Conferences in Research and Practice 
in Information Technology (CRPIT), 2008,Vol. 74. 
 
 
 
 
 
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0814 
www.IJCSI.org 439
Copyright (c) 2012 International Journal of Computer Science Issues. All Rights Reserved.

