 
Department of Numerical Analysis and Computing Science 
IPLab-182 
The World Wide Web as a social infrastructure  
for knowledge-oriented work 
 
Kerstin Severinson Eklundh, Kristina Groth, Anders Hedman, Ann Lantz, Henrry 
Rodriguez and Eva-Lotta Sallnäs 
 
Interaction and Presentation Laboratory (IPLab) 
 
 
 
Kerstin Severinson Eklundh, Kristina Groth, Anders Hedman, Ann Lantz, 
Henrry Rodriguez and Eva-Lotta Sallnäs 
The World Wide Web as a social infrastructure for knowledge-oriented work 
Report number: IPLab-182 
Publication: In H van Oostendorp (ed.). Cognition in a digital world. 2001 
E-mail of author: {kse, kicki, ahedman, alz, evalotta}@nada.kth.se 
 
Reports can be ordered from: 
Interaction and Presentation Laboratory (IPLab) 
Numerical Analysis and Computing Science (Nada) 
Royal Institure of Technology (KTH) 
S-100 44  STOCKHOLM, Sweden 
telephone; + 46 8 790 6280 
fax: + 46 8 10 2477 
e-mail: reports-iplab@nada.kth.se 
URL: http://www.nada.kth.se/nada/iplab/ 
 
 
1
The World Wide Web as a social infrastructure for knowledge-
oriented work
Kerstin Severinson Eklundh
Kristina Groth
Anders Hedman
Ann Lantz
Henrry Rodriguez
Eva-Lotta Sallnäs
Technical report IPLab-182
Department of Numerical Analysis and Computer Science
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 2001
Introduction
The World Wide Web has implied an explosion in network-mediated information
exchange. Its ubiquitous nature and technical strengths, in particular the flexible
hypermedia document format and the general communication protocol, have given
users a powerful infrastructure for sharing knowledge as well as for interactive
communication. This has created new research questions with respect to how people
conceptualize the Web, and how the use of this medium is embedded in their
professional activities.
This chapter investigates implications of Web-based information exchange for people
within knowledge-oriented professions. Our point of departure is a current project on
knowledge, communication and context in electronic networks (KnowHow). People in
knowledge-intensive professions, such as researchers, technical developers, teachers,
and librarians, typically have a continuous need for updated knowledge within their
area of expertise, which necessitates contacts with others both inside and outside their
local organization. Furthermore, workers in such areas are often responsible for their
own competence development. This has been found in an interview study that preceded
the present project (Lantz & Severinson Eklundh, 1999). These observations motivated
investigation of their use of the Web as a medium for self-selected knowledge
development.
Among the unique characteristics of the Web is the fact that it enables fast and global
communication among its users. A range of new contact patterns and special
collaboration forms have been developed on the basis of the Web infrastructure It is an
open question how these increased possibilities of contact affect individuals‘ strategies
of information exchange, both with respect to providing and aquiring information.
Our focus in this chapter is therefore: what are the implications of the “social Web” for
the daily information exchange of knowledge workers? In particular, how has the
Web‘s potential for communication and its accessible information infrastructure
affected their strategies for acquiring and spreading professional information? We will
deal with the following aspects of Web use:
2
(1) sharing knowledge on the global network
(2) sharing knowledge within an organization
(3) active collaboration within work groups.
These three aspects are not independent, since the Web’s global character affects its use
also for organisational and group purposes. However, we attempt to maintain the
distinction between them as far as possible below. We will both review research that we
have come across, and describe some of our own studies in relation to these areas1.
The need for research about Web use
The World Wide Web as a research area is still new. Most of the work published so far
concerns technical issues (e.g. different communication protocols, document formats
and Web programming tools), or issues about the design of Web sites from a usability
perspective (see, e.g., Buckingham Shum & McKnight, 1997). In a workshop on the
topic “HCI and the Web” (Instone, 1996) the following research areas were mentioned
as important: users’ models of the Web, navigation in large amounts of information,
and document design for the Web.  More recently, there has been a growing interest in
the design of Web-based collaborative environments, and generally, the social potential
of the Web is increasingly recognized and taken advantage of (see e.g. Munro, Höök, &
Benyon, 1999b).
In the growing literature on the Internet and the Web, there is a notable lack of
empirical research about how people actually use these media in their daily work
activities. Many of the existing studies of Web use are based on automatically gathered
usage data, which is relatively easy to collect by adding registration functionality to
Web sites, or on large surveys about navigation patterns. For example, studies have
been made focusing on how users revisit Web pages (Tauscher & Greenberg, 1997),
and of the use of bookmarks when navigating the Web (Abrams, Baecker & Chignell,
1998).
In contrast to such quantitative studies of Web usage patterns, qualitative studies
involving interviews or observations related to a specific work context are hard to find.
(See, however, Järvelä and Häkkinen, this volume.) In fact, there are many challenges
in studying the use of Internet technology in this way. The Web is growing rapidly and
new technical solutions are developing continuously, as well as new usage forms. This
makes qualitative, longitudinal studies necessary for an understanding of the research
issues we are interested in.
Sharing knowledge on the global network
In many ways, the Web is unlike any other medium existing previously, and it is natural
that research about the use of the Web has touched on many different areas. In fact, the
view of the Web itself is subject to constant change, as both the contexts of its uses and
the technology itself develop further. We will review some implications of these
perspectives for Web use among knowledge professionals.
The Web as a new, interactive reading medium
The dominating view of the Web has been as a medium for presenting and retrieving
information. As such, it differs from traditional screen-based media in many ways. In
3
addition to just locating and reading particular documents, users can navigate in a world
of inter-linked information. In fact, the vision of the global hypertext formulated by
Vannevar Bush (1945) is quite close to the Web as it works today.
Computer screens are well-known for providing a less optimal reading environment. In
this respect, Web use cannot be expected to bring new research findings, at least from
an ergonomic perspective. In fact, it is unclear to what extent people actually read
lengthy Web pages on screen, compared to just browsing through relevant parts,
printing out the document and reading it off-line.
On the other hand, the Web can be seen as a more social, interactive reading
environment than traditional, paper-based media. Since both authors and readers are
online, they can potentially communicate in a fast and interactive manner. Also, other
users are visible through their personal home pages, where their interests and activities
are often explicitly described. One may ask: can the social nature of the Web outweigh
the negative aspects of reading information on screens? Or is the interactive nature of
the Web as a reading medium sometimes felt as a burden, so that people need to protect
themselves against unwanted communication?
Carleson, Lundberg and Nässla (1997) presented a study of the introduction of a web-
based information channel to a local Intranet for a telecommunications company. A
survey and interviews were made to assess the acceptance of the channel and to
compare it with an existing paper-based workplace magazine. With respect to design
and readability of the material, the paper-based magazine was found to be superior. It
was also seen as more flexible by encouraging reading at home, which was not possible
for the Web channel. However, the authors argue that a Web channel could be more
attractive in other aspects, especially by offering a more interactive relationship
between writer and reader.
A similar result was found in a study by Balsvik (1999), who interviewed a group of
journalists about their experience of Web publishing (see also Balsvik, this volume). E-
mail was the communication tool used most frequently by these journalists, and was
used for interviews, for information exchange and for making a first contact. The results
indicated that Web-published papers could foster a closer relationship between the
journalist and the reader. The journalists reported a feeling of having got a more
extended all-round education through the use of the Internet, though it seemed that they
had to develop their ability to sift information due to the use of the Internet.
However, the advantages of paper as a reading medium prevail, even in contexts where
both original text input and final reading are on-line. Bellotti and Rogers (1997) found
in a study of Web-publishing journals that the paper medium had important roles as a
form of intermediate representation during the production process, e.g. for overview of
the current state of a page, coordination of activities, and passing information in a
newsroom. Similar results have been obtained in other studies focused on management
of documents in organisations (see e.g. Sellen & Harper, 1997).
4
Searching for information on the web: from individual to social navigation
Among the main problems with the use of the Web are orientation and overview of the
information available on the net (see e.g. Instone, 1996). This applies both to searching
and navigation through hypermedia links.
In the background is the threat of information overflow, e.g. by the multitude of hits
that are often rendered by ordinary search engines. A related aspect is “lost in
hyperspace”, pertaining to the lack of orientation and overview of users navigating via
hypermedia links on the Web. These problems have led researchers and developers to
investigate alternative metaphors for describing parts of the Web, and to design various
techniques of visualization to facilitate navigation and overview (cf. “The Web book
and Web forager” (Card, Robertson & York, 1996). However, these alternative models
for navigation do not seem to have reached wide-spread use.
A more recent development in Web navigation emphasizes the social nature of people’s
information seeking activities (Munro, Höök & Benyon, 1999a, Dourish, 1999). The
general idea is to provide possibilities for users to keep track of the activities of other
users, with whom they may have common interests, in order to find their way through
the immense space of hypermedia information. The term “social navigation” was
originally introduced by Dourish and Chalmers (1994), to describe how
users’navigation through an information space is guided and structured by the activities
of others within that space. According to Erickson (1996), using other people’s home
pages as sources of information is a kind of social navigation. There have also been
efforts to provide special navigation possibilities on the Web based on the visibility of
other users' presence in real-time, or “footprints” showing how they have navigated
(Munro, Höök & Benyon, 1999b). In many cases, there is a possibility to open a direct
communication channel among users who are “co-located” in this way.
So-called recommendation systems may be seen as building upon social navigation
principles. For example, a web site may be constructed by automatically collecting the
addresses recommended by other users in online discussions, and providing links to
these sites (a system with this capability is described by Hill and Terveen, 1997). Other
readers may subsequently contribute by suggesting changes to the structure thus built
up.
Dourish (1999) takes the concept of social navigation further, to stand for a general
paradigm of collaboration through technology. His discussion emphasizes two aspects
of collaborative activity as distinctive for social navigation: awareness of the activitities
of others to provide a means for interaction, and the conceptual distinction between
"places" and "spaces", where a place-centric view implies that there are other people
inhabiting the information space, providing opportunities for mutual interaction and
information sharing.
Visions of the Web as a universal medium for knowledge work
The unique possibilities of exchanging knowledge and drawing upon others’ work have
been the source of many visions about the World Wide Web for knowledge workers,
following in the trace of Bush’s “memex” (1945).  In fact, the original idea of the Web
was to support distributed collaboration and exchange of ideas between researchers
(Berners-Lee, Cailliau, Luotonen, Nielsen, & Secret, 1994). One vision could be the
5
Web as a platform for constructing places of information resources but also of
knowledge where experts in a topic can be contacted. Shneiderman (1998) uses the term
"genex" for describing a development of the concept "memex" applied on the potential
of the web. He proposed:
"appropriate genex design would enable problem solvers to locate and build on
previous work easily, explore numerous alternatives rapidly, consult conveniently, and
propagate solutions widely" (p.99).
A similar vision, presented by Holtzblatt (1999), is the ”knowledge crystal”. By
describing skills, knowledge and procedures within the field of customer centred
design, researchers are invited to jointly represent knowledge using the new medium,
Internet.
These examples should be seen as ideal models of shared knowledge among researchers
on a global network. There are already numerous examples of knowledge communities
on the Web, where researchers voluntarily share information about their field. Web-
based environments are also being designed for educational purposes, supporting both
document repositories and synchronous text communication within distributed groups
of professionals2.
Buckingham Shum (1998) discusses methods of enhancing the Web with special
mechanisms aiming to support the collective development and use of scientific
knowledge. According to Buckingham Shum, ”the Net, particularly the Web, provides
an unprecedented opportunity in scientific history to locate, interconnect and analyse
ideas and documents.” But also, ”The Web is becoming a more chaotic place every day.
As the signal to noise ratio gets worse, research communities need better support for
tracking developments and finding relevant documents.” The solution proposed by
Buckingham Shum is to supply metadata schemes that describe semantic relationships
between scientific documents, and that enable a researcher to search for general patterns
of ideas and arguments within a large space of related contributions.
Dilemmas of sharing knowledge
It is clear that the Internet and the Web are potential tools for knowledge sharing and
competence development among knowledge workers. Our point of departure in the
KnowHow project is a democratic model where all participants can use the medium on
the same terms. Communication, and maybe even more, competence development on
the Web, build on an implicit assumption that everyone wants to co-operate and
contribute, to both give and take. However, it can be expected that some users will only
take without giving, since it in many situations is very hard to make people contribute
(Kollock & Smith, 1996). This does not always have to be a problem, at least not as
long as this group does not grow too large.3 To contribute with information implies
taking responsibility with respect to its quality, so that misleading or false information
is avoided. These different aspects of co-operation are relevant for individuals, groups
and organisations.
A particular tension on an individual basis exists in the desire for obtaining Web
information in relation to one's own willingness to be visible on the net. If you are
visible, people will notice you and perhaps offer information. However, there is a cost
6
in being visible; e.g. people will expect you to continue providing information and to
keep existing information updated.
A pre-study of Internet communication
In a pre-study to the KnowHow project  in 1997 (reported in Lantz and Severinson
Eklundh, 1999), we performed in-depth interviews with a group of 10 individuals from
research, development, and information areas about their use of electronic networks for
communication and knowledge exchange. The study was explorative, and aimed to
identify relevant research questions for the project. The following issues were
addressed:
• How do the users conceptualize the Internet? How do they distinguish between the
Internet and an intranet?
• To what extent are the users willing to fetch and collect material on the global net?
How do they manage to find the information they look for?
• What is their attitude to being visible on the net?
• Do users give hints to each other about relevant information and contacts? To what
extent are new contacts established on the network?
• How is the Internet used for communication and for supporting the individual‘s
development of competence?
The participants (four women and six men) all had academic education and were
researchers, teachers, technical developers and information professionals. All of them
had occupations that involved a large amount of information acquisition, for themselves
and for others. Typical work tasks were writing documents, communicating with other
people, searching for information, distributing information and attending meetings.
Most of the participants had a role that allowed them to organize their own work and
plan for future activities themselves.
The respondents had reached such a level of expertise that they had to take
responsibility for their own competence development. They visited conferences, read
literature, participated in relevant courses and seminar series, and they regarded Internet
as a competence supporting tool.
The view of the Internet
The Internet was described by the respondents as a protocol or a language that is
necessary for enabling communication among the connected computers. When asked to
use a metaphor for describing the Web, the telephone or a net was used. When asked to
compare the Internet with intranets and explain the differences, the respondents first
laughed. Then they explained: "Well, one is world wide and one is local".
Security was felt to be higher on an intranet since it is closed. Because an intranet can
be specifically designed for a group, co-operation can also be facilitated in a different
way than it can be on the Internet. On the other hand, it is only a support to people who
have access; everybody else is excluded. Some participants felt isolated behind the
7
”fire-walls”, not being able to communicate freely with others outside their own
organisation. One respondent gave the example: "When I visit a conference, others
sometimes give me their home page URL but I can never do the same since I am on an
intranet".
Search and navigation
When navigating on the Web, users collect bookmarks of sites that they want to return
to. After a period of Web use with a growing collection of bookmarks, the latter must
be structured in some way, and organisational problems may sometimes emerge. These
may be similar to those appearing in e-mail communication (Whittaker & Sidner, 1997;
Bälter, 1998; Lantz, 1998)and lead to a need for cleaning and filing of bookmarks, an
activity that is not well supported according to Nielsen (1997).
Bookmarks are used when the user knows where to go; otherwise search engines are
used. Some of the respondents reported that they had noticed that search tools have
specialised in different topics. When the respondents have learned which search tools
are reliable, and if they also have other sources of information on a certain topic, the
result can be more complete. One given example was a librarian asked to search for
information about a very uncommon disease. The results were to be delivered to a
doctor who had just received a case. In addition to literature in the area found at the
library the librarian could also add information found on the Web. This information
consisted of an information sheet about the disease, names of contact-persons, and, a
homepage for children with the disease. The doctor and the sick child‘s family could
then take part of all this information.
Home pages
Most of the respondents had a personal home page, on which they were careful to
include only professional information. For certain respondents there were difficulties in
constructing a home page and they needed technical help. Some organisations had
home pages with links to all employees, and standards were emerging for the build-up
of these.
To be visible on the net was experienced in different ways. Some respondents reported
that they were afraid of receiving too much information or too many contacts if
appearing on the Internet. Others preferred to use traditional publishing media for
increasing their professional visibility in an effective way.
Communication and cooperation
For the participants in the study, e-mail was the primary communication tool in their
daily work. This meant that e-mail was used irrespective of whether the receiver was in
the next room or across the world. However, if a response was needed quickly, the
telephone was used. Also, home pages can be used for communication, and email can
sometimes be sent directly from the home page. Contrary to our expectations, it was not
felt to be necessary to meet face-to-face first. In fact, we have seen several examples of
contacts started via Internet where the involved subjects first met after several years.
For the main part of the users in the study the Internet was not primarily seen as a tool
for co-operation. However, an example was given by a respondent about a project
group spread over Sweden and working in libraries. They had a co-ordinator that
8
administrated the homepage and a number of persons responsible for different areas.
The homepage was the uniting node, and communication was managed via email and
distribution lists. What is demanded for such co-operation is that everyone feels
responsible and that one person acts as a co-ordinator.
Co-operation on the Internet would often be more indirect, such as by users giving each
other hints about relevant information. However, some users never did this and did not
receive hints from others either. Giving hints can sometimes be excluded because of the
climate at work, or that the fear of overloading colleagues is greater than the wish to
offer information. Often a work group knows about the different group member's
interests and forwards relevant addresses and information.
The experiences from the pre-study confirmed that the Web has a potential as a
platform for sharing of knowledge across geographical boundaries. The study opened
the way for more specific studies within the KnowHow theme, investigating how
people use Internet and the Web for professional collaboration, and how the technology
supports these activities.
Knowledge communities on the Web: a study of the Oester’96 project
People working in knowledge professions often have a number of obligations in several
projects. This leads to working with different colleagues in different settings, with
regard to both type of group and context. Often the colleagues are at other work sites
and the interaction between these experts are mostly formal meetings. Hence, it is easy
to see that an expert's work situation often is very isolated: there is no one to ask for
advice or initiate a discussion with.
The most obvious need is to communicate with other experts in the same area and to
develop one's competence, not only by reading a book, giving a course or visiting
conferences. Face-to-face meetings, formal as well as informal are very important, but
there are cases when a mediated way to communicate is a good substitute or even a
better solution.
One example of this is the Oester'964 project, which has been the subject of a case study
in KnowHow. The project started in 1997, involving 11 countries and working with
different political aspects of the Baltic region. Here experts working within knowledge
professions were offered to use the Web as a place to collect or present information,
chat or use mailing lists. Part of the site is open to the general public, other parts are
closed, only available for the members of the project group. These experts work in
several projects, sometimes distributed via the Web site since the co-operating persons
are located in different countries.
Results from the questionnaire sent to the project leaders showed that the site mostly
was used as an open library, both internal and external. The respondents of the
questionnaire knew that all reports were available at the site. The purpose of this Web
site is not to develop the participants’ competence - in fact this has never been
discussed. The overall aim of the Web site is to signal democracy, i.e. to work very
openly and present all final reports as well as the plans for the future of the different
parts of the project.
9
In interviews with some of the respondents of the questionnaires, it turned out that the
need of performing work with a democratic model in mind is helpful in co-operation
among delegates in different countries. The idea of using the Web site as a place for
competence development within a group can be viewed in terms of common ground (cf.
Clark, 1996). As a new delegate enters the project, it is easy to read all previous
documents on the Web site, to look at the lists of participants, the time schedules and
organisation, which leads to fast capturing of the overall common ground (what
everybody else in the project learned by participating).
In the questionnaire, there were also questions about an internal part of the Web site
(i.e. the intranet, including facilities for communicating via chat and distribution lists).
Only a few of the respondents reported that they had used the internal part, and it turned
out that two years later it was closed, probably due to the low interest on the part of the
participants of the project. One interviewee said that taking part of the information at
the Web site contributes to the development of competence, since it enables an
attendant to follow the ongoing work and also take part of the reports from the different
parts of the project. It is one way to take part of others’ knowledge.
Another subject said about the same, but also saw it as direct and indirect competence
development, where ”direct” is related to the specific work task performed within the
project and ”indirect” is information about others to pose questions to. The Web site
can be used for one’s own reasons but also as a reference library for others who want to
know more about the project.
Sharing knowledge in an organisation
The Web has great potential for sharing knowledge and fostering collaboration within
organisations. So-called Intranets are established in many organisations as a channel for
intra-organisational communication. Using the same protocol as the Internet, but with
restricted access, they may provide both information archives and platforms for direct
communication among the organization‘s members. This means that they can function
as a kind of organizational memory.
Organizational memory
To support sharing of knowledge within an organisation, a collaborative system can be
designed to store the knowledge in a large repository of information. Such systems are
often referred to as organisational memory systems, or lately also knowledge
management systems. The information can then be retrieved and used in the future.
Examples of organisational memory systems are gIBIS (Conklin & Begeman, 1988),
and Answer Garden (Ackerman & Malone, 1990; Ackerman, 1994; Ackerman &
McDonald, 1996). The purpose of the gIBIS system was to explore the capture of
design history, to support computer mediated teamwork, and to investigate hypertext
navigation of very large information spaces. In Answer Garden, commonly asked
questions about an application domain are stored, together with the answer, in a
common repository. In a newer version of Answer Garden there is also the possibility to
find and interact with an expert directly.
The concept organisational memory has been criticised for not accounting for how
remembering actually takes place in organisations (Bannon & Kuutti, 1996). Bannon
10
and Kuutti also point out that it is difficult to predict what knowledge, or information,
within an organisation, will be of interest in the future and thereby is worth storing.
This involves a trade-off between cost of storing and the cost of reinventing, but how is
this trade-off to be decided? Bannon and Kuutti also argue that if the "activity" during
which the "storing" takes place differs from the one in which the "remembering" takes
place, then the information may be re- or even misinterpreted. It is a question of what
needs to be stored and what can be left as taken for granted.
Asking for information
Bannon (1986) argues that people rather ask other persons for advice than search
through a manual for information. He found, when interviewing administrative and
clerical personnel, that the major source of information about the computer systems
used were other users (see also Kraut & Streeter, 1995). One person in his study
expressed that sharing office with a person more experienced within a certain area
provides an ideal environment for solving problems related to the area. Bannon points
out the importance of a common view of the problem, expecially in the case of a
novice-expert conversation (see also Clark, 1996, Ch. 1). In a face-to-face conversation,
interruptions and follow-up questions can provide feedback about the participants'
understanding of the current dialogue, and the conversation can change to an
appropriate level of understanding. Thus, to meet a person face-to-face could help
solving a problem.
There is also a difference between formal and informal sources of information. A
formal source can e.g. be a computer system help desk, while an informal source can be
a person who does not officially have the task of helping other persons. The reason that
formal sources often fail in their mission is because the persons working at a formal
source do not know enough about the particular topic and because they often are
remotely located (Bannon, 1986). Instead, informal sources such as colleagues are
chosen because they are physically available, they are personal friends, or they are
known to be experts on the topic. Investigations show that people working in software
design projects prefer to ask nearby colleagues rather than using formal information
sources (Waterson, Clegg, & Axtell, 1997; Eveland, Blanchard, Brown, & Mattocks,
1994). The reason is that the colleagues better relate the question to the problem. Also,
people outside the group can be important when searching for information (Kraut &
Streeter, 1995).
Knowledge nets: an alternative approach for intra-organisational communication
One way to support the sharing of knowledge within an organisation is to present
references to persons with the requested knowledge, as opposed to presenting the
knowledge itself represented in some artefact. The knowledge net approach (Groth,
1999) is based on this principle.
The idea has similarities to social navigation, in that it builds on the importance of
using other people as resources. However, a knowledge net builds on using the
computer to store references to other persons, who are then contacted directly. A
knowledge net can be viewed as a "time-window", i.e., the knowledge referred to is
what is relevant today – the knowledge people have at the moment.
11
One characteristic of the knowledge net approach is that the given references should
encourage and support on-going communication between individuals. This means that
just providing a list or database of references is not sufficient. Another main
characteristic is that the knowledge providers are also those who should benefit from
the system. In other words, there should be a focus on what the individual is interested
in sharing with others and not on, for example, what management is asking for. A
crucial issue in the knowledge net approach is that the individuals' knowledge is
described in an open-ended way. This makes it possible for the knowledge providers to
decide how to describe their knowledge and how much of it they want to share with
others. Still, technical support for the process of entering information should be
available, e.g., using templates and forms.
However, the use of a specific system supporting people in finding ”who-knowswhat”
might not be the ideal solution. Rather, simple means for showing people’s present
activities and availability in combination with structured information about projects and
other activities within the organisation might be even better.
The Web as a basis for a knowledge net
Some knowledge net like applications already exist and can be found on the Web. One
such application is the Referral Web (Kautz, Selman, & Shah, 1997), which is an
interactive tool on the Web that helps people find short referral chains between
themselves and experts within a certain area. The Referral Web uses publicly available
Web pages to create a referral chain. A referral chain is created by searching for names
and following links on Web pages. If two or more names occur in close proximity on a
Web page, then this is seen as evidence of a direct relationship between these persons.
Hence, no information needs to be explicitly entered by the users. Unfortunately, the
Referral Web was never used within the organisation it was created for, a domain of AI
researchers.
The Referral Web was thus intended to be used within a specific domain of users.
However, there also exists Web based tools for knowledge exchange between
individuals that are globally available on Internet. One is Abuzz5, which "provides on-
line communities with tools to share knowledge through people-to-people interactions".
Another is Experts Exchange6,  a knowledge sharing community on the Web where
different topics are available for discussion. A third example is Six Degrees7, which is
an on-line community with the possibility to interact, communication and share
information and experience with others.
In addition to these specific systems supporting contacts between people, well
structured personal home pages on the web in combination with search facilities may
also serve as a simple knowledge net. This issue was addressed in a longitudinal study
in the KnowHow project.
A study of the use of home pages on the Web
Personal home pages8 give an individual user of the Internet, or of an intranet, an
opportunity to present personal information to other users. These pages on the Web can,
therefore, be seen as a source of knowledge about individuals within a network, The
network is either global, i.e., available to everyone on the Internet, or local, i.e.,
12
available only to the specific users of a certain intranet (physically these individuals
may be distributed).
According to Instone (1996) home pages constitute the most visible Web genre. People
visit the “home sites” of other persons with interests that are close to their own topic of
interest where they expect to find new information about the topic (either directly or via
links).
Erickson (1996) claims that home pages are the very cornerstone of the social character
of the Web: navigating via home pages is like asking someone else who is likely to
know the answer to a question. Also, home pages provide a possibility to create an
identity on the net by a portrayal of oneself in terms of interests, activities etc.
Given that personal home pages already contain information about individuals‘
knowledge and competence, it is of interest to explore the extent to which they can
function as a knowledge net. With this question in mind, we performed a longitudinal
interview study about the use of personal home pages among people from knowledge-
oriented professions (Groth, 1999, Groth & Lantz, 1997). Although home pages are
often available on a global basis, we were especially interested in their use for sharing
knowledge within an organisation.
In 1996, a group of 22 persons from three different organisations were interviewed
about their personal home page. In combination with the interview the personal home
page was demonstrated. Two of the organisations were research organisations with
personal home pages accessible from Internet. The subjects from the research
organisations had been advised by their managers to have a personal home page. The
third organisation was a software development company using an intranet where people
voluntarily could present personal home pages. All subjects in each organisation
belonged to the same department and they were chosen because they had a personal
home page. After one year seven researchers, and three software developers were
interviewed once again about the changes made to their home page. The home pages of
all 14 researchers and of the three software developers were also examined. After yet
another year the home pages of the 14 researchers and one of the software developers
were once again examined.
At the beginning of the study, most persons interviewed had used the Web for more
than a year. As many as 13 subjects had used it from the beginning of the Web, in
1993/1994. Also, most subjects used the Web every day, and the most common activity
was to search for specific information, often related to the subject‘s work tasks. Eleven
of the subjects, all from the research groups, searched for articles or research reports.
The subjects also reported that they searched for other persons‘home pages because
they wanted to find, e.g., links to other sites about subjects that they knew the author
was interested in, or information about the author such as a picture, contact information
or written reports.
The Web was also used to find solutions to specific problems, to look for conferences,
courses, or organisations of interest. Finally, it was used for looking up non-
professional information such as weather reports, apartments, friends, movies etc.
13
About half of the subjects had had a home page for more than a year. The reasons
reported by the subjects for having made a personal home page were because they
found other persons' home pages useful, they wanted to distribute their publications,
they wanted to try out the new medium, and because they considered it a good way to
find information about other persons.
The results of the study showed that contact information and information about projects
or work that the author was involved in were information items that the subjects both
found interesting on other persons' home pages and included on their own home page.
The reasons given for including project information were because they wanted other
persons to know what they do, and to distribute information about projects. Contact
information was included to give other persons the possibility to make contact.
In a similar study of personal home pages, Bly, Cook, Bickmore, Churchill and Sullivan
(1998) found that most (75%) of the examined personal home pages contained project
related information. Bly et al. mention that the authors of the home pages wanted to
facilitate the access to project information and thereby provide pointers to their work.
For a knowledge net, project-related information may be crucial. However, in order to
get an understanding of the author’s skills, the work/project related information needs
to be more detailed. Contact information is important in a knowledge net like
application because the "expert" needs to be contacted by, e.g., email, phone or in
person.
In our study, only a minority of the subjects had not made any changes to their home
page in 1996, and when comparing the home pages from 1996, 1997, and 1998 it was
found that most people had made some changes to their home page. Reasons given for
updating the information were that the information on the page was outdated, new
interesting links had been found, new projects had been started, more information had
been added which made a new layout of the page necessary, etc. The fact that the
subjects tend to update the information on their personal home page is of interest for a
knowledge net like application, where the validity of the information is important. Bly
et al. (1998) reported that one of the authors in their study thought the work of having a
personal home page was worthwhile because it was important that other persons had the
possibility to find out about him and his work. This is interesting from a general
perspective of the Web as a medium for sharing knowledge, and the dilemmas of equal
participation discussed in the introduction to this chapter. It shows a willingness to
provide personal information for others, although the author's own benefit from the
work of supporting the home pages may be marginal.
Another finding was that some of the subjects said that looking at an unknown persons'
home page made them feel more familiar with that person. Bly et al. (1998) mention
that some of their subjects reported using personal home pages as an introduction to
someone they were going to meet. They also found that the personalisation of a home
page was important.
It seems that a main group of intended readers of people's home pages are colleagues.
The respondents of our study thought that information about research projects,
publications and contact information would interest such persons most. Also, students
were mentioned as a possible group that could be interested in their home page. The
14
information on the home pages described, in most cases, what "project" the owner of
the page is involved in and what areas s/he was interested in. The subjects presented
what they had knowledge about rather than their opinions (although this may also be
found on some home pages). They did not seem to be afraid of presenting what they
knew, wanted to do, and had been doing in the past.
Also, the subjects found the information included on other persons' home pages of
interest, which suggests that what is presented on personal home pages is of relevance
for a knowledge net like application. It was mainly contact information, publications,
and project or research information that was found interesting. Bly et al. (1998) found
that personal home pages are often used by the author's colleagues to get access to other
material. This, together with the findings that some of the subjects had been contacted
about their information on their home page, shows the interest for personal information.
In this regard, many people may have, consciously or unconsciously, used personal
home pages as a knowledge net.
Group collaboration through the Web
In addition to its role as a medium for sharing knowledge in global and local networks,
the Web is also increasingly used to support actual collaboration in small or moderate-
sized groups. This is not a feature that is inherent in the standard Web protocol; instead,
the demands of collaboration support usually require extensions in terms of either
server or client software or both (Dix, 1997).
The research on computer-supported cooperative work in the last decade has so far
yielded few widely used collaborative systems. However, there have been a number of
important insights through the empirical studies of existing systems. Grudin (1988)
showed that it is important that users who have to change their work due to a new
system are also the ones that will benefit from it. Further, there must be a working
infrastructure for collaboration, and it should be easy to switch from individual to group
collaboration. The last two requirements suggest that the Web is a suitable basis for
building cooperative systems.
Collaboration can be defined in different ways, which will have consequences for what
would be included here. A weak definition of collaboration is assumed e.g. in Terveen
and Hill (1998): “Links between web sites can be seen as evidence of a type of
emergent collaboration among Web site authors". They conducted a quantitative study
of such linking behaviour by using a special algorithm to detect the connectivity among
Web sites in various domains.
A definition of collaboration in such terms would imply that almost all use of the Web
is a kind of collaboration. Here, we will restrict the word collaboration in the way
suggested by Dix (1997), i.e. that it requires a common task and a channel for direct
communication between participants of a group. Thus, for a Web-based application to
support collaboration, it should (1) provide some representation of the collaborative
task and its artifacts, (2) make it possible for users to interact with and manipulate these
artifacts, and (3) facilitate user‘s communication with each other about the task.
A central concept in computer-supported cooperative work is awareness. In its original
form, it stands for the co-workers‘ ability to perceive and understand the activities of
15
others as a context for their own work (Dourish & Bellotti, 1992; Dourish, 1999). When
people are working in the same building, they normally observe others‘ activities in
subtle and straightforward ways. For example, when leaving one‘s own office, one may
hear voices, or see someone passing at the end of the corridor, which makes it possible
to infer the state of others‘ activity. In contrast, in mediated collaboration, awareness of
other‘s activities must be deliberately designed for, in a way that is adapted to the users
and their tasks.
The Web does not in itself support users‘ awareness of each other. In the context of
searching for information, this has recently been argued as a weakness by proponents of
the “Social navigation” paradigm, who have attempted to make traces of users‘ activity
more explicit. Certain efforts have also been made to construct Web-based support for
local workgroup awareness; e.g. @ Work (Sandor & Tollmar, 1996) which allows a
group of users to extend their home pages with information about their current
whereabouts on a day-to-day basis9. Furthermore, Web-based virtual environments have
been developed in which users have an explicit representation as an avatar, and which
are thought to encourage synchronous group interaction and support peripheral
awareness (see further below).
Sharing and reviewing documents in working groups
A form of collaboration that is of particular interest for knowledge professionals is the
use of the Web for co-authoring documents within working groups. Certain efforts to
support collaborative management of documents on the Web have focused on creating a
shared repository, including password protection and easy up- and downloading. A
well-known example is the BSCW system (Bentley et al., 1997), which also supports
communication between co-authors. However, it is less common that Web-based
solutions explicitly support collaborative writing, in the sense of interactive user-
document manipulation, support for awareness, and a user-user communication link.
There have been certain efforts in this direction. One example is the Alliance system,
which is a structured cooperative authoring application for distributed collaboration
(Romero Salcedo & Decouchant, 1997). The system has many interesting properties,
but empirical evaluations seem to be missing so far. Sumner and Buckingham Shum
(1998) presented a system for sharing and reviewing documents on the Web, as a part
of a redesigned publishing process for scholarly work. The emphasis is on the
encouragement of an ongoing discourse about the documents submitted. Easy-to-use
facilities are offered for uploading a document and incorporating it into a reading
environment enhanced with communication facilities. The design thus supports an
interactive discussion between authors, reviewers and readers. The system has been
evaluated in several case studies, including an online multimedia journal and a mixed-
modality conference with a concluding face-to-face discussion.
In the KnowHow project, we have developed a series of prototypes for Web-based
authoring and communication based on a concept of “four frames”. The idea, first
materialized in the Domain Help System (DHS)10, is that members of a group share and
comment on a collection of HTML documents (or document parts), available through
selection in a list of hyperlinks. When a comment has been made, it is available
immediately together with the previous comments in a special window. The set of
comments thus evolve into a dialogue between participants, aligned with the document,
16
which serves as communication channel throughout the reviewing process (see
Rodriguez, 1999).
There are many obvious advantages of having a collaborative environment fully
integrated with the Web, as in this case. The users have direct access to the whole Web
and all of its uses - in other words, an existing infrastructure is built on. Links can be
placed within the document and the comments, establishing references to locally or
globally available knowledge sources. And the basis for the application is an ordinary
Web browser, accessible everywhere.
There are also some disadvantages associated with this solution. For example, it is
impossible to control in all aspects how information presented in the system will look to
a user, as the users can normally change the appearance of a document through
preferences made in their Web browser.
The DHS system has been evaluated in several case studies. At first, it was used in our
own laboratory as a tool for updating our Web site. The lab members could read others’
draft project descriptions and make comments on them. It turned out that comments
often referred to the design of the system (described in one of the document sections)
instead of the others’ documents. Apparently, people with a computer or HCI interest
were mostly interested in the novel aspects of the system and less motivated to
comment on each others’ texts. In fact, some members stated in interviews that they did
not favour ”public” criticism of draft project descriptions.
The DHS system has more recently been used in an educational context, for students to
give feedback on each other’s texts within a course. Through these trials, the system has
been gradually improved with respect to usability. In one course, which had a HCI
orientation, the same pattern of commenting on the system emerged, whereas this
pattern was absent in another course dealing with writing scientific papers. Here,
students made many comments on each others’ papers, although the focus of their
comments was often details of spelling and style rather than the content of the papers.
The problem of awareness was reflected through these studies in the time it took the
author of a document to react to a comment. The only way that the system supported
awareness was by showing the last comment made in the window (all other comments
were available through scrolling). In this way, users could just check if they had read
the comment before. In general it took 2-3 days on average, occasionally 10 days, for
the author to reply to a direct question posed to him/her, and in some cases, the author
never replied.
Recently, the DHS system has been developed further into a co-authoring system,
called Collaboracio (Rodriguez, Kim, & Severinson Eklundh, 1999). The system
supports not only shared access to HTML documents and comments, but also facilities
for awareness, joint editing and versioning. The focus is on communication among
distributed co-authors during the reviewing phase of a shared document.
The work in this project was preceded by a series of interviews with academics about
their co-writing practices (Kim & Severinson Eklundh, 2001). The people taking part in
this study did not use any specific collaboration software. Instead, they cooperated by
17
exchanging emails and commenting on paper versions of their articles. It was clear from
this study that users lacked a common infrastructure for collaboration.
<Insert Figure 1 about here>
Figure 1 shows the interface layout of the Collaboracio system. The links to the left
correspond to sections in the document being written. When a section is selected, its
content appears in the upper right frame. The middle right frame is where the comments
are displayed, and the bottom right frame contains buttons for available commands.
Each section can be edited by the participants who have access to that section, by
pressing ”Edit section” and changing the HTML code in a separate window. This
function does not allow for flexible authoring, but is aimed at supporting small changes
rather than original composition of the document.
The awareness of changes to the document is supported in the following way. As soon
as a new comment has been made by one participant, the other participants receive an
email message containing the comment. The same thing happens when a new section
has been added, or a section has been deleted. In this way, the user does not have to
enter the system to check if something important has happened in the collaborative task.
We have evaluated the system in 6 different writing tasks in which groups of 2-9 people
from an academic background participated. These case studies showed that co-authors
used the system for an ongoing, asynchronous dialogue about the writing task, which
served to coordinate their actions and negotiate about changes. In their communication,
users often took account of the whole history of comments (including how people had
reacted to each other's comments) made between members of the group. While other
writing tools often lack this feature, we found that having access to the comment history
is important to promote communication and awareness among co-authors. Also, the
notification about new comments via email played an important role to create a sense of
other members' current activities and the overall state of the task. Since most users read
email on a daily and frequent basis, email notification appears to be a good way of
supporting awareness with minimal effort and delay.
However, email notifications can easily get overwhelming in periods of intense activity.
It emerged early in the case studies that it is not suitable to make every new change in a
document section cause a new email message. In fact, even with the present design, it
should be possible for users to change the level of awareness set by the system,
depending on the task context and their own preferences.
Altogether, the experiences of DHS and Collaboracio point to the conclusion that
groups with an existing common ground (Clark, 1996) in relation to a task, and who are
motivated to collaborate, have considerable use of a Web-based tool for communication
about shared documents. On the other hand, for groups with less incentive to
collaborate, or whose collaboration serves merely to acquire course credits, sharing
knowledge in this way may sometimes be perceived as an extra burden or task, which
means that their participation will not reach a critical level for the group’s benefit.
18
Web-based collaborative virtual environments: a new meeting medium
In many organizations experts work mostly alone. Nevertheless, they need to meet
colleagues for discussions, knowledge exchange, and competence development. In such
contexts, computer support for distributed real-time collaboration may be a relevant
work tool.
Web technology enables distributed storing of information, and support for
synchronous as well as asynchronous communication using text, audio and video.
Moreover, it is possible to build ”Collaborative Virtual Environments” (CVE:s) with
relevant information for a specific group i.e. experts in a domain (cf. Lea, Honda &
Matsuda, 1997). Apart from synchronous communication – usually by text-based chat –
the system offers a graphical representation of a shared environment and participating
users. The graphical representation of a user is referred to as his or her avatar.11 Users
of CVE:s can be seen as visitors who need visual embodiments to provide mutual
awareness and orientation in the virtual environment (Hedman, 2001).
Not many groups of experts use CVE technology, although it is available relatively
easily, and studies in natural settings are rare. Research on CVE's has mainly been
performed in experimental settings, focusing on presence, enjoyment and feelings of
group accord, and subjective reactions such as shyness and conflict (Slater, Sadagic,
Usoh, & Schroder, 1998) and leadership (Tromp, Bullock, Steed, Sadagic, Slater, &
Frécon, 1998).
In a recent case study by Lantz (2001), a workgroup consisting of four researchers were
observed under three conditions: face-to-face, chat and CVE, as they had regular
meetings. The CVE was an open world in Active Worlds™ consisting of a building
with an exhibition area, surrounded by trees on a lawn, and a blue heaven.
Results from the analysis of the data, collected via observations and questionnaires
distributed after each meeting, showed that both chat and the CVE were experienced as
very slow. This could be explained both by limitations in the technology itself, and by
the fact that the participants were not skilled "chatters", i.e. they had not developed a
language of ”shorthand” efficient in a chat environment. Another reason for delays
could be that participants were performing other parallel activities during the meeting,
such as talking on the phone, to a visitor, or reading e-mail. This has also been
discussed by Bowers et al. (1996b).
Ratings of efficiency were obtained by asking questions about overall efficiency, task
oriented work and the number of items handled on the agenda. It turned out that the
CVE was rated as more efficient and task oriented than face-to-face meetings. This can
be explained by the fact that social talk was a substantial part of the face-to-face
meetings while meetings in the chat and CVE focused on the tasks to be performed.
Regarding communication and the representation of each participant by her/his name,
the chat environment was very difficult to communicate in. Extreme discipline was
necessary, and a set of rules for how to communicate was developed. It was necessary
to follow only one thread of discussion, and rules were needed for organizing the turn
taking among participants. In the CVE, the discipline and rules were not as important.
Since participants were represented by avatars, their position in the CVE and their
spatial relations in the group made turn taking more or less transparent. People would
19
usually talk in the order of their spatial positions in the environment, and discussing one
topic at a time was facilitated.
Overall, the participants were able to enter, navigate and communicate in the CVE
although they did not have any previous experience of using this particular technology.
Using a common meeting spot in the CVE seemed to be preferred compared to just
using the built-in chat function. All three ways to perform meetings were rated as being
enjoyable, although the level of enjoyment decreased for the chat and CVE after the
first meeting.
The results indicate that face-to-face meetings are needed in order to facilitate learning
and competence development, e.g. for brainstorming. Also, participants are in favor of
knowing each other before starting to communicate in the CVE. Bowers et al. (1996a)
state that the overall design of CVE:s should be considered with respect to how they
afford social interaction and not just in terms of navigability, capability of presenting
information or aesthetic appeal. Our study also indicates the following design elements
of a CVE as important for distributed meetings: improved communication facilities
(e.g. speech interface, support for turn-taking); support for common material, (e.g.
documents), and support for parallel activities (e.g. writing).
More recently, an experimental study has been performed by Sallnäs and Hedman
(2001) investigating to what extent and in what way collaboration in CVE is affected by
an audio or video connection in comparison to text chat. This study gives additional
evidence of the properties of text chat in comparison with other ways of communicating
in a CVE, by analysing dialogues conducted in each medium.
Thirty pairs of subjects performed a decision-making task that was presented to them as
a written scenario. A CVE was constructed in the ActiveWorlds system, and had the
appearance of a simple exhibition with information stations (see Figure 2). The stations
included posters with pictures of cars of different models, and corresponding movie
clips with information about the cars. Humanlike avatars represented the subjects. The
task was, for each pair of subjects, to go through the exhibition, and decide on a car
together. This involved discussing both the information available in the CVE and the
subjects' individual preferences, based on prior knowledge that was relevant to making
the decision.
<Insert Figure 2 about here>
Twenty-seven dialogues out of thirty were transcribed. These dialogues were coded into
twelve categories according to Bales' (1976) Interaction Process Analysis (IPA) by two
people independently. Results show that the amount of communication and thus the
number of code units was significantly lower in the text-chat condition than in the other
conditions. However, no significant difference was found between the voice and video
conditions with respect to the amount of communication between subjects; the number
of code units was almost the same.
The IPA analysis showed that the subjects' verbal behaviour in the text-chat condition
differed in several respects from the other conditions. Subjects both provided more
information and asked for more information in the voice and video conditions than in
20
the text-chat condition. This was mainly because they investigated and discussed more
of the information displayed in the CVE. Many of the questions and much of the
information shared in the audio and video conditions concerned personal issues, such as
how large subjects´ families were, or personal experiences relevant to the information
displayed. Subjects also explored the CVE more completely, and consequently had
more to discuss. Furthermore, subjects shared more opinions in the voice and video
conditions as they negotiated more extensively in those conditions than in the text-chat
condition. They often discussed and analysed the information carefully, while at the
same time communicating their personal preferences. In the text-chat condition, on the
other hand, negotiations were crude and were more based on appearances of cars than
on information about functionality and preferences in this respect. Subjects did not
seem as engaged in the discussion in the text-chat condition and the dialogues exhibited
numerous misunderstandings.
Subjects showed more agreement in the video and voice conditions than in the text-chat
condition. This might be because it was easier to give fast feedback in the voice and
video conditions than in the text-chat condition. Subjects also showed more tension-
releasing behavior in the voice and video than in the text condition. They were joking
more and often expressed satisfaction regarding individual or cooperative behaviour.
However, there were examples of this in the text-chat condition also. Smileys
(emotionally expressive symbols created with standard keyboard characters) were used
by the subjects in order to communicate a joke or feelings of satisfaction.
When studying the percentages of dialogue acts, it emerged that a substantial part of the
communication in all three conditions was focused on problem solving. The reason why
more than half of the dialogue is focused on problem solving in the text-chat condition
might be that, since communicating in this medium is harder, most of the effort is put
into actually solving the task.
The communication in the voice and video condition, on the other hand, was more
socially oriented than in the text-chat condition. More feedback was given in the voice
and video condition, that either intervened or was communicated in parallel to the other
persons´ utterances. This is evidently hard to accomplish in the text-chat condition.
Video as an added information channel did not seem to make a great difference in
comparison to the voice mode. This result is in agreement with previous research about
the use of video communication in problem-solving tasks (see Whittaker, 1995;
Whittaker & O'Conaill, 1997). It was noticed, however, that the video channel was used
in certain typical situations:
• During long pauses in the conversation--to attract the partners attention, or to see if
the partner was busy, or ready to interact.
• When problems were encountered, i.e., navigational, or interface-related--to establish
mutual awareness of pressing situations.
• During greetings, and during discussions prior to important decision-making, to
establish eye-contact, according to traditional social norms.
Thus the video-channel, while not used heavily, did serve important functions. It was
used to structure the conversation, to establish and maintain mutual awareness, and to
allow certain kinds of social interaction that would otherwise not have been possible.
21
Conclusions
Through the work in the KnowHow project, we have begun to look into the complexity
and the promises of the Web as a medium for communication and knowledge exchange.
The area is vast, and the studies reported here should be seen as just a beginning.
However, we do feel that using a combination of empirical studies and explorative
design work is a promising approach that may lead to new insights as well as to
concrete recommendations for the design of collaborative tools on the Web.
The Web is constantly changing, both in terms of contextual and technical conditions. It
is difficult to state general conclusions from the work presented here, and it is clear that
longitudinal studies are necessary to increase our understanding with respect to some of
the questions studied. Nevertheless, the research reviewed and our own studies support
the picture of the Web as a potentially powerful social infrastructure for knowledge
work, the actual realization of which depends on contextual conditions well known
from previous studies of collaborative work. Web technology can help people
accomplish tasks together in new ways, across geographical boundaries, but the extent
to which such cooperation actually takes place is dependent on a range of situational
factors. These include participants’ motivation to share knowledge and be visible to
others, the constraints of their tasks and the cooperative climate in their everyday work
situation. In addition, Web-based tools must be designed to fulfill usability
requirements and be easily integrated with people’s existing work tools – factors that
currently meet considerable challenges for developers as well as researchers.
For example, the studies of home pages and the experiences from the Collaboracio
design work show that the Web affords truly new ways of collaboration, using
technology easily available to virtually everyone. At the same time, it seems clear that
people will only accept a new Web-based tool if they gain something particular from it.
There is not always a balance between individuals’ need for updated information and
their own willingness to supply such information. More stable patterns of collaboration
may emerge slowly, under the influence of certain well-known examples of
constructive Web use, and with the emergence of a new generation of network-oriented
users.
Acknowledgements
The research reported here has been supported by the Swedish Transport and
Communications Research Board, and the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research
through the Graduate School for Human-Machine Interaction.
We are grateful for the constructive comments given by Olle Bälter and Teresa Cerratto
on an earlier version of the chapter.
22
References
Abrams D., Baecker R., & Chignell M. (1998). Information archiving with bookmarks:
personal Web space construction and organization. In Proceedings of ACM CHI'98
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp.41-48). New York: ACM
Press.
Ackerman, M. S. (1994), Augmenting the organizational memory: a field study of
Answer Garden, in Proceedings of ACM CSCW'94 Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 243-252). New York: ACM Press.
Ackerman, M. S., & Malone, T. W. (1990), Answer Garden: A tool for growing
organizational memory, in Proceedings of ACM Conference on Office Information
Systems (pp. 31-39). Cambridge, MA, USA: ACM Press.
Ackerman, M. S., & McDonald, D. W. (1996), Answer Garden 2: Merging
organizational memory with collaborative help, in Proceedings of ACM CSCW'96
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 97-105). New York:
ACM Press.
Bales, R. F. (1976). Interaction process analysis: a method for the study of small
groups. Chicago : Univ. of Chicago Press.
Balsvik, G. (1999) Electronic networks and knowledge creation: A study of new
learning perspectives related to the context of a media profession. Technical report
TRITA-NA-P9911, NADA, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
Balsvik, G. (chapter in this volume).
Bannon, L. (1986), Helping Users Help Each Other. In D.A. Norman & S.W. Draper
(eds.) User Centered System Design: New Perspectives on Human-Computer
Interaction (pp. 399-410). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bannon, L. J., & Kuutti, K. (1996), Shifting Perspectives on Organizational Memory:
From Storage to Active Remembering, in Proceedings of HICSS-29, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering Inc.
Bellotti, V., & Rogers, Y. (1997) From Web press to Web pressure: Multimedia
representations and multimedia publishing. In Proceedings of ACM CHI'97
Conferenceon Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 279-286). New York:
ACM Press.
Bentley, R., Appelt, W., Busbach, U., Hinrichs, E., Kerr, D., Sikkel, D., Trevor, K., &
Woetzel, G. (1997). Basic support for collaborative work on the World Wide Web.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 46(6), 827-846.
Berners-Lee, T., Caillaiau, R., Luotonen, A., Nielsen, H.F., & Secret, A. (1994) The
World Wide Web. Communications of the ACM, 37(8), 76-82.
Bly, S., Cook, L., Bickmore, T., Churchill, E., & Sullivan, J. W. (1998), The rise of
personal Web pages at work, in Proceedings of ACM CHI'98 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Summary) (pp. 313-314). New York: ACM Press.
Bowers, J.,  Pycock, J., & O'Brien, J, (1996a). Talk and embodiment in collaborative
virtual environments. In Proceedings of ACM CHI'96 Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (pp. 58-65). New York: ACM Press
Bowers, J.,  Pycock, J., & O'Brien, J, (1996b). Practically accomplishing immersion:
cooperation in and for virtual environments. In Proceedings of ACM CSCW'96
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, New York: ACM Press.
Buckingham Shum, S. (1998) Evolving the Web for scientific knowledge: first steps
towards an ”HCI Knowledge Web”. Interfaces Magazine, British HCI Group,
December 1998.
23
Buckingham Shum, S., & McKnight, C. (Eds.) (1997) Special issue on World Wide
Web  usability. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 47(1), 1-218.
Bush, V. (1945) As We May Think. Atlantic Monthly, 176, 101-108.
Bälter, O. (1998) Electronic mail in a working context. Doctoral thesis, IPLab-155,
TRITA-NA-9820, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
Card, S., Robertson, G., & York, W. (1996) The Web-book and Web forager: An
Information workspace for the World-Wide Web. In Proceedings from ACM CHI'96
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 11-117). New York:
ACM Press.
Carleson, F., Lundberg, T., & Nässla, H. (1997) Magazines and electronic Web
channels – The reader's point of view. In Proceedings of ACM CHI'97 Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 253-254). Atlanta, Georgia: ACM
Press.
Cerratto, T. (2001). Collaborative learning in synchronous text-based environments.
Technical report TRITA-NA-178, NADA, Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm.
Cerratto, T., & Wærn, Y (2000). Chatting to learn and learning to chat in collaborative
virtual environments. In M/C: A Journal of Media and Culture 3(4).
(http://www.apinetwork.com/mc/0008/learning.html)
Clark, H. H. (1996) Using Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Conklin, J., & Begeman, M. L. (1988), gIBIS: A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy
Discussion. In Proceedings of ACM CSCW'88 Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (pp. 140-152), ACM Press.
Dix, A. (1997) Challenges for Cooperative Work on the Web: An Analytical Approach.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collaborative Computing 6
(2/3), 135-156.
Dourish, P. (1999) Where the footprints lead: tracking down other roles for social
navigation. In A.J. Munro, K. Höök, & D. Benyon (Eds.) Social Navigation of
Information Space (pp. 15-34), Springer Verlag, London.
Dourish, P., & Bellotti, V. (1992) Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. In
Proceedings of ACM CSCW’92 Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work, (pp. 107-114). New York: ACM Press.
Dourish, P., & Chalmers, M. (1994) Running out of space: models of information
navigation. Short paper presented at HCI'94, Glasgow, 1994.
Erickson, T. (1996) The World-Wide Web as Social Hypertext. Communications of the
ACM, 39 (1), 15-17.
Eveland, J. D., Blanchard, A., Brown, W., & Mattocks, J. (1994), The role of "help
networks" in facilitating use of CSCW tools. In Proceedings of ACM CSCW'94
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 265-274). New York:
ACM Press.
Finn, K.E., Sellen, A.J., & Wilbur, S.B. (1997) Video-mediated communication.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Groth, K. (1999) Knowledge Net – A Support for Sharing Knowledge within an
Organisation, Licentiate thesis, IPLab-156, TRITA-NA-9902, Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm.
Groth, K., & Lantz, A. (1997). Personliga hemsidor - funktion eller passion? (Personal
homepages - function or passion?). In STIMDI'97, Linköping, September 1997, p.
29-34.
Grudin, J. (1988) Why CSCW applications fail: Problems in the design and evaluation
24
of organisational Interfaces. In Proceedings of ACM CSCW’88 Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (pp. 85-93). New York: ACM Press.
Hedman, A. (2001) Visitor orientation: human-computer interaction in digital places.
Licentiate dissertation, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm. ISBN-91-7283-
049-2, TRITA-NA-0103, ISSN-0348-2952.
Hill, W. C., & Terveen, L. (1997). Involving remote users in continuous design of Web
content. In Proceedings of DIS'97: Designing Interactive Systems: Processes,
Practices, Methods, & Techniques (pp. 137-145).
Holtzblatt, K. (1999). Customer centred design as discipline. Proceedings of
INTERACT'99 (pp.3-17). M. Angela Sasse and C. Johnson (Eds), IOS Press
Instone, K. (1996). HCI and the Web, SIGCHI Bulletin, 28, 4, pp. 42-45.
Järvela & Häkkinen  (chapter in this volume).
Kautz, H., Selman, B., & Shah, M. (1997) The referral web: combining social networks
and collaborative filtering. Communications of the ACM 40 (3), 63-65.
Kim, H-C., & Severinson Eklundh, K. (2001) Reviewing practices in collaborative
writing. To appear in Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of
Collaborative Computing.
Kollock, P., & Smith, M. (1996) Managing the virtual commons: Cooperation and
conflict in computer communities. In S.C. Herring (Ed.) Computer-mediated
communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives. Amsterdam: J.
Benjamins Publishing Company.
Kraut, R. E., & Streeter, L. A. (1995), Coordination in Software Development,
Communications of the ACM, 38 (3), 69-81.
Lantz, A. (1998). Heavy users of email. International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction, 10(4), 361-379.
Lantz, A. (2001) Meetings in a distributed group of experts: Comparing face-to-face,
chat and a collaborative virtual environments. Accepted  for publication in
Behavioural and Information Technology, 2001.
Lantz, A., & Severinson Eklundh, K. (1999) Kommunikation och kompetensutveckling
via elektroniska nätverk: en förstudie. (Communication and competence
development via electronic networks: a prestudy). Technical report IPLab-159,
TRITA-NA-P9903, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden.
Lea, R., Honda, Y., & Matsuda, K. (1997) Virtual society: Collaboration in 3D spaces
on the Internet. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Vol. 6, No. 2/3, pp. 227-
250.
Munro, A.J., Höök., K., & Benyon, D.R. (1999a) Footprints in the snow. In A.J. Munro,
K. Höök, & D.R. Benyon (Eds.) Social navigation of information space (pp. 1-14),
Springer Verlag, London.
Munro, A.J., Höök, K. & Benyon, D.R. (1999b). Social navigation of information
space. Springer Verlag, London.
Nielsen, J. (1997). The telephone is the best metaphor for the Internet.
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/9705b.html/
Perlman, G. (1998). Web-based user interface evaluation with questionnaires. In
http:/www.acm.org/~perlman/question.html, 1998-10-10.
Rodriguez, H. (1999) The Domain Help System. Technical report TRITA-NA-P9912,
CID-56, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
Rodriguez, H., Kim, H-C, & Severinson Eklundh, K. (1999) Using the Web as
infrastructure for collaborative writing and document design. Poster presented at
ECSW'99 (6th European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work),
25
Copenhagen, 1999.
Sallnäs, E-L., & Hedman, A. (2001) Exploring communicative modes for a virtual
environment: a social psychological analysis. Technical report IPLab-181,
Department of Numerical Analysis and Computer Science, Royal Institute of
Technology, Sweden.
Sandor, O., & Tollmar, K. (1996) @Work: The design of a new communication tool. In
Proceedings of the ERCIM W4G workshop on CSCW and the Web, Sankt Augustin,
Germany, February 1996.
Sellen, A., & Harper, R. (1997) Paper as an analytic resource for the design of new
technologies. Proceedings of ACM CHI'97 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 319-326). New York: ACM Press.
Shneiderman, B. (1998). Codex, memex, genex: The pursuit of transformational
technologies. In Proceedings of ACM CHI' 98 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 98-99). New York: ACM Press.
Slater. M., Sadagic, A., Usoh, M., & Schroder, R. (1998). Small group behavior in a
virtual and real environment: A comparative study. Paper presented at the BT
Workshop on Presence in Shared Virtual Environments, June 1998.
Sumner, T., & Buckingham Shum, S. (1998). From documents to discourse: Shifting
conceptions of scholarly publishing. In Proceedings of ACM CHI'98 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. New York: ACM Press.
Tauscher, L., & Greenberg, S. (1997). How people revisit Web pages: empirical
findings and implications for the design of history systems. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 47(1), 97-137.
Terveen, L., & Hill, W. (1998). Evaluating emergent collaboration on the Web. In
Proceedings of ACM CSCW'98 Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work, (pp. 355-362). New York: ACM Press.
Tromp, J., Bullock, A., Steed, A., Sadagic, A., Slater, M. & Frécon, E. (1998). Small
group behavior experiments in the Coven Project. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications,18(6), 53-63.
Waterson, P. E., Clegg, C. W., & Axtell, C. M. (1997), The dynamics of work
organization, knowledge and technology during software development, International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 46 (1), 79-101.
Whittaker, S. (1995) Rethinking video as a technology for interpersonal
communications: theory and design implications.  International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 42 (5), 501-529.
Whittaker, S., & O'Conaill, B. (1997) The role of vision in face-to-face and mediated
communication. In K.E. Finn, A.J. Sellen & S.B. Wilbur (Eds.), Video-mediated
communication (pp. 23-49). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Whittaker, S. & Sidner, C. (1996). Email overload: exploring personal information
management of email. Proceedings of ACM CHI'96 Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 276-283. New York: ACM Press.
Whittaker, S., Terveen, L., Hill, W., & Cherny, L. (1998) The dynamics of mass
interaction. Proceedings of ACM CSCW'98 Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work (pp. 257-264). New York: ACM Press.
26
NOTES
                                                 
1 As we are focusing on professional communication, many issues concerning Web and Internet usage are
not covered in this chapter. For example, the area of on-line commerce is mainly outside the scope of this
paper. Furthermore, computer-mediated communication is only dealt with insofar as it occurs as part of
Web-based activity.
2 One example is Tapped In™. a shared teacher professional development workplace, patterned after a
real world conference center. It began developing its community in the summer of 1997 and had grown to
over 8500 members and over 15 partner organizations by May of 2000. Studies about the use of Tapped
In show that teachers benefit from using them as a place for informal discussions and collaboration, to
exchange tips and advice and to share educational resources rather than as a space for importing
"traditional classrooms" on-line (see Cerratto, 2001; Cerratto and Waern, 2000).
3  The problem of unequal participation is well-known and has frequently been discussed with respect to
other electronic media. For example in Usenet newsgroups, discussions tend to be dominated by a few
active individuals (see Whittaker, Terveen, Hill, & Cherny, 1998), and many others participate only as
passive ”lurkers”.
4  The name of the project has been changed for reasons of the integrity of participants.
5 http://www.abuzz.com/.
6 http://www.experts-exchange.com/.
7 http://www.sixdegrees.com/.
8 A home page on the Web is the intended entry point of a logical information structure (usually called a
web site) from which all other pages on the site may be reached, directly or via other pages, by hypertext
links. A home page can refer to an individual, a group or an organisation. If a home page is written
(partly or wholly) by and about an individual, it is called a personal home page.
9 @ Work was developed within our own research environment by Ovidiu Sandor and Konrad Tollmar.
The design was ambitious, e.g . including links from people’s personal information to the telephone
switchboard, in order to be able to update information about their work hours and activities. However, the
tool never reached a critical threshold of use. A possible explanation is that there were problems of
usability in the Web presentation, such as long response times and lack of overview. Also, it is
conceivable that people felt it was too much work to update the information, compared to the benefit they
gained from it (cf. Grudin, 1988).
10 DHS was developed in a collaboration project between IPLab and CID at KTH.
11  The term avatar originates from Hindu mythology, where it indicated the temporary body that a god
inhabits while visiting earh.

