Web Mining: Information and Pattern Discovery 
on the World Wide Web * 
R. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
University of Minnesota 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA 
Abstract 
Application of data mining techniques to  the World 
Wide  Web, referred to  as Web  mining, has been the 
focus of several recent research projects and papers. 
However, there is n o  established vocabulary, leading to  
confusion when comparing research efforts. The  t e r m  
W e b  mining has been used in two distinct ways. T h e  
first, called Web content mining in this paper, is  the 
process of information discovery f rom sources across 
the World Wide  Web. The  second, called Web  m a g e  
mining, is the process of mining f o r  user browsing and 
access patterns. I n  this paper we define W e b  mining 
and present an  overview of the various research is- 
sues, techniques, and development e f forts .  W e  briefly 
describe W E B M I N E R ,  a system for Web usage min- 
ing, and conclude this paper by  listing research issues. 
1 Introduction 
With the explosive growth of information sources 
available on the World Wide Web, it has become 
increasingly necessary for users to utilize automated 
tools in find the desired information resources, and to  
track and analyze their usage patterns. These factors 
give rise to the necessity of creating server-side and 
client-side intelligent systems that can effectively mine 
for knowledge. Web mining can be broadly defined as 
the discovery and analysis of useful information from 
the World Wide Web. This describes the automatic 
search of information resources available on-line, i.e. 
Web content mining, and the discovery of user access 
patterns from Web servers, i.e., Web usage mining. 
In this paper, we provide an overview of tools, tech- 
niques, and problems associated with both dimen- 
sions. We present a taxonomy of Web mining, and 
place various aspects of Web mining in their proper 
This work was supported in part by NSF grant ASC- 
9554517 
Figure 1: Taxonomy of Web Mining 
context. There are several important issues, unique 
to  the Web paradigm, that come into play if sophis- 
ticated types of analyses are to be done on server 
side data collections. These include integrating var- 
ious data sources such as server access logs, referrer 
logs, user registration or profile information; resolving 
difficulties in the identification of users due to  miss- 
ing unique key attributes in collected data; and the 
importance of identifying user sessions or transactions 
from usage data, site topologies, and models of user 
behavior. We devote the main part of this paper to 
the discussion of issues and problems that characterize 
Web usage mining. Furthermore, we survey some of 
the emerging tools and techniques, and identify sev- 
eral future research directions. 
2 A Taxonomy of Web Mining 
In this section we present a taxonomy of Web min- 
ing, i.e. Web content mining and Web usage mining. 
We also describe and categorize some of the recent 
work and the related tools or techniques in each area. 
This taxonomy is depicted in Figure 1. 
558 
1082-3409197 $10.00 0 1997 IEEE 
2.1 Web Content Mining: 
The lack of structure that permeates the informa- 
tion sources on the World Wide Web makes auto- 
mated discovery of Web-based information difficult. 
Traditional search engines such abs Lycos, Alta Vista, 
Webcrawler, ALIWEB [29], MetaCrawler, and others 
provide some comfort to users, but do not generally 
provide structural information nor categorize, filter, 
or interpret documents. A recent study provides a 
comprehensive and statistically thorough comparative 
evaluation of the most popular search engines [32]. 
In recent years these factors have prompted re- 
searchers to develop more intelligent tools for infor- 
mation retrieval, such as intelligent Web agents, and 
to extend data mining techniques, to provide a higher 
level of organization for semi-structured data available 
on the Web. We summarize some of these efforts be- 
low. 
2.1.1 Agent-Based Approach. Generally, 
agent-based Web mining systems can be placed into 
the following three categories: 
Intelligent Search Agents: Several intelligent 
Web agents have been developed that search for rel- 
evant information using domain characteristics and 
user profiles to organize and interpret the discov- 
ered information. Agents such a s  Harvest [6], FAQ- 
Finder [19], Information Manifold [27], OCCAM [30], 
and Parasite [51] rely either on pre-specified domain 
information about particular types of documents, or 
on hard coded models of the information sources to re- 
trieve and interpret documents. Agents such as Shop- 
Bot [14] and ILA (Internet Learning Agent) [42] in- 
teract with and learn the structure of unfamiliar infor- 
mation sources. ShopBot retrieves product informa- 
tion from a variety of vendor sites using only general 
information about the product domain. ILA learns 
models of various information sources and translates 
these into its own concept hierarchy. 
Information Filtering/Categorization: A 
number of Web agents use various information re- 
trieval techniques [17] and Characteristics of open hy- 
pertext Web documents to automatically retrieve, fil- 
ter, and categorize them [5, 9, 34, 55, 531. HyPur- 
suit [53] uses semantic information embedded in link 
structures and document content to create cluster hi- 
erarchies of hypertext documents, and structure an 
information space. BO (Bookmark Organizer) [34] 
combines hierarchical clustering techniques and user 
interaction to organize a collection1 of Web documents 
based on conceptual information. 
Personalized Web Agents: This category of 
Web agents learn user preferences and discover Web 
information sources based on these preferences, and 
those of other individuals with similar interests (us- 
ing collaborative filtering). A few recent examples of 
such agents include the Webwatcher [3], PAINT [39], 
Syskill & Webert [41], GroupLens [47], Firefly [49], 
and others [4]. For example, Syskill & Webert utilizes 
a user profile and learns to rate Web pages of interest 
using a Bayesian classifier. 
2.1.2 Database Approach. Database ap- 
proaches to Web mining have focused on techniques 
for organizing the semi-structured data on the Web 
into more structured collections of resources, and us- 
ing standard database querying mechanisms and data 
mining techniques to analyze it. 
Multilevel Databases: The main idea behind 
this approach is that the lowest level of the database 
contains semi-structured information stored in various 
Web repositories, such as hypertext documents. At 
the higher level(s) meta data or generalizations are 
extracted from lower levels and organized in struc- 
tured collections, i.e. relational or object-oriented 
databases. For example, Han, et. al. [56] use a multi- 
layered database where each layer is obtained via gen- 
eralization and transformation operations performed 
on the lower layers. Kholsa, et. al. [25] propose the 
creation and maintenance of meta-databases at each 
information providing domain and the use of a global 
schema for the meta-database. King & Novak [26] 
propose the incremental integration of a portion of the 
schema from each information source, rather than re- 
lying on a global heterogeneous database schema. The 
ARANEUS system [40] extracts relevant information 
from hypertext documents and integrates these into 
higher-level derived Web Hypertexts which are gener- 
alizations of the notion of database views. 
Web Query Systems: Many Web-based query 
systems and languages utilize standard database query 
languages such as SQL, structural information about 
Web documents, and even natural language process- 
ing for the queries that are used in World Wide 
Web searches. W3QL [28] combines structure queries, 
based on the organization of hypertext documents, 
and content queries, based on information retrieval 
techniques. WebLog [31] Logic-based query language 
for restructuring extracts information from Web in- 
formation sources. Lore1 [46] and UnQL [7, 81 query 
heterogeneous and semi-structured information on the 
Web using a labeled graph data model. TSIMMIS [lo] 
extracts data from heterogeneous and semi-structured 
information sources and correlates them to generate 
559 
an integrated database representation of the extracted 
information. 
2.2 Web Usage Mining 
Web usage mining is the automatic discovery of user 
access patterns from Web servers. Organizations col- 
lect large volumes of data in their daily operations, 
generated automatically by Web servers and collected 
in server access logs. Other sources of user information 
include referrer logs which contain information about 
the referring pages for each page reference, and user 
registration or survey data gathered via CGI scripts. 
Analyzing such data can help organizations deter- 
mine the life time value of customers, cross marketing 
strategies across products, and effectiveness of pro- 
motional campaigns, among other things. It can also 
provide information on how to restructure a Web site 
to create a more effective organizational presence, and 
shed light on more effective management of workgroup 
communication and organizational infrastructure. For 
selling advertisements on the World Wide Web, ana- 
lyzing user access patterns helps in targeting ads to 
specific groups of users. 
Most existing Web analysis tools [16, 23, 371 pro- 
vide mechanisms for reporting user activity in the 
servers and various forms of data filtering. Using such 
tools it is possible to determine the number of accesses 
to the server and to individual files, the times of visits, 
and the domain names and URLs of users. However, 
these tools are designed to handle low to  moderate 
traffic servers, and usually provide little or no analy- 
sis of data relationships among the accessed files and 
directories within the Web space. 
More sophisticated systems and techniques for dis- 
covery and analysis of patterns are now emerging. 
These tools can be placed into two main categories, 
as discussed below. 
2.2.1 Pattern Discovery Tools. The emerging 
tools for user pattern discovery use sophisticated tech- 
niques from AI, data mining, psychology, and infor- 
mation theory, to mine for knowledge from collected 
data. For example, the WEBMINER system [12, 361 
introduces a general architecture for Web usage min- 
ing. WEBMINER automatically discovers association 
rules and sequential patterns from server access logs. 
In [ll] algorithms are introduced for finding maxi- 
mal  forward references and large reference sequences. 
These can, in turn be used to  perform various types 
of user traversal path analysis, such as identifying the 
most traversed paths thorough a Web locality. Pirolli 
et. al. [43] use information foraging theory to  com- 
bine path traversal patterns, Web page typing, and 
site topology information to categorize pages for eas- 
ier access by users. 
2.2.2 Pattern Analysis Tools. Once access pat- 
terns have been discovered, analysts need the appro- 
priate tools and techniques to understand, visualize, 
and interpret these patterns, e.g. the WebViz system 
[45]. Others have proposed using OLAP techniques 
such as data cubes for the purpose of simplifying the 
analysis of usage statistics from server access logs [15]. 
The WEBMINER system [36] proposes an SQL-like 
query mechanism for querying the discovered knowl- 
edge (in the form of association rules and sequential 
patterns). These techniques and others are further 
discussed in the subsequent sections. 
3 Pattern Discovery from Web 
Transactions 
As discussed in section 2.2, analysis of how users 
are accessing a site is critical for determining effec- 
tive marketing strategies and optimizing the logical 
structure of the Web site. Because of many unique 
characteristics of the client-server model in the World 
Wide Web, including differences between the physical 
topology of Web repositories and user access paths, 
and the difficulty in identification of unique users as 
well as user sessions or transactions, it is necessary to 
develop a new framework to enable the mining pro- 
cess. Specifically, there are a number of issues in pre- 
processing data for mining that must be addressed be- 
fore the mining algorithms can be run. These include 
developing a model of access log data, developing tech- 
niques to  clean/filter the raw data to eliminate outliers 
and/or irrelevant items, grouping individual page ac- 
cesses into semantic units (i.e. transactions), integra- 
tion of various data sources such as user registration 
information, and specializing generic data mining al- 
gorithms to take advantage of the specific nature of 
access log data. 
3.1 Preprocessing Tasks 
The first preprocessing task is data cleaning. Tech- 
niques to clean a server log to eliminate irrelevant 
items are of importance for any type of Web log analy- 
sis, not just data mining. The discovered associations 
or reported statistics are only useful if the data repre- 
sented in the server log gives an accurate picture of the 
user accesses of the Web site. Elimination of irrelevant 
items can be reasonably accomplished by checking the 
560 
suffix of the URL name. For instance, all log entries 
with filename suffixes such as, gif, jpeg, GIF, JPEG, 
jpg, JPG, and map can be removed. 
A related but much harder problem is determining 
if there are important accesses that are not recorded 
in the access log. Mechanisms such as local caches and 
proxy servers can severely distort the overall picture 
of user traversals through a Web site. Current meth- 
ods to try to overcome this problem include the use of 
cookies, cache busting, and explicit user registration. 
As detailed in [44], none of these methods are with- 
out serious drawbacks. Cookies can be deleted by the 
user, cache busting defeats the speed advantage that 
caching was created to  provide and can be disabled, 
and user registration is voluntary and users often pro- 
vide false information. Methods for dealing with the 
caching problem include using site topology or referrer 
logs, along with temporal information to infer missing 
references. 
Another problem associated with proxy servers is 
that of user identification. Use of a machine name 
to uniquely identify users can result in several users 
being erroneously grouped together as one user. An 
algorithm presented in [43] checks tlo see if each incom- 
ing request is reachable from the pages already visited. 
If a page is requested that is not directly linked to the 
previous pages, multiple users are alssumed to exist on 
the same machine. In [12], user session lengths deter- 
mined automatically based on navigation patterns are 
used to identify users. Other heuristics involve using 
a combination of IP address, machine name, browser 
agent, and temporal information to  identify users [44]. 
The second major preprocessing task is transac- 
t ion identification. Before any mining is done on 
Web usage data, sequences of page references must 
be grouped into logical units representing Web trans- 
actions or user sessions. A user session is all of the 
page references made by a user during a single visit 
to a site. Identifying user sessions is similar to the 
problem of identifying individual users, as discussed 
above. A transaction differs from a user session in 
that the size of a transaction can range from a sin- 
gle page reference to all of the page references in a 
user session, depending on the criteria used to iden- 
tify transactions. Unlike traditional domains for data 
mining, such as point of sale datalbases, there is no 
convenient method of clustering page references into 
transactions smaller than an entire user session. This 
problem has been addressed in [ll] and [12]. 
3.2 Discovery Techniques on Web "rans- 
actions 
Once user transactions or sessions have been iden- 
tified, there are several kinds of access pattern mining 
that can be performed depending on the needs of the 
analyst, such as path analysis, discovery of associa- 
tion rules and sequential patterns, and clustering and 
classification. 
There are many different types of graphs that can 
be formed for performing path analysis, since a graph 
represents some relation defined on Web pages (or 
other objects). The most obvious is a graph repre- 
senting the physical layout of a Web site, with Web 
pages as nodes and hypertext links between pages as 
directed edges. Other graphs could be formed based 
on the types of Web pages with edges representing sim- 
ilarity between pages, or creating edges that give the 
number of users that go from one page to another [43]. 
Most of the work to date involves determining frequent 
traversal patterns or large reference sequences from 
the physical layout type of graph. Path analysis could 
be used to determine most frequently visited paths in 
a Web site. Other examples of information that can 
be discovered through path analysis are: 
0 70% of clients who accessed /company/product2 
did so by starting at /company and proceed- 
ing through /company/new, /company/products, 
and /company/productl; 
0 80% of clients who accessed the site started from 
/company/products; or 
0 65% of clients left the site after four or less page 
references. 
The first rule suggests that there is useful informa- 
tion in /company/product2, but since users tend to 
take a circuitous route to the page, it is not clearly 
marked. The second rule simply states that the ma- 
jority of users are accessing the site through a page 
other than the main page (assumed to be /company in 
this example) and it might be a good idea to include 
directory type information on this page if it is not 
there already. The last rule indicates an attrition rate 
for the site. Since many users don't browse further 
than four pages into the site, it would be prudent to 
ensure that important information is contained within 
four pages of the common site entry points. 
Association rule discovery techniques [l, 481 are 
generally applied to databases of transactions where 
each transaction consists of a set of items. In such a 
framework the problem is to discover all associations 
561 
and correlations among data items where the presence 
of one set of items in a transaction implies (with a cer- 
tain degree of confidence) the presence of other items. 
In the context of Web usage mining, this problem 
amounts to discovering the correlations among refer- 
ences to various files available on the server by a given 
client. Each transaction is comprised of a set of URLs 
accessed by a client in one visit to the server. For ex- 
ample, using association rule discovery techniques we 
can find correlations such as the following: 
e 40% of clients who accessed the Web page 
with URL /company/product 1, also accessed 
/company/product2; or 
0 30% of clients who accessed /company/special, 
placed an online order in /company/productl. 
Since usually such transaction databases contain 
extremely large amounts of data, current association 
rule discovery techniques try to prune the search space 
according to  support for items under consideration. 
Support is a measure based on the number of occur- 
rences of user transactions within transaction logs. 
Discovery of such rules for organizations engaged 
in electronic commerce can help in the development 
of effective marketing strategies. But, in addition, as- 
sociation rules discovered from WWW access logs can 
give an indication of how to best organize the organi- 
zation’s Web space. 
The problem of discovering sequential patterns [35, 
521 is to find inter-transaction patterns such that the 
presence of a set of items is followed by another item 
in the time-stamp ordered transaction set. In Web 
server transaction logs, a visit by a client is recorded 
over a period of time. The time stamp associated 
with a transaction in this case will be a time interval 
which is determined and attached to the transaction 
during the data cleaning or transaction identification 
processes. The discovery of sequential patterns in Web 
server access logs allows Web-based organizations to 
predict user visit patterns and helps in targeting ad- 
vertising aimed at groups of users based on these pat- 
terns. By analyzing this information, the Web mining 
system can determine temporal relationships among 
data items such as the following: 
30% of clients who visited /company/products, 
had done a search in Yahoo, within the past week 
on keyword w; or 
e 60% of clients who placed an online order in 
/company/product 1, also placed an online order 
in /company/product4 within 15 days. 
Another important kind of data dependency that 
can be discovered, using the temporal characteristics 
of the data, are similar time sequences. For example, 
we may be interested in finding common characteris- 
tics of all clients that visited a particular file within 
the time period [t l ,  t z ] .  Or, conversely, we may be in- 
terested in a time interval (within a day, or within a 
week, etc.) in which a particular file is most accessed. 
Discovering classification rules [20, 541 allows one 
to develop a profile of items belonging to a particu- 
lar group according to their common attributes. This 
profile can then be used to classify new data items 
that are added to the database. In Web usage mining, 
classification techniques allow one to develop a profile 
for clients who access particular server files based on 
demographic information available on those clients, or 
based on their access patterns. For example, classifi- 
cation on WWW access logs may lead to  the discovery 
of relationships such as the following: 
0 clients from state or government agencies who 
visit the site tend to be interested in the page 
/company/product I; or 
e 50% of clients who placed an online order in 
/company/product2, were in the 20-25 age group 
and lived on the West Coast. 
Clustering analysis [24, 381 allows one to group to- 
gether clients or data items that have similar char- 
acteristics. Clustering of client information or data 
items on Web transaction logs, can facilitate the de- 
velopment and execution of future marketing strate- 
gies, both online and off-line, such as automated re- 
turn mail to clients falling within a certain cluster, 
or dynamically changing a particular site for a client, 
on a return visit, based on past classification of that 
client. 
4 Analysis of Discovered Pat- 
terns 
The discovery of Web usage patterns, carried out by 
techniques described earlier, would not be very useful 
unless there were mechanisms and tools to help an an- 
alyst better understand them. Hence, in addition to 
developing techniques for mining usage patterns from 
Web logs, there is a need to develop techniques and 
tools for enabling the analysis of discovered patterns. 
These techniques are expected to draw from a num- 
ber of fields including statistics, graphics and visual- 
ization, usability analysis, and database querying. In 
this section we provide a survey of the existing tools 
562 
and techniques. Usage analysis of Web access behav- 
ior being a very new area, there is very little work in it, 
and correspondingly this survey is not very extensive. 
Visualization has been used very successfully in 
helping people understand various kinds of phenom- 
ena, both real and abstract. Hence it is a natural 
choice for understanding the behavior of Web users. 
Pitkow, et a1 [45] have developed the WebViz system 
for visualizing WWW access patterns. A W e b  path 
paradigm is proposed in which sets of server log en- 
tries are used to extract subsequences of Web traver- 
sal patterns called W e b  paths. WebViz allows the ana- 
lyst to selectively analyze the portion of the Web that 
is of interest by filtering out the irrelevant portions. 
The Web is visualized as a directed graph with cy- 
cles, where nodes are pages and edg,es are (inter-page) 
hyperlinks. 
On-Line Analytical Processing (OLAP) is emerg- 
ing as a powerful paradigm for strategic analysis of 
databases in business settings. It has been recently 
demonstrated that the functional and performance 
needs of OLAP require that new information struc- 
tures be designed. This has led to  the development 
of the data cube information model [NI, and tech- 
niques for its efficient implementation [2, 22, 501. Re- 
cent work [15] has shown that the analysis needs of 
Web usage data have much in common with those of a 
data warehouse, and hence OLAP techniques are quite 
applicable. The access information in server logs is 
modeled as an append-only history, which grows over 
time. Since the size of server logs grows quite rapidly, 
it may not be possible to provide on-line analysis of 
all of it. Therefore, there is a need to summarize the 
log data, perhaps in various ways, to make its on-line 
analysis feasible. Making portions of the log selec- 
tively (in)visible to various analysts may be required 
for security reasons. 
One of the reasons attributed to  the great success of 
relational database technology has been the existence 
of a high-level, declarative, query language, which al- 
lows an application to express what conditions must 
be satisfied by the data it needs, rathler than having to 
specify how t o  get the required data. Given the large 
number of patterns that may be mined, there appears 
to be a definite need for a mechanism to specify the 
focus of the analysis. Such focus may be provided in 
at least two ways. First, constraints may be placed on 
the database (perhaps in a declarative language) to 
restrict the portion of the database to  be mined for, 
e.g. [36]. Second, querying may be performed on the 
knowledge that has been extracted bly the mining pro- 
cess, in which case a language for querying knowledge 
rather than data is needed. An SQL-like querying 
mechanism has been proposed for the WEBMINER 
system [36]. For example, The query 
SELECT association-rules(A*B*C*) 
FROM log. data 
WHERE date >= 970101 AND domain = ”edu” 
AND support = 1.0 AND confidence = 90.0 
extracts the rules involving the ‘‘.edu,’ domain after 
Jan 1, 1997, which start with URL A, and contain B 
and C in that order, and that have a minimum support 
of 1 % and a minimum confidence of 90 %. 
5 Web Usage Mining Architec- 
ture 
We have developed a general architecture for Web 
usage mining which is presented in [13] and [36]. The 
WEBMINER is a system that implements parts of 
this general architecture. The architecture divides the 
Web usage mining process into two main parts. The 
first part includes the domain dependent processes of 
transforming the Web data into suitable transaction 
form. This includes preprocessing, transaction identi- 
fication, and data integration components. The sec- 
ond part includes the largely domain independent ap- 
plication of generic data mining and pattern matching 
techniques (such as the discovery of association rule 
and sequential patterns) as part of the system’s data 
mining engine. The overall architecture for the Web 
mining process is depicted in Figure 2. 
Data cleaning is the first step performed in the Web 
usage mining process. Some low level data integration 
tasks may also be performed at this stage, such as 
combining multiple logs, incorporating referrer logs, 
etc. After the data cleaning, the log entries must be 
partitioned into logical clusters using one or a series of 
transaction identification modules. The goal of trans- 
action identification is to create meaningful clusters of 
references for each user. The task of identifying trans- 
actions is one of either dividing a large transaction into 
multiple smaller ones or merging small transactions 
into fewer larger ones. The input and output transac- 
tion formats match so that any number of modules to 
be combined in any order, as the data analyst sees fit. 
Once the domain-dependent data transformation 
phase is completed, the resulting transaction data 
must be formatted to conform to the data model of 
the appropriate data mining task. For instance, the 
format of the data for the association rule discovery 
task may be different than the format necessary for 
mining sequential patterns. Finally, a query mech- 
563 
Figure 2: A General Architecture for Web Usage Mining 
anism will allow the user (analyst) to  provide more 
control over the discovery process by specifying vari- 
ous constraints. For more details on the WEBMINER 
system refer to 113, 361. 
on whatever is possible and allowable at any point in 
time. 
Portions of Web usage data exist in sources as di- 
verse as W e b  server logs, referral logs, registration 
files, and index server logs. Intelligent integration and 
correlation of information from these diverse sources 
can reveal usage information which may not be ev- 
integration [33] should be examined for this purpose. 
Web usage data collected in various logs is at a very 
of being extremely general and fairly detailed, it also 
alyzed directly, since the analysis may start focusing 
on micro trends rather than on the macro trends. On 
6 Research Directions 
The techniques being applied to Web content min- ident from any one of them- Techniques from data 
ing draw heavily from the work On information re- 
trieval, databases, intelligent agents, etc. Since most 
where, we have focused on Web usage mining in this 
ing we provide some directions for future research. 
of these techniques are well known and reported else- fine granularity. Therefore, while it has the advantage 
survey instead of Web content mining. In the follow- has the corresponding drawback that it cannot be an- 
6.1 Data Pre-Processing for Mining 
Web usage data is collected in various ways, each 
mechanism collecting attributes relevant for its pur- 
pose. There is a need to pre-process the data to  make 
it easier to  mine for knowledge. Specifically, we be- 
lieve that issues such as instrumentation and data col- 
lection, data integration and transaction identification 
need to be addressed. 
Clearly improved data quality can improve the 
quality of any analysis on it. A problem in the Web 
domain is the inherent conflict between the analysis 
needs of the analysts (who want more detailed usage 
data collected), and the privacy needs of users (who 
want as little data collected as possible). This has 
lead to the development of cookie files on one side and 
cache busting on the other. The emerging OPS stan- 
dard on collecting profile data may be a compromise 
on what can and will be collected. However, it is not 
clear how much compliance to this can be expected. 
Hence, there will be a continual need to develop better 
instrumentation and data collection techniques, based 
the other hand, the issue of whether a trend is micro 
or macro depends on the purpose of a specific analysis. 
Hence, we believe there is a need to group individual 
data collection events into groups, called W e b  trans- 
actions [12], before feeding it to the mining system. 
While [ll, 12, 361 have proposed techniques to do so, 
more attention needs to be given to this issue. 
6.2 The Mining Process 
The key component of Web mining is the mining 
process itself. As discussed in this paper, Web mining 
has adapted techniques from the field of data mining, 
databases, and information retrieval, as well as devel- 
oping some techniques of its own, e.g. path analysis. A 
lot of work still remains to be done in adapting known 
mining techniques as well as developing new ones. 
Web usage mining studies reported to  date have 
mined for association rules, temporal sequences, clus- 
ters, and path expressions. As the manner in which the 
Web is used continues to expand, there is a continual 
need to figure out new kinds of knowledge about user 
564 
behavior that needs to be mined. 
The quality of a mining algorithm can be measured 
both in terms of how eflective it is in mining for knowl- 
edge and how ef ic ient  it is in computational terms. 
There will always be a need to improve the perfor- 
mance of mining algorithms along both these dimen- 
sions. 
Usage data collection on the VVeb is incremental 
in nature. Hence, there is a need to develop min- 
ing algorithms that take as input the existing data, 
mined knowledge, and the new data, and develop a 
new model in an efficient manner. 
Usage data collection on the Web is also distributed 
by its very nature. If all the data were to be integrated 
before mining, a lot of valuable information could be 
extracted. However, an approach of collecting data 
from all possible server logs is both non-scalable and 
impractical. Hence, there needs to be an approach 
where knowledge mined from various logs can be inte- 
grated together into a more comprehensive model. 
6.3 Analysis of Mined Knowledge 
The output of knowledge mining algorithms is often 
not in a form suitable for direct human consumption, 
and hence there is a need to devel'op techniques and 
tools for helping an analyst better assimilate it. Issues 
that need to be addressed in this area include usage 
analysis tools and interpretation of mined knowledge. 
There is a need to develop tools which incorporate 
statistical methods, visualization, aind human factors 
to help better understand the mined knowledge. Sec- 
tion 4 provided a survey of the current literature in 
this area. 
One of the open issues in data mining, in general, 
and Web mining, in particular, is the creation of in- 
telligent tools that can assist in the interpretation of 
mined knowledge. Clearly, these t'ools need to  have 
specific knowledge about the particular problem do- 
main to do any more than filtering blased on statistical 
attributes of the discovered rules or patterns. In Web 
mining, for example, intelligent agents could be de- 
veloped that based on discovered access patterns, the 
topology of the Web locality, and certain heuristics 
derived from user behavior models, could give recom- 
mendations about changing the physical link structure 
of a particular site. 
7 Conclusion 
The term Web mining has been used to refer to  
techniques that encompass a broad range of issues. 
However, while meaningful and attractive, this very 
broadness has caused Web mining to mean different 
things to different people [21, 361, and there is a need 
to develop a common vocabulary. Towards this goal 
we proposed a definition of Web mining, and devel- 
oped a taxonomy of the various ongoing efforts related 
to it. Next, we presented a survey of the research in 
this area and concentrated on Web usage mining. We 
provided a detailed survey of the efforts in this area, 
even though the survey is short because of the area's 
newness. We provided a general architecture of a sys- 
tem to do Web usage mining, and identified the issues 
and problems in this area that require further research 
and development. 
References 
[l] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Fast algorithms for min- 
ing association rules. In Proc. of the 20th VLDB Con- 
ference, pages 487-499, Santiago, Chile, 1994. 
[2] S. Agrawal, R. Agrawal, P.M. Deshpande, A. Gupta, 
J. Naughton, R. Ramakrishna, and S. Sarawagi. On 
the computation of multidimensional aggregates. In 
Proc. of the 22nd VLDB Conference, pages 506-521, 
Mumbai, India, 1996. 
[3] R. Armstrong, D. Fkeitag, T. Joachims, and 
T. Mitchell. Webwatcher: A learning apprentice for 
the world wide web. In Proc. A A A I  Spring Sympo- 
sium on Information Gathering from Heterogeneous, 
Distributed Environments. 1995. 
[4] M. Balabanovic, Yoav Shoham, and Y .  Yun. An 
adaptive agent for automated web browsing. Journal 
of Visual Communication and Image Representation, 
6(4), 1995. 
[5] A. Z. Broder, S. C. Glassman, M. S. Manasse, and 
G Zweig. Syntactic clustering of the web. In Proc. of 
6th International World Wide Web Conference, 1997. 
[6] C. M. Brown, B. B. Danzig, D. Hardy, U. Manber, 
and M. F. Schwartz. The harvest information dis- 
covery and access system. In Proc. 2nd International 
World Wide Web Conference, 1994. 
[7] P. Buneman, S. Davidson, G. Hillebrand, and D. Su- 
ciu. A query language and optimization techniques 
for unstructured data. In Proc. of 1996 ACM- 
SIGMOD Int. Conf. on Management of Data, 1996. 
[8] P. Buneman, S. Davidson, and D. Suciu. Program- 
ming constrcuts for unstructured data. In Proceedings 
of ICDT'95, Gubbio, Italy, 1995. 
[9] C. Chang and C. Hsu. Customizable multi-engine 
search tool with clustering. In Proc. of 6th Znterna- 
tional World Wide Web Conference, 1997. 
565 
[lo] S. Chawathe, H. Garcia-Molina, J. Hammer, K. Ir- 
land, Y. Papakonstantinou, J. Ulman, and J .  Widom. 
The tsimmis project: Integration of heterogenous in- 
formation sources. In Proc. IPSJ Conference, Tokyo, 
1994. 
[11] M.S. Chen, J.S. Park, and P.S. Yu. Data mining 
for path traversal patterns in a web environment. In 
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on 
Distributed Computing Systems, pages 385-392, 1996. 
I121 R. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava. Group- 
ing web page references into transactions for mining 
world wide web browsing patterns. Technical Report 
TR 97-021, University of Minnesota, Dept. of Com- 
puter Science, Minneapolis, 1997. 
[13] R. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava. Web min- 
ing: Information and pattern discovery on the world 
wide web. Technical Report T R  97-027, University of 
Minnesota, Dept. of Computer Science, Minneapolis, 
1997. 
1141 R. B. Doorenbos, 0. Etzioni, and D. S. Weld. A scal- 
able comparison shopping agent for the world wide 
web. Technical Report 96-01-03, University of Wash- 
ington, Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, 
1996. 
1151 C. Dyreson. Using an incomplete data cube as a 
summary data sieve. Bulletin of the IEEE Technical 
Committee on Data Engineering, pages 19-26, March 
1997. 
[16] e.g. Software Inc. Webtrends. 
http://www.webtrends.com, 1995. 
[I71 W. B. Frakes and R. Baeza-Yates. In fomat ion  Re- 
trieval Data Structures and Algorithms. Prentice 
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1992. 
[18] J. Gray, A. Bosworth, A. Layman, and H. Pirahesh. 
Data cube: A relational aggregation operator gener- 
alizing group-by, cross-tab, and sub-totals. In IEEE 
12th International Conference on Data Engineering, 
pages 152-159, 1996. 
[19] K. Hammond, R. Burke, C. Martin, and S. Lytinen. 
Faq-finder: A case-based approach to  knowledge nav- 
igation. In Working Notes of the A A A I  Spring Sym- 
posium: Information Gathering from Heterogeneous, 
Distributed Environments. AAAI Press, 1995. 
[20] J. Han, Y .  Cai, and N. Cercone. Data-driven dis- 
covery of quantitative rules in relational databases. 
In IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Eng., 
volume 5, pages 29-40, 1993. 
[21] J. Han, Y. Fu, W. Wang, K. Koperski, and 0. Za- 
iane. Dmql: A data mining query language for rela- 
tional databases. In SIGMOD’96 Workshop on Re- 
search Issues in Data Mining and Knowledge Discov- 
ery  (DMKD’SG), Montreal, Canada, 1996. 
[22] V. Harinarayan, A. Rajaraman, and J.D. Ullman. Im- 
plementing data cubes efficiently. In PTOC. of 1996 
ACM-SIGMOD Int. Conf. on Management of Data, 
pages 311-322, Montreal, Canada, 1996. 
[23] Open Market Inc. Open market web reporter. 
http://www.openmarket.com, 1996. 
[24] L. Kaufman and P.J. Rousseeuw. Finding Groups 
in Data: an Introduction to Cluster Analysis. John 
Wiley & Sons, 1990. 
[25] I. Khosla, B. Kuhn, and N. Soparkar. Database search 
using informatiuon mining. In Proc. of 1996 ACM- 
SIGMOD Int. Conf. on Management of Data, 1996. 
[26] R. King and M. Novak. Supporting information in- 
frastructure for distributed, heterogeneous knowledge 
discovery. In PTOC. SIGMOD 96 Workshop on Re- 
search Issues on Data Mining and Knowledge Dis- 
covery, Montreal, Canada, 1996. 
[27] T. Kirk, A. Y .  Levy, Y. Sagiv, and D. Srivastava. The 
information manifold. In Working Notes of the A A A I  
Spring Symposium: Information Gathering from Het- 
erogeneous, Distributed Environments. AAAI Press, 
1995. 
[28] D. Konopnicki and 0. Shmueli. W3qs: A query sys- 
In Proc. of the 21th tem for the world wide web. 
VLDB Conference, pages 54-65, Zurich, 1995. 
[29] M. Koster. Aliweb - archie-like indexing in the web. 
In Proc. 1st International Conference on the World 
Wide Web, pages 91-100, May 1994. 
[30] C. Kwok and D. Weld. Planning to  gather informa- 
tion. In Proc. 14th National Conference on AI ,  1996. 
[31] L. Lakshmanan, F. Sadri, and I. N. Subramanian. 
A declarative language for querying and restructur- 
ing the web. In Proc. 6th International Workshop on 
Research Issues in Data Engineering: Interoperability 
of Nontraditional Database Systems (RIDE-NDS’96), 
1996. 
[32] H. Vernon Leighton and J. Srivastava. Pre- 
cision among WWW search services (search en- 
gines): Alta Vista, Excite, Hotbot, Infoseek, 
Lycos. http://www.winona.msus.edu/is-f/library- 
f/webind2/webind2.htm, 1997. 
[33] E. Lim, S.Y.  Hwang, J. Srivastava, D. Clements, and 
M. Ganesh. Myriad: design and implementaion of 
federated database prototype. Software - Practive €!i 
Experience, 25(5):533-562, 1995. 
566 
[34] Y .  S. Maarek and I.Z. Ben Shad. Automatically or- 
ganizing bookmarks per contenit. In Proc. of 5th In- 
ternational World Wide Web Conference, 1996. 
1351 H. Mannila, H. Toivonen, and A. I. Verkamo. Dis- 
covering frequent episodes in sequences. In Proc. of 
[47] P. Resnik, N. Iacovou, M. Sushak, P. Bergstrom, and 
J. Riedl. Grouplens: An open architecture for col- 
laborative filtering of netnews. In Proc. of the 1994 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work Conference, 
ACM, 1994. 
the First Int ’1 Conference on .Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining, pages 210-21#5, Montreal, Quebec, 
1995. 
B. Mobasher, N. Jain, E. Han, and J. Srivastava. Web 
mining: Pattern discovery from world wide web trans- 
actions. Technical Report T R  !36-050, University of 
Minnesota, Dept. of Computer Science, Minneapolis, 
1996. 
net. Genesis. net .a,nalysis desktop. 
http://www.netgen.com, 1996. 
R. Ng and J. Han. Efficient and effective clustering 
method for spatial data mining. In Proc. of the 20th 
VLDB Conference, pages 144-1.55, Santiago, Chile, 
1994. 
K. A. Oostendorp, W. F. Punch, and R. W. Wig- 
gins. A tool for individualizing the web. In PTOC. 2nd 
International World Wide Web Conference, 1994. 
P. Merialdo P. Atzeni, G. Mecca. Semistructured and 
structured data in the web: Going back and forth. In 
Proceedings of the Workshop on the Management of 
Semistructured Data (in conjunction with ACM SIG- 
MOD), 1997. 
M. Pazzani, J. Muramatsu, and D. Billsus. Syskill 
& webert: Identifying interesting web sites. In Proc. 
AAAI Spring Symposium on Machine Learning i n  In- 
formation Access, Portland, Ore;gon, 1996. 
M. Perkowitz and 0. Etaioni. Category translation: 
learning to understand informat#ion on the internet. 
In Proc. 15th International Joint Conference on A I ,  
pages 930-936, Montral, Canada., 1995. 
P. Pirolli, J. Pitkow, and R. Rao. Silk from a 
sow’s ear: Extracting usable structures from the 
web. In Proc. of 1996 Conferencle on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI-96), Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada, 1996. 
J. Pitkow. In search of reliable! usage data on the 
www. In Sixth International W c d d  Wade W e b  Con- 
ference, pages 451-463, Santa Clara, CA, 1997. 
J. Pitkow and Krishna K. Bharat. Webviz: A tool for 
world-wide web access log analysis. In First Interna- 
tional WWW Conference, 1994. 
D. Quass, A. Rajaraman, Y. Sagiv, J. Ullman, and 
J. Widom. Querying semistructured heterogeneous 
information. In International Conference on Deduc- 
tive and Object Oriented Databas:es, 1995. 
[48] A. Savasere, E. Omiecinski, and S. Navathe. An ef- 
ficient algorithm for mining association rules in large 
databases. In Proc. of the 21th VLDB Conference, 
pages 432-443, Zurich, Switzerland, 1995. 
[49] U. Shardanand and P. Maes. Social information fil- 
tering: Algorithms for automating ”word of mouth”. 
In PTOC. of 1995 Conference on Human Factors in  
Computing Systems (CHI-95), pages 210-217, 1995. 
[50] A. Shukla, P.M. Deshpande, J. Naughton, and K. Ra- 
maswamy. Storage estimation for multidimensional 
aggregates in the presence of hierarchies. In Proc. of 
the 22nd VLDB Conference, pages 522-531, Mumbai, 
India, 1996. 
[51] E. Spertus. Parasite: mining structural information 
on the web. In Proc. of 6th International World Wade 
Web Conference, 1997. 
[52] R. Srikant and R. Agrawal. Mining sequential pat- 
terns: Generalizations and performance improve- 
ments. In PTOC. of the Fifth Int’l Conference on Ex- 
tending Database Technology, Avignon, France, 1996. 
[53] R. Weiss, B. Velez, M. A. Sheldon, C. Namprempre, 
P. Szilagyi, A. Duda, and D. K. Gifford. Hypur- 
suit: a hierarchical network search engine that ex- 
ploits content-link hpertexxt clustering. In Hyper- 
text’96: The Seventh ACM Conference on Hypertext, 
1996. 
[54] S.M. Weiss and C. A. Kulikowski. Computer Sys- 
tems that Learn: Classification and Prediction Meth- 
ods from Statistics, Neural Nets, Machine Learning, 
and Expert Systems. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, 
CA, 1991. 
[55] M. R. Wulfekuhler and W. F. Punch. Finding salient 
features for personal web page categorization. In 
Proc. of 6th International World Wide Web Confer- 
ence, 1997. 
[56] 0. R. Zaiane and J. Han. Resource and knowledge 
discovery in global information systems: A prelim- 
inary design and experiment. In Proc. of the First 
Int ’1 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, pages 331-336, Montreal, Quebec, 1995. 
567 

