Evolving Spatially Aggregated Features From
Satellite Imagery for Regional Modeling
Sam Kriegman, Marcin Szubert, Josh C Bongard, and Christian Skalka
University of Vermont, Burlington VT 05405, USA,
sam.kriegman@uvm.edu
Abstract. Satellite imagery and remote sensing provide explanatory
variables at relatively high resolutions for modeling geospatial phenom-
ena, yet regional summaries are often desirable for analysis and action-
able insight. In this paper, we propose a novel method of inducing spatial
aggregations as a component of the machine learning process, yielding
regional model features whose construction is driven by model predic-
tion performance rather than prior assumptions. Our results demonstrate
that Genetic Programming is particularly well suited to this type of fea-
ture construction because it can automatically synthesize appropriate
aggregations, as well as better incorporate them into predictive models
compared to other regression methods we tested. In our experiments we
consider a specific problem instance and real-world dataset relevant to
predicting snow properties in high-mountain Asia.
Keywords: spatial aggregation, feature construction, genetic program-
ming, symbolic regression
1 Introduction
Regional modeling focuses on explaining phenomena occurring at a regional, as
opposed to site-specific or global scales [11]. Regional models are of interest in
many remote sensing applications, as they provide meaningful units for analysis
and actionable insight to policymakers. Yet satellite imagery and remote sens-
ing provide variables at relatively high resolutions. Consequently, studies often
involve decisions concerning how to integrate this information in order to model
regional processes. Considering measurements at each individual spatial unit as
a separate model feature can result in a high dimensional problem in which high
variance and overfitting are major concerns. For this reason, spatial aggregation
is often applied in this setting to uniformly up-sample variables to be consistent
with the response. Although in averaging variables across all spatial units in the
region, we discard information which could in turn diminish prediction accuracy
and our understanding of underlying phenomena.
Rather than strictly incorporating individual spatial units or uniformly up-
sampling, it might instead be beneficial to construct features of a regional model
using particularly important subsets of geographical space. In this paper, we
ar
X
iv
:1
70
6.
07
88
8v
1 
 [
st
at
.M
L
] 
 2
4 
Ju
n 
20
17
move away from uniform up-sampling aggregations towards more flexible and in-
teresting aggregation operations predicated on their subsequent use as features
of a regional model. We propose a novel method of inducing spatial aggrega-
tions as a component of the machine learning process, yielding features whose
construction is driven by model performance rather than prior assumptions.
In experiments designed to explore these techniques, we consider a specific
problem and real dataset: estimating regional Snow Water Equivalent (SWE)
in high-mountain Asia with satellite imagery. Improved estimation of SWE in
mountainous regions is critical [3] but is difficult due in part to complex charac-
teristics of snow distribution [2].
2 Methods
We take a comparative approach to the SWE problem, considering ridge regres-
sion, lasso, and GP-based symbolic regression1. For each regression model, we
consider a filter-based method of feature construction in addition to a second,
more dynamic method. For linear regression, we incorporate a wrapper approach
in which constructed features and the regression model are induced in separate
learning processes, with feedback between the two. For symbolic regression, we
use an embedded approach where constructed features and the regression model
are induced simultaneously over the course of an evolutionary run.
The Dataset. The SWE dataset2 is derived from data collected by NASA’s Ad-
vanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer (AMSR2/E) and Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) for March 1 - September 30, in 2003 - 2011,
over an area that spans most of the high mountain Asia. We have three explana-
tory variables measured daily across a 113× 113 regular grid for 1935 days: (1)
mean and (2) standard deviation of sub-pixel Snow Covered Area [4,10], as well
as (3) an estimate of SWE derived from passive microwaves [15]. Our response
variable is regional SWE, an attribute of the entire study region, represented
as a single value for each of the 1935 days. The response was “reconstructed”
by combining snow cover depletion record with a calculation of the melt rate to
retroactively estimate how much snow had existed in the region [9].
2.1 Regression Models
Ridge regression [5] is similar to ordinary least squares (OLS) but subject to a
bound on the L2-norm of the coefficients. Because of the nature of its quadratic
constraint, ridge regression cannot produce coefficients exactly equal to zero
and keeps all of the features in its model. Lasso (Least Absolute Shrinkage and
1 The source code necessary for reproducing our results is available at
https://github.com/skriegman/ppsn_2016.
2 Raw satellite data was pre-processed by Dr. Jeff Dozier (UCSB) using previously
reported techniques and is available upon request.
Selection Operator, [16]) modifies the ridge penalty and is subject to a bound
on the L1-norm of the coefficients. The geometry of this L1-penalty has a strong
tendency to produce sparse solutions with coefficients exactly equal to zero. In
many high dimensional settings, lasso is the state-of-the-art regression method
given its ability to produce parsimonious models with excellent generalization
performance. For both lasso and ridge regression, the parameter constraining
the coefficients is set through cross-validation.
Genetic Programming (GP, [7]) is a very flexible heuristic technique which
can conveniently represent free-form mathematical equations (candidate regres-
sion models) as parse trees. GP’s inherent flexibility is well-suited for our particu-
lar problem because it can efficiently express spatial aggregations and seamlessly
combine them into the learning process with minimal assumptions. Furthermore,
the “white box” nature of GP may provide physical insights about this complex
problem that is currently lacking, as in other domains [1, 13].
To search the space of possible GP trees we use a variant of Age-Fitness
Pareto Optimization (AFPO, [12]). AFPO is a multiobjective method that re-
lies on the concept of genotypic age, an attribute intended to preserve diversity.
We extend AFPO to include an additional objective of model size, defined as the
syntactic length of an individual tree. The size attribute protects parsimonious
models which are less prone to overfitting the training data. The GP algorithm
therefore identifies the Pareto front using three objectives (all minimized): age,
error (fitness), and size. For the fitness objective, we use a correlation-based
function rather than pure error, and define fCOR = 1− |φ(ŝ, s)|, where φ(ŝ− s)
denotes Pearson correlation between model predictions (ŝ) and actual values of
our response (s), regional SWE. Correlation has recently been shown to outper-
form error-based search drivers given that if a model makes a systematic error it
could be easily eliminated by linearly scaling the output and therefore should be
protected [14]. Accordingly, for all GP implementations, we apply a linear trans-
formation after fCOR -driven evolution has concluded, by using an individual
program (model) output as the single input of OLS on the training data.
Our implemented GP experiments used ramped half-and-half initialization
with a height range of 2−6 and an instruction set including unary ({sin, cos, log,
exp}) and binary functions ({×,+,−, /}). One thousand individuals in the pop-
ulation are subject to crossover (with probability 0.75) and mutation (with prob-
ability 0.01) over the course of 1000 generations. There is a static limit on the
tree height (17) as well as the tree size (300 nodes). Each experiment consists
of 30 evolutionary runs, from which the best model (lowest training fCOR) is
selected. The selected model is then transformed using OLS, and subsequently
validated using unseen test data.
Standard Methods. Ridge regression, lasso, and GP may be performed on
the raw data using each variable at each individual spatial unit as a separate
feature. We denote these methods as Standard Ridge (SR), Standard Lasso (SL)
and Standard GP (SGP). SR, SL and SGP each have access to 113× 113× 3 =
38307 features, but only 1720 observations in each fold of data.
2.2 Feature Construction Methods
Feature construction is a well studied problem and the utility of genetic program-
ming for feature construction has been recognized in many previous studies [8].
The key difference in our work from this past work is the nature of the data
being modeled. We presume that there exist spatial autocorrelations of varying
size and shape that, if aggregated to improve the signal to noise ratio, yield
features supporting more accurate predictions.
In a regional model, we can construct features by aggregating higher di-
mensional variables across space. However, it is not entirely clear what kind of
aggregations are useful as features of a predictive model. Grouping variables
based on similarity or dissimilarity does not necessarily produce useful regional
features. In this paper, we make an assumption about the importance of distance
and continuity in effective spatial aggregations, based on Tobler’s first law of ge-
ography [17] which states that “everything is related to everything else, but near
things are more related than distant things.” Accordingly, we limit the space of
possible spatial aggregations to be an average of values within a circular spatial
area defined by its centerpoint and radius. However, where to aggregate, how
many aggregations to perform, and how to combine the aggregates must still be
determined manually or decided during model optimization. We view filters and
wrappers as intermediary steps in relaxing assumptions towards our embedded
approach, which automates all three of these aspects.
The Filter Method. Filter-based feature construction methods transform or
“filter” the original variables as a preprocessing step, prior to modeling. Our fil-
ter for the SWE problem represents a static up-sampling transformation of the
original variables. Each variable is decomposed in space by a grid of overlapping
circles3 of equal radii centered on a square lattice pattern of points (see Figure
1a,c,e for example). Each constructed feature corresponds to the average (arith-
metic mean) of a particular variable sampled within a particular circle of space.
Units that reside in an overlapping region of two separate circles are included in
the calculation of both features. Since there are three explanatory variables in
the SWE dataset, an R × R grid corresponds to p = 3R2 constructed features.
The constructed features are then used as inputs for ridge regression, lasso, and
GP, which we will refer to as Filtered Ridge (FR), Filtered Lasso (FL), and Fil-
tered GP (FGP). We will also specify the value of R used in a particular model
instance as a subscript, e.g. FR15 denotes Filtered Ridge with R=15. We con-
sider filters with R ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 20}, however note that the standard methods are
essentially filters with R = 113, albeit with the non-overlapping square pixels.
The Wrapper Method. Wrapper-based feature construction methods incor-
porate feedback from the fit of the model. We implement wrappers around both
3 The shape of circles are in reality so-called “small circles,” as they lie on the surface
of earth.
ridge regression and lasso in order to enable the circular sampling regions to de-
fine their own center and radius. The circles are no longer fixed on a grid with a
predetermined size. Instead, each constructed feature is uniquely parameterized
by the coordinates of a center unit (x, y), as a latitude and longitude tuple, and
a radius r, as a single value floating point number in km. The center can be any
spatial unit in the region, including one at the edge of the raster. The radius is
restricted to be within 0 and 1000 km, which is flexible enough to contain only
a single unit or span the entire region (see Figure 1b,d for example).
Wrapped Ridge (WR) and Wrapped Lasso (WL) separately use a ridge/lasso-
driven hill climbing algorithm to construct features that minimize Mean Absolute
Error (MAE), i.e. 1n
∑n
i=1 |ŝi − si|, where si is the actual value of our response
(regional SWE) and ŝi is output predicted by the model over n observations.
The algorithm uses the same number of circles for each of the three variables,
initializing their parameters (x, y, r) randomly. For 1000 iterations, a single con-
structed feature (circle) is randomly selected and subject to a Gaussian mutation
on one of its parameters with standard deviation equal to 25% of the radius and
centered at zero. A new ridge/lasso model is then refit on the mutated set of
features using a random subset of data sampled without replacement. If the mu-
tation lowered model error on the complementing set of training data left out,
then the change is accepted. Otherwise, the mutation is undone. If a proposed
mutation to the radius would take it outside the restricted range of 0−1000 km,
then it is “bounced-back” the distance it would have exceeded the boundary. For
example, a random mutation that would result in a radius of 1200 km, becomes
1000 − (1200 − 1000) = 800 km. Thirty restarts are used from which the best
model based on training data is selected. We consider R ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} for wrap-
pers corresponding to 3×R2 features which really means 3× 3×R2 modifiable
parameters.
The Embedded Method. By using GP, we can allow for flexibility with
respect to the placement and number of aggregations as well as the way in
which they are combined to form a model. However, stochastic optimization
methods like GP cannot be easily “refit” in the same manner as deterministic
algorithms like ridge regression or lasso. Therefore using wrapper approach for
GP is computationally infeasible. Instead, modifications to aggregated features
are implemented through mutation-based operators.
In Genetic Programming with Embedded Spatial Aggregation (GPESA) in-
troduced here, our constructed features are represented as parameterized tree
terminals, with parameters (x, y, r). Constructed features are randomly initial-
ized in the same manner as the wrapper method, but separately for each terminal
of each individual in the population. Greedy Gaussian mutations to the param-
eters (x, y, r) of a randomly selected constructed feature occur in the population
with 20% probability, each generation. Mutations to r have mean zero and a
standard deviation of 25%, subject to the bounce-back rule. Similarly, muta-
tions to (x, y) have mean distance zero and a standard deviation of 0.25r. For
25 iterations, greedy mutations modify the parameterized terminals within a
particular GP tree. A modification is accepted if it successfully reduces aver-
age error (fCOR) on random subsets of training data sampled with replacement.
Aside from the stochastic application, another key difference between the wrap-
per method’s hill climbing algorithm and the GPESA’s greedy mutations is that
the overall regression model stays the same between mutations rather than being
“refit” after each mutation.
Validation. In order to validate the generalization of models we partition the
dataset into nine overlapping folds. Each fold corresponds to leaving out one
year for testing and training on the remaining eight (using years 2003 - 2011).
We use MAE on the unseen test data as a metric to assess model performance.
To account for a difference in scale across any set of features, all input model
features are standardized over time by removing the mean and scaling to unit
variance. This means that as wrapper and embedded methods construct new
aggregations, the sampled data is scaled over time prior to being averaged over
space. Since our goal is near-real-time estimation for a future day, the training
values of a feature’s mean and variance are reapplied when scaling the same
feature in validation.
3 Results
Table 1 displays the test error of each valid regression and feature construction
method combination. For filters and wrappers, only the best performing model
is displayed and we indicate the particular value of parameter R as a subscript.
Since the ultimate goal of our paper is to synthesize a method better than
existing approaches, we must statistically compare GPESA to SL, the state-of-
the-art linear regression / variable selection algorithm. The null hypothesis of
interest here is that of no difference between GPESA and a SL. Therefore we
perform yearly Wilcoxon signed rank tests [6] comparing GPESA to SL with
Bonferroni correction across the nine years. For five out of the nine test years,
GPESA is significantly better than SL, while for the other four years there is no
significant difference with SL.
Through displaying only the best testing filters and wrappers, we aim to
focus speculation about GPESA performance through a conservative lens. Yet
we ultimately view filters and wrappers as intermediary steps “working up” to
GPESA. Accordingly, the best test error better represents a bound on the po-
tential performance of a particular intermediary method even though it may not
be possible to achieve such performance through a parameter sweep based on
the training data. And indeed, across all methods tested, GPESA reported the
lowest recorded median mean-absolute error within all but two years (7 of 9)
where it has the second lowest.
Table 1. Median mean-absolute error with corresponding standard errors in parenthe-
ses. Only the best testing filter- and wrapper-based results (choice of R) are displayed.
We explicitly compare GPESA with the state-of-art, SL. Bold values indicate signifi-
cance (at 0.05 level with Bonferroni correction) under a Wilcoxon singed rank test in
which the null hypothesis asserts that distribution of the differences between GPESA
and SL is symmetrically distributed about 0.
Year SR SL SGP FR4 FL19 FGP19 WR2 WL3 GPESA
2003 0.86 0.51 0.35 (0.14) 0.50 0.46 0.44 (0.08) 0.43 (0.10) 0.49 (0.09) 0.29 (0.09)
2004 0.47 0.30 0.32 (0.10) 0.34 0.29 0.26 (0.05) 0.37 (0.16) 0.35 (0.16) 0.17 (0.05)
2005 0.95 0.44 0.50 (0.13) 0.61 0.40 0.52 (0.06) 0.58 (0.11) 0.63 (0.09) 0.32 (0.07)
2006 0.66 0.27 0.41 (0.29) 0.57 0.52 0.36 (0.06) 0.53 (0.11) 0.54 (0.11) 0.27 (0.05)
2007 0.72 0.33 0.44 (0.10) 0.42 0.38 0.34 (0.05) 0.52 (0.13) 0.50 (0.11) 0.24 (0.06)
2008 1.46 0.46 0.60 (0.13) 0.71 0.64 0.58 (0.11) 0.70 (0.31) 0.54 (0.26) 0.52 (0.18)
2009 0.81 0.41 0.65 (0.08) 0.90 0.61 0.56 (0.08) 0.98 (0.10) 1.03 (0.09) 0.41 (0.10)
2010 0.62 0.48 0.44 (0.12) 0.43 0.47 0.41 (0.06) 0.43 (0.11) 0.52 (0.11) 0.32 (0.07)
2011 0.87 0.48 0.61 (0.17) 0.77 0.60 0.53 (0.10) 0.82 (0.20) 0.93 (0.16) 0.45 (0.12)
Mean 0.82 0.41 0.48 0.58 0.49 0.44 0.58 0.61 0.33
4 Discussion
Our results show that incorporating dynamic aggregations of higher resolution
variables into a regional model is beneficial in our particular problem setting, as
compared to both uniform up-sampling of variables and a state-of-the-art linear
regression technique (SL) that incorporates individual spatial units. SL achieves
competitive prediction performance through a sparse linear combination of the
individual spatial units, on par with SGP which is not linearly constrained.
Ultimately, GPESA performed significantly better (lower median test error) than
SL on a majority (5 of 9) of cross validation folds. Moreover, whenever GPESA
was not significantly better than SL it was not significantly worse.
A main reason why GPESA has an advantage in this application is the dif-
ficulty of knowing a priori what the most important spatial datapoints are, and
how to best aggregate them. Additionally, the structure of the model itself is
unknown and it depends on the resulting aggregations. Therefore this is not a
fixed length optimization problem, which makes it well-suited for GPESA, which
can search over different numbers and non-linear combinations of spatial aggre-
gations. While SL can theoretically perform the same aggregation as a GPESA
terminal (mean within a radius of a geographical point), SL is restricted to a
single linear solution while GPESA is not.
However, it’s important to emphasize that the computational cost of GPESA
is higher than that of traditional GP and much higher than that of linear regres-
sion. In particular, the most expensive operation is the “on the fly” aggregation
component of GPESA which makes the fitness evaluation require 500% more
time than in SGP. Part of the incurred cost is due to inefficiencies of our imple-
mentation that necessitated a copy with all spatial aggregation operations. In
future work we will look at reducing this overhead through more efficient data
structures (e.g. k-d trees).
Importance of Spatial Data. To better understand the relevance of partic-
ular spatial locations, we define the importance of a spatial unit for both linear
and symbolic methods, separately. For ridge regression and lasso, we can define
importance by exploiting the disposition of coefficients to be larger for variables
with a stronger correlation to the response, relative to a particular feature set.
We define linear regression importance of a particular spatial unit as the aver-
age absolute coefficient of features that incorporate the unit into a regression
model. While we cannot as easily determine relative importance within nonlin-
ear models, we can instead define importance by exploiting the multiple candi-
date solutions provided from stochastic multiobjective optimization. We define
GP importance of a particular spatial unit as the average absolute correlation
(1− fCOR) of nondominated solutions that incorporate the unit.
To visualize the importance of spatial information, we generated a series of
heatmaps (Figure 1). In Figures 1a, 1c, and 1e we show regional importance
values of filter methods for each R ∈ {1, ..., 20}, with the relevant value of R
annotated in the upper left corner of each box. Note that in lasso- and GP-
based approaches, some variables are unused (white), while ridge cannot perform
variable selection and uses all. Figures 1b and 1d plot WR and WL for R ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4}. Finally, Figures 1e and 1f plot the importance of spatial information
in the GP sense, for FGP and GPESA, respectively. Overall, this visualization
indicates an agreement among all methods on the relatively higher importance
of information in the lower center/right region of the image.
5 Conclusion
In this work we developed a novel method to address the problem of modeling
a regional response with high resolution satellite imagery. We moved away from
uniform up-sampling aggregations towards more flexible and interesting aggre-
gation operations predicated on their subsequent use as features of a regional
model. Our proposed technique, GPESA, is general and intended to apply to a
variety of modeling problems on spatially organized data. But as an application
example, and as a setting in which to evaluate our techniques, we considered
the problem of estimating snow water equivalent in high mountain Asia using
satellite imagery. Our results showed that using GP to evolve spatial aggrega-
tions outperforms lasso, the state-of-the-art method for directly incorporating
individual spatial units into a sparse linear model.
In future work we plan to explore more flexible spatial and temporal aggre-
gations for more predictive modeling in real earth science applications.
Acknowledgements: Thanks to Dr. Jeff Dozier (UCSB) for posing the high-
mountain Asia SWE problem and providing associated datasets.
Fig. 1. Importance (defined in Section 4) of spatial units. For filters a.) FR, c.) FL,
and e.) FGP, importance is displayed at each resolution R ∈ {1, 2, . . . 20} and each
individual filter subplot is annotated with the corresponding R. For wrappers b.) WR
and d.) WL, R ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Finally, f.) GPESA, which has no R parameter. White
areas indicate spatial units unused in feature construction across all three exploratory
variables.
References
1. J. Bongard and H. Lipson. Automated reverse engineering of nonlinear dynamical
systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(24):9943–9948,
2007.
2. D. Buckingham, C. Skalka, and J. Bongard. Inductive learning of snowpack distri-
bution models for improved estimation of areal snow water equivalent. Journal of
Hydrology, 524:311–325, 2015.
3. J. Dong, J. P. Walker, and P. R. Houser. Factors affecting remotely sensed snow
water equivalent uncertainty. Remote Sensing of Environment, 97(1):68–82, 2005.
4. J. Dozier, T. H. Painter, K. Rittger, and J. Frew. Time-space continuity of daily
maps of fractional snow cover and albedo from MODIS. Advances in Water Re-
sources, 31(11):1515–1526, 2008.
5. A. E. Hoerl and R. W. Kennard. Ridge regression: biased estimation for nonorthog-
onal problems. Technometrics, 12(1):55–67, 1970.
6. M. Hollander, D. A. Wolfe, and E. Chicken. Nonparametric statistical methods.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
7. J. R. Koza. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means
of Natural Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1992.
8. K. Krawiec. Genetic programming-based construction of features for machine
learning and knowledge discovery tasks. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Ma-
chines, 3(4):329–343, 2002.
9. J. Martinec and A. Rango. Areal distribution of snow water equivalent evaluated
by snow cover monitoring. Water Resour. Res, 17(5):1480–1488, 1981.
10. T. H. Painter, K. Rittger, C. McKenzie, P. Slaughter, R. E. Davis, and J. Dozier.
Retrieval of subpixel snow-covered area, grain size, and albedo from MODIS. Re-
mote Sensing of Environment, 113:868–879, 2009.
11. J. Rees, A. Gibson, M. Harrison, A. Hughes, and J. Walsby. Regional modelling of
geohazard change. Geological Society, London, Engineering Geology Special Publi-
cations, 22(1):49–63, 2009.
12. M. Schmidt and H. Lipson. Age-fitness pareto optimization. In R. Riolo, T. Mc-
Conaghy, and E. Vladislavleva, editors, Genetic Programming Theory and Practice
VIII, volume 8 of Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pages 129–146. Springer
New York, 2011.
13. M. D. Schmidt, R. R. Vallabhajosyula, J. W. Jenkins, J. E. Hood, A. S. Soni, J. P.
Wikswo, and H. Lipson. Automated refinement and inference of analytical models
for metabolic networks. Physical biology, 8(5):055011, 2011.
14. K. Stanislawska, K. Krawiec, and T. Vihma. Genetic programming for estimation
of heat flux between the atmosphere and sea ice in polar regions. In Proceedings of
the 2015 on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 1279–1286.
ACM, 2015.
15. M. Tedesco and P. S. Narvekar. Assessment of the nasa amsr-e swe product.
Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, IEEE Journal
of, 3(1):141–159, 2010.
16. R. Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), pages 267–288, 1996.
17. W. R. Tobler. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the detroit region.
Economic geography, pages 234–240, 1970.

