 
 
Trusted Computing in Embedded Systems 
Workshop 
Archie Andrews, CERT 
Jonathan McCune, CyLab 
March 2011 
SPECIAL REPORT 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 
CERT® Program 
Unlimited distribution subject to the copyright. 
http://www.sei.cmu.edu 
 
 
 
This report was prepared for the 
SEI Administrative Agent 
ESC/XPK 
5 Eglin Street 
Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2100 
The ideas and findings in this report should not be construed as an official DoD position. It is published in the 
interest of scientific and technical information exchange. 
This work is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense. The Software Engineering Institute is a federally 
funded research and development center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense. 
Copyright 2011 Carnegie Mellon University. 
NO WARRANTY 
THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS 
FURNISHED ON AN “AS-IS” BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF 
ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED 
TO, WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS 
OBTAINED FROM USE OF THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT MAKE 
ANY WARRANTY OF ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR 
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT. 
Use of any trademarks in this report is not intended in any way to infringe on the rights of the trademark holder. 
Internal use. Permission to reproduce this document and to prepare derivative works from this document for 
internal use is granted, provided the copyright and “No Warranty” statements are included with all reproductions 
and derivative works. 
External use. This document may be reproduced in its entirety, without modification, and freely distributed in 
written or electronic form without requesting formal permission. Permission is required for any other external 
and/or commercial use. Requests for permission should be directed to the Software Engineering Institute at 
permission@sei.cmu.edu. 
This work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number FA8721-05-C-0003  with 
Carnegie Mellon University for the operation of the Software Engineering Institute, a federally funded research 
and development center. The Government of the United States has a royalty-free government-purpose license to 
use, duplicate, or disclose the work, in whole or in part and in any manner, and to have or permit others to do so, 
for government purposes pursuant to the copyright license under the clause at 252.227-7013. 
For information about SEI publications, please visit the library on the SEI website (www.sei.cmu.edu/library).
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | i 
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgments iii 
Executive Summary v 
Abstract vii 
1 Introduction 1 
2 Workshop Goals 2 
3 Workshop Format and Plenary Sessions 3 
3.1 Summary of Plenary Session – Day 1 3 
3.1.1 Introductory Presentations 3 
3.1.2 Problem Panel 5 
3.1.3 Break Out Session – Day 1 7 
3.2 Summary of Plenary Session - Day 2 8 
3.2.1 Current Research Reports 8 
3.2.2 Case Study 10 
3.2.3 Break Out Session – Day 2 10 
4 Conclusion and Recommendations 12 
4.1 Conclusions 12 
4.2 Recommendations 12 
Appendix A - TCES 2010 Agenda 16 
Appendix B – Attendees 18 
References 20 
 
  
  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | ii 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | iii 
Acknowledgments 
The authors of this report thank the members of the organizing committee for their valuable in-
sight and recommendations. The committee members: David Fisher, CMU SEI, CERT, Virgil 
Gligor, CMU CyLab, Amy Kunkle, CMU SEI, CERT, Adrian Perrig, CMU CyLab, and Howard 
Lipson, CMU SEI, CERT, all gave generously of their energies. Thanks to all the participants in 
this workshop who gave us all their more valuable possession, their time, as they engaged in can-
did discussions and exchange of ideas both in forum and in numerous interactive opportunities. 
Special thanks goes to the excellent support we all received from the CERT and CyLab staff, es-
pecially Amy Kunkle and Samantha Stevick, who made the logistics for this workshop look easy. 
Finally, we owe special appreciation to Dr. Michael May, Associate Director for Software Tech-
nologies in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, for recognizing the challenges in this area and 
providing the funding and personal support to make this workshop of value to all.  
 
  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | iv 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | v 
Executive Summary 
Despite progress during the past decades secure operation of computing systems and components 
continues to be a fundamental research challenge. Unfortunately, the increasing sophistication of 
defense mechanisms has resulted in a progressive evolution of increasingly sophisticated attacks. 
As a result, the majority of computing systems are still plagued by common vulnerabilities that 
can readily be exploited by attackers. 
The concerted efforts of industry to resolve these challenges have resulted in the creation of new 
hardware security standards. Most visible is the Trusted Platform Module (TPM), specified by the 
Trusted Computing Group (TCG), a not-for-profit standards organization. The TCG effort has 
been so successful that hundreds of millions of current computing platforms today are equipped 
with TPM chips.  
The Trusted Computing in Embedded Systems Workshop convened to begin discussion on the 
necessary research to advance the application of trusted computing technologies in embedded sys-
tems. This workshop provided the opportunity to focus on embedded systems while incorporating 
the relevance of other related disciplines to foster collaborative efforts in this area. 
Presentations and discussion addressed the capabilities and limitations of effectively employing 
trusted hardware-enabled components in embedded systems. This included, but was not restricted 
to, the following areas: 
• new research and development in enabling trust in embedded systems 
• methods and techniques for establishing trust in embedded systems  
• lessons learned from research and development projects on embedded systems security 
• gaps in current research 
Based on the workshop presentations and candid exchange of ideas and concerns, the authors of 
this report developed recommendations for potential research directions for improving trust in 
embedded systems. 
• Research is needed on isolation and memory management methods to improve the level of 
trust feasible in 8-bit microcontrol systems today.  
• Coherent trust models based on sound criteria for, and principles of, trust are necessary to 
support both acquirers and researchers.  
• A reference implementation of end-to-end use of trusted computing in an embedded system 
would be a valuable community resource to explore the characteristics of such a system and 
to understand necessary compromises, shortfalls and limitations.  
• Tool support is necessary to aid embedded development and design teams in their considera-
tion and incorporation of security and trust into their requirements, specifications, designs, 
and implementations.  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | vi 
• Building a community that spans the safety, security, dependability, and trust communities 
requires research to identify the points of intersection and diversion as well as encouraging 
sponsorship and leadership.  
• Research is needed to appreciate the relationship and dependencies inherent in cyber-
physical systems and to evaluate how that interrelatedness impacts trust.   
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | vii 
Abstract 
This report describes the November 2010 Trusted Computing in Embedded Systems Workshop 
held at Carnegie Mellon University. This workshop brought together various groups concerned 
with advancing research into improving the trustworthiness in embedded systems. The workshop 
format provided the opportunity to focus on embedded systems while examining the application 
of related trust technologies in order to foster collaborative approaches and information exchange 
in this area. Presentations and discussion addressed the capabilities and limitations of effectively 
employing trusted hardware-enabled components in embedded systems. This included, but was 
not restricted to, the following areas: new research and development in enabling trust in embed-
ded systems, methods and techniques for establishing trust in embedded systems, lessons learned 
from research and development projects on embedded systems security, and gaps in current re-
search. The workshop resulted in identification of gaps in current research and recommendations 
for potential research directions.  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | viii 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 1 
1 Introduction 
The TCES workshop, held on November 9 -10, 2010, in Pittsburgh, PA on Carnegie Mellon University’s cam-
pus convened to explore the practical application of trusted computing technology to embedded systems and to 
inspire collaborative opportunities and future information exchange among the government, industry and aca-
demic participants. The workshop was sponsored by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Director of De-
fense Research and Engineering (ODDR&E). CERT and CyLab at Carnegie Mellon University jointly hosted 
the meeting. The workshop was targeted at developing a shared appreciation for the application of trusted 
computing to embedded systems to include currently available means of establishing trustworthy embedded 
systems, technology gaps in trustworthy computing for embedded devices and systems, and promising areas 
for future research and practices. A workshop steering committee from CERT and CyLab agreed on the ab-
stract and specific goals for the workshop. The workshop agenda focused on presentations and research papers 
that help characterize the application of the current trusted technologies in embedded systems and frame the 
necessary research to advance the field. Reports presented in plenary session addressed both research chal-
lenges and the current state of research. The breakout session discussion aimed to identify the difficult chal-
lenges in supporting trusted computing in embedded systems.  
 Individuals attended the workshop from government, industry and academia. Participants were invited based 
on their active engagement in research and/or acquisition of trusted systems or embedded systems. (See Ap-
pendix B, “Workshop Attendees.”) This disparate group of participants shared their perspectives on the current 
needs, capabilities, and limitations of applying trusted computing technologies to embedded systems that oper-
ate in increasingly hostile environments.  
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 2 
2 Workshop Goals 
While individual technologies already provide enhanced security capabilities, the greatest challenges still lie 
ahead in combining these technologies in ways that will enable secure, robust, and manageable trusted systems 
and components to become the norm for the next-generation of embedded-systems. The key to addressing 
these challenges appears to be research in trust-enabling infrastructure and application to embedded systems.  
This workshop focused on identifying, supporting, and driving interdisciplinary research activities to address 
the security challenges relevant to embedded systems. The two-day workshop was intended to foster further 
collaborative research among academia, industry, and government technologists, linking industry's experience 
in the development of Trusted Computing technology, academia and CERT's IT security skills with the gov-
ernment's desire to enhance the security of the national information infrastructure.  
Goals for the workshop included: 
• Bring industry (producers and system integrators) and government  practitioners (consumers and users) in 
embedded systems together with researchers in trusted computing to explore feasible and practical appli-
cation of trusted computing technology to embedded systems.  
• Build a shared understanding of the following:  
− currently available means of instilling trust in embedded systems,  
− practical limitations bounding that trust within current implementations,  
− promising areas for future research and practice.  
• Identify research areas necessary to address the security challenges relevant to embedded systems. 
• Produce a summary report on promising research areas, benefits to DoD, and projected timeframes (e.g., 
for practical application of the proposed research).  
• Make contacts for future information exchange and possible collaborative research projects. 
 
 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 3 
3 Workshop Format and Plenary Sessions 
The TCES workshop agenda (see Appendix A. “TCES 2010 Agenda”) was a combination of plenary sessions 
and breakout sessions. The sessions were designed to develop a common perspective on currently available 
means of instilling trust in embedded systems, practical limitations bounding that trust within current imple-
mentations, and promising areas for future research and practice. This workshop brought together disparate 
groups to gain a broad perspective of the problem. Each workshop participant was invited based on their active 
engagement in research and/or acquisition of either embedded systems or trusted systems.  
Day one focused on practice with keynote and panel sessions covering challenges and current problems to lay 
a foundation for shared understanding. There were sessions on cyber-physical systems (as an example of net-
worked embedded systems) and a background session on the promise of trusted computing and recent ad-
vances in that area. Five panelists participated in a problem panel that laid out the problem-set from the view 
of the industry producer and integrator, the government user, and the researcher. The breakout sessions on day 
one developed plausible attack/defense scenarios directed toward embedded systems to explore needed trust 
capabilities.  
Day two focused on research with reports given by workshop participants engaged in ongoing research on their 
current work as well as a case study on a directed attack, the Stuxnet worm. The case study on Stuxnet was a 
late addition to the agenda to ground the discussion on potential future directions in the reality of an ongoing 
investigation of a real and recent attack against an embedded system controller. The second day concluded 
with all participants engaging in a brainstorming session to identify current gaps in research in the area. 
3.1 Summary of Plenary Session – Day 1 
The initial plenary session framed the challenges and potential gains for necessary research.  
Michael May, Associate Director for Software Technologies in ODDR&E, welcomed the participants and 
stressed the potential value to the DoD of finding answers to the hard problems of building trustworthy em-
bedded systems. He pointed out that his role was to act as an advocate and connecting agent for required re-
search with the appropriate agencies within each of the DoD branches of service. 
3.1.1 Introductory Presentations  
Introductory presentations were used to set the context of the areas of embedded systems and trusted compu-
ting in preparation for discussions of the possible overlap and future opportunities.  
Archie Andrews, SEI’s CERT, presented the challenges that need to be addressed in order to build trustworthy 
embedded systems. Andrews proposed that there are underlying problems awaiting solutions such as operating 
within a known malicious environment, maintaining trust in environments with autonomous components, and 
cooperative detection and mitigation of potential failures. He described the opportunities from the workshop of 
embedded systems researchers gaining an understanding of the relevance of recent advances in trusted compu-
ting, trusted computing researchers appreciating the characteristics and limitations of embedded systems, and 
members from both areas collaborating to explore how to build trustworthy embedded systems. 
Al Mok from the University of Texas at Austin gave a presentation on Trust in Cyber-Physical Systems. Mok 
pointed out that Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) predominantly rely on embedded system components but by 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 4 
definition will include the tight conjoining of and coordination between computational and physical resources 
with the attendant complexity of such a “mash-up” and the implications on establishing trust in such a system. 
His presentation revealed the many facets of trust inherent in an event chain that involves hardware/software 
interactions. He explained that the challenge to trustworthiness extends beyond security (real time interaction) 
to include reliability (the failure semantics challenge) and interoperability (the open system environment chal-
lenge). He spoke to the complexity of failure semantics (how a system behaves when a failure occurs) intro-
duced from the interrelatedness of cyber and physical components in which the failure of one component, ei-
ther cyber or physical, can affect the other in complex ways. Mok asserted that specifying failure semantics 
that are both strong and implementable is a hard problem. In reference to the interoperability inherent in the 
mash-up of cyber and physical in CPS, Mok pointed out that “Open Systems” carries multiple meanings. He 
explained that open systems, when used in the context of computing, implies some degree of interoperability, 
portability, and open systems standards. He contrasted that idea with open system, when used in systems 
theory, refers to a system where matter or energy can flow into and/or out of the system as opposed to a closed 
system in which energy can enter or leave but matter may not. Both meanings are applicable to CPS. Mok 
pointed out that this open system environment has implications in both policy and implementation issues and 
these issues may affect the trust and certainty of the system. Mok also spoke to the security challenges and 
potential opportunities for defense in CPS. He explained that as CPS systems grow more complex and interac-
tive with the environment then there will be more vulnerabilities, more failure modes, more overt channels and 
more unexpected interactions. At the same time, the unalterable laws of physics determine the dynamics of the 
physical system; this can be in the defenders’ advantage. Mok asserted that there may be opportunity for dam-
age containment in CPS by defining new failure semantics that incorporate CPS domain-specific semantics 
based on the inherent physics of the system under control and the temporal dimension (e.g., time-to-detect, 
time to correct action). Mok’s presentation briefly introduced the pros and cons of trustworthiness of controls 
in a wireless and a wired CPS as an example of some of the considerations for understanding the nature of trust 
and trustworthy in the context of CPS and embedded systems. 
Jonathan McCune, CMU’s CyLab, gave a presentation on Trusted Computing Concepts and Recent Advances 
to introduce the trusted computing landscape to the participants for background and to add trusted computing 
techniques for consideration in new embedded systems. McCune’s central messages were that trusted compu-
ting mechanisms enable fundamentally new properties and trusted computing mechanisms provide new primi-
tives to build secure systems. He motivated these central messages by posing a controlling question: how does 
one get a low-level guarantee that everything is as intended on any remote device, in other words, how can one 
remotely verify trustworthy device operation. He then laid out an axiom – every system has at least one more 
flow. Additionally, he presented some assumptions, such as the concept that a remote adversary can launch 
networked-based attacks, hardware under control is trusted (i.e., physical anti-tamper mechanisms are compli-
mentary but outside scope). Given those considerations, McCune posed the question - how can we establish 
trustworthy device operations. The question was especially pertinent to the workshop because remote attacks 
constitute the most serious new threat to networked embedded systems such as those described by Al Mok. To 
familiarize the workshop with current approaches, McCune examined the advantages and disadvantages of a 
number of different approaches such as program code in ROM, secure boot and virtual machine isolation. That 
was the springboard to a discussion of the  advantages and applications of remote attestation based on the 
Trusted Computing Group’s Trusted Platform Module (TPM). He also introduced the basic TPM functions and 
their potential application in a number of environments of interest to workshop participants. Some applications 
may be hardware based attestation of Linux static configurations and isolated execution environments, and 
software based attestation. 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 5 
3.1.2 Problem Panel 
Following the introductory  presentations, a problem panel session was held to expose the problem from the 
perspective of the industry producers and integrators, the government user, and the researcher. The panel con-
sisted of Helen Gill, co-chair of NITRD High Confidence Software and Systems Coordinating Group, National 
Science Foundation; Robert Thibadeau, Senior Vice-President and Chief Scientist, Wave Systems Corpora-
tion; Ron Perez, Fellow and Security Architect, AMD Corporation; Tom Shaffnit, Ford Motor Company; and 
Duane Gilmour, Chief Computing Architectures Branch, Air Force Research Laboratory. Adrian Perrig of 
CMU’s CyLab introduced the panel and invited each member to talk about the problems that kept them awake 
at night. 
Helen Gill used the backdrop of cyber-physical systems to introduce the challenges that span the range of em-
bedded systems. She began by defining cyber-physical systems (CPS) to include aspects of computing embed-
ded into every physical components, possibly even into the materials, networked at every scale, with that com-
putational core as an embedded system usually demanding real-time response. She explained that while CPS is 
not traditional, post-hoc embedded/real-time systems, it will display cyber capability in every physical compo-
nent, complexity at multiple temporal and spatial scales, dynamic reorganization and reconfiguring, as well as 
unconventional computational and physical substrates - all this while requiring operations to be dependable 
and certified in some cases. Gill challenged the workshop participants to look beyond current embedded sys-
tems to the next generation, for example expanding the scope (simple to complex, hardware-software to full 
system considerations). She also stressed the increased necessity for end-to-end assurance in interoperable and 
open systems. Her conjecture is that dealing with the end-to-end problems will require integration of previous-
ly separate IT research areas such as real-time embedded systems, control theory, networking and communica-
tions, security and privacy, and human-computer interaction. Gill explained that the trusted computing in em-
bedded system challenges stem from the following problems: 
• Open, complex dynamical systems;  
• coexisting and joint accreditation of mechanisms such as security, real-time task management, control, 
networking and autonomy;  
• understanding the perspective of process and behavioral dynamics; 
• appreciating authority management with respect to control authority; and 
• widening / opening the trusted computing research community  
Robert Thibadeau related that each year he searches for a magic bullet, i.e., a principle that would cause 
sweeping change for the better. He cited the US Constitution and the Ten Commandments as examples. For 
this fiscal year he proposed two such principles related to trusted computing and embedded systems, namely: 
• Every device should be able to uniquely sign and have a corresponding X.509 public key certificate 
signed by the manufacturer. Thus each important agreement will be based on proof that both parties have 
agreed in a way that neither party can deny or repudiate. 
• Common criteria level 1 is self certified. The implication of this principle is that neither a lab nor an ex-
ternal process or approval is needed for the most basic set of security assurance requirements. Thiba-
deau’s belief is that removing the obstacles and expense to considering security assurance requirements is 
a strong incentive to draw companies toward the right path. He also proposed that laws would have to be 
passed that make fraudulent self-certification punishable. 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 6 
Ron Perez provided an industry perspective on the challenges facing trusted computing technologies and em-
bedded systems. He began by recognizing that the embedded systems considerations are different than the 
general purpose computing model that the Trusted Computing Group is focused on. He pointed out that con-
siderations such as cost sensitivity (even a $1 added to the BOM maybe too much), security requirements 
(what is the ROI on security investment), and usability (opt-in is probably impractical, requiring on by default 
and transparent usage) are important and different considerations for the embedded systems community. 
Another difference he observed was the different ecosystems. For example, general purpose systems require 
end-to-end support for software and services, whereas embedded systems are generally closed ecosystems with 
standards driving and supporting composability. Another example was the feasibility of attestation, where the 
general purpose platform is highly dynamic both at load-time and at runtime while an embedded system has a 
more static workload on purpose-specific platforms. After identifying those distinguishing characteristics, Pe-
rez went on to enumerate the challenges unique to embedded systems that bear on imbuing trust in embedded 
systems. The challenges he listed include environment and reliability requirements, form factor constraints, 
diversity in devices, hardware attack mitigation and real-time requirements, as well as debugging, failure and 
testability issues. Perez noted that it is too easy NOT to use trusted computing technologies in the embedded 
systems world, as a result of cultural biases such as “security through obscurity” and rolling one’s own solu-
tions. 
Tom Shaffnit spoke to the challenges of designing a system that relies on cooperating embedded devices with 
integrated security for reliable and predictable performance. He used as an operational example the vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V) interoperability project involving most of the major automotive manufacturers. The V2V 
project combines vehicle communications with GPS to provide a new safety sensing capability. According to 
Shaffnit, the challenge is to design for interoperable security features amongst all automotive manufacturers 
that eventually extend to serve as a vehicle-to-infrastructure safety system. Shaffnit explored the complex in-
terrelatedness of trust and embedded systems by noting that the V2V project system design requires an under-
standing and appreciation for the questions of policy issues (e.g., control, rights, privileges, privacy, and secu-
rity) as well as technological challenges. 
 
Duane Gilmour gave a service perspective on trusted computing concerns. While Gilmour specifically ad-
dressed the concerns of the Air Force, his concerns appear to be equally applicable to the other services. Gil-
mour expressed what keeps him up at night as a series of statements and unresolved questions. Those concerns 
include: 
• establishing a root of trust 
• dealing with supply chain issues, specifically off-shore manufacturing 
• ramifications of adding security to off-the-shelf technologies versus requiring security to be built into new 
technology 
• appropriately evaluating hardware and software trust as well as answering the question – can we achieve 
trust with untrusted components? 
• protecting data, given that our current supply chains must rely on off-shore suppliers and knowing that we 
will process critical data on untrusted hardware. 
• defining security implications given that we are moving to multicore technologies. 
• determining if there are potential unanticipated complex interactions of embedded software on multicore 
technologies? 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 7 
• determining if we can develop provably correct code and compose trusted complex systems? 
• determining if we can formally verify complex systems for trust, since test and evaluation can never be 
exhaustive. 
• determining how we can ensure that we can fight through a cyber attack while completing a mission giv-
en that attacks to our national defense infrastructure will occur.  
• identifying that a system has been compromised. 
• determining how much trust is enough when considering the tradeoff decisions between trust and cost in 
overhead and application dependencies.  
• determining if we can achieve trust in autonomous systems? 
The comprehensive nature of the concerns and issues that the problem panel raised made sure that no one slept 
well that night. 
3.1.3 Break Out Session – Day 1 
Following the problem panel the workshop participants broke into three separate groups with each group chal-
lenged to describe a realistic scenario that relied on embedded systems and required security. Each group was 
free to capitalize on the expertise and interests of their constituents to develop a scenario. Once the scenario 
was developed, the group put on a black-hat to describe how the particular system described could be attacked. 
After exhausting potential attack scenarios, the group became white-hat defenders to describe how to protect 
the system described in the initial scenario. The teams were comprised of equal distributions of researchers, 
acquirer/users, and producers. The teams received no guidance or restrictions on what scenario to describe, 
making them rely on advocacy to emerge from the expertise within each of the teams. 
The intention of this exercise was not to derive realistic threats or defense strategies. The goal was to encour-
age the participants consider the range of the threat environment to embedded systems and the hard challenges 
of securing those systems.   
Two teams chose to describe a vehicle system as their system to first attack and then defend this system. The 
third team chose to describe a remote health care system. Every team had similar concerns with the threats and 
risks associated with respect to the dissimilar scenarios. All of the teams were consistent in their concern that 
increased connectivity and reliance on embedded systems, heightened the risks of either intentional or uninten-
tional disruptive events. All of the teams took both a narrow and a broad perspective of the objectives of a dis-
ruptive event and potential consequences. Both of the automotive groups listed harm to national transportation 
infrastructure and economic disincentive to manufacturer, as well as local events such as blocking roads and 
tunnels. The health care group listed events such as reputation of institution, disruption of caregiver routine, 
and reputation of device manufacturer. All of the groups mentioned issues with surety of both hardware and 
software supply chains, fragileness of systems and the potential engineered impact to corporate reputations. 
The groups were easily able to describe the potential for harm to individuals such as malicious control of safe-
ty devices – airbags, brakes, and medication delivery devices; and harm to corporate concerns – manufactur-
ers’ reputation, malware injection during routine maintenance, violation of patient privacy to damage institu-
tion. As for defensive measures, all groups addressed “reasonable test”, which is the concept that embedded 
devices should abide by the expected laws of physics and demonstrate behavior within expected norms. Oper-
ating beyond those norms – too high a dosage, shifting into reverse at 60 mph – should be identifiable by 
checks and balances within the embedded systems. The health care group included exploring opportunities for 
increasing the surety of the delivery devices to mitigate human errors. One of the automotive groups brought 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 8 
up the issue of potential harm to national infrastructure and remarked that there were voids in responsibility 
and technical acumen to recognize, plan for, and mitigate disruptive events at the infrastructure level.  The 
post-breakout observation was that it was remarkable how the problems and the potential solutions were so 
similar, even for such apparently dissimilar applications. 
3.2 Summary of Plenary Session - Day 2 
Day two of the workshop focused on research. Participants were invited to inform the workshop attendees of 
their current research and early results. 
Philip Koopman, CMU, requested time for an impromptu session to build on the practice-oriented presenta-
tions of day one. Koopman wanted to relate current embedded systems to security and trusted computing. He 
referred to this as a reality check on embedded systems constraints. Koopman provided the workshop with a 
sense of the densities of the various types of CPUs in use worldwide. He stressed that designers and integrators 
optimize embedded systems for low total system cost. A TPM-type add-on would double the cost of most 8-bit 
systems. Koopman went on to give examples of potential and real intersections between innocuous embedded 
systems, such as those used for entertainment, and embedded systems with critical control functions. As an 
example, Koopman discussed how the infotainment system on an airplane and the in-flight control systems are 
separated only by a potentially fallible gateway. He emphasized the fact that this threat is real and should be of 
high concern. He compared security to dependability and trust pointing out that in most cases faults are as-
sumed random and independent for hardware, the environment is assumed to behave as expected, and software 
is assumed to perform without fault. He acknowledged that all of these factors affect classic dependability. His 
conjecture is that security can be viewed as classic dependability with the added complication that attackers 
can intentionally correlate induced faults and attackers can manipulate environments to produce exceptions. 
Koopman’s overview set a solid foundation for continued discussion of relevant research in both embedded 
systems and trustworthy computing that filled the rest of the day. 
3.2.1 Current Research Reports 
Eleven researchers were prepared to share their current research with the workshop attendees. The following is 
a very brief abstraction of the research reports. The reader should refer to the speakers’ presentations found on 
www.cert.org/tces (see Appendix A for links to the presentations). 
Tom Eisenbarth, Florida Atlantic University, presented his work on embedded security. Eisenbarth’s presenta-
tion focused on the challenges of implementing crypto in embedded devices considering limitations in compu-
ting power, energy and memory as well as protecting against side channel attacks. Based on his research, Ei-
senbarth concludes that the adversarial models are different and porting trusted computing concepts needs to 
be done with care. The new directions of his research are leakage aware protocols and crypto schemes suited 
for embedded systems. 
Kevin Fu, University of Massachusetts, presented ongoing research to understand the challenges of building 
trustworthy embedded systems, in particular trustworthy medical devices. Fu spoke about the unique chal-
lenges of embedded medical devices and the work that his group is doing to understand those challenges. 
Rick Han, University of Colorado at Boulder, introduced his group’s research on privacy in context aware 
(mobile sensor) social networks. His current research is focused on addressing the risk to preserving the priva-
cy of a participant in a complex community using multiple assets (picture a social network user on Facebook, 
sensor networks and mobile networks) by building an anonymity layer. 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 9 
Trent Jaeger, Penn State University, spoke to research at Penn State University on high integrity computing for 
embedded systems. The goals of that group’s research is to understand how to specify integrity, how to deploy 
systems that meet the specifications, and how to maintain system integrity. His group is currently examining 
information flow models to understand how to establish and maintain integrity-relevant operations. The group 
is also investigating how to apply integrity concerns to distributed embedded systems. 
Ramesh Karri, Polytechnic Institute of New York University, spoke about his group’s research on securing the 
core root of trust. His group is challenging the assumption that the core root of trust embedded in hardware is 
secure. He pointed out that chip foundries and all aspects of IC design are increasingly migrating outside the 
US and subject to reverse engineering, Trojans, cloning and counterfeiting.  
Philip Koopman, CMU, presented what he labeled a quick tour of current research in secure and safe embed-
ded systems at the Electrical and Computer Engineering department at Carnegie Mellon University. His 
group’s research is concerned with issues such as security and safety concerns with integrating gateways sepa-
rating embedded systems with enterprise systems, authenticating embedded network messages, and potential 
impacts of embedded virtualization. 
Farinaz Koushanfar, Rice University, presented her research on the physical dimensions of embedded security. 
Her group at Rice is investigating the use of physical one-way functions and physical unclonable functions to 
enhance the security of embedded devices. 
Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania, discussed his group’s research on medical device cyber physical sys-
tems (MCPS). Lee pointed out that medical devices are being networked for integration and interoperation to 
increase functionality. As a result, they are evolving to become systems of systems and inheriting all the com-
plexity and vulnerability of that domain. He enumerated four areas of concern for security attacks on MCPS: 
patient’s physical security, patient’s data security and privacy, the physical security of the device and the insti-
tution’s data security and privacy.  
Captain Roy Porter, Air Force Research Laboratory, gave an overview of the information directorate of AFRL 
and their research interests in trusted computing and embedded systems. Captain Porter made the point that the 
Air Force requires systems that are resilient against attacks and will be able to “fight through” to mission com-
pletion. He explained that to accomplish this requires high-assurance systems for embedded applications along 
with secure encapsulation of subsystem components. In his presentation slides, Captain Porter identified spe-
cific targets for trusted computing technologies in the areas of trusted software and trusted hardware. 
Ed Suh, Cornell University, introduced the work that his group at Cornell is doing on hardware support for 
trustworthy embedded systems. Suh pointed out that the context of networked embedded systems, with many 
devices collaborating, requires a means of establishing and maintaining trust while recognizing that individual 
components will get compromised. He asserted that in today’s embedded systems network, software and phys-
ical attacks are all possible and “fail-stop” may not be an option. In addition, according to Suh, embedded sys-
tems have constraints on real-time performance and energy consumption. Some of the areas researchers at 
Cornell are investigating to address these challenges include:  
• establishing trust among devices by identifying the hardware via device attestation (physical unclonable 
functions for unique characteristics of each IC),  
• providing a secure execution environment by using secure processors (single-chip processors with self-
authentication) to support physical tamper resistance,  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 10 
• recovering on failure through early detection via fine-grained monitoring (Dynamic Information Flow 
Tracking) 
• fast roll-back to a trusted state via hardware check pointing (hybrid memory for instant check pointing 
and roll-back).    
Doug Blough, Georgia Tech, presented a technical overview of MedVault. MedVault ensures the security and 
privacy of electronic medical records. While not directly applicable to embedded systems, it was clear from 
Doug’s explanation on his group’s work on protecting patient records such as dynamic policy combination, 
selective disclosure with source verifiability, and redactable signatures, could have bearing on areas of TCES 
research. 
3.2.2 Case Study 
We invited Liam O Murchu, Operations Manager for Symantec Security Response, to present a case study on 
the work that Symantec has done in analyzing Stuxnet. The case study was requested as a special, unscheduled 
presentation to this workshop because of Stuxnet’s methods of distribution and propagation, its effect on in-
dustrial control systems, and the relevance to being able to build and maintain trusted embedded systems in a 
malicious environment. According to O Murchu, Stuxnet is the first known cyber attack incident that exhibits 
this degree of sophistication in dissemination, distribution, and precision targeting. O Murchu explained that 
the Stuxnet worm spreads indiscriminately but the malware payload is specifically targeted. O Murchu made 
clear that the attack was directed against programmable logic controllers in industrial control systems but the 
infection media was spread via general purpose computing networks supposedly isolated from the target. The 
analysis and understanding of Stuxnet continues and the reader should refer to more up to date sources for de-
tailed explanations of this worm. The relevance to this workshop is the demonstration that a sophisticated tar-
geted attack can reach its intended destination in an embedded system by exploiting emergent non-
deterministic effects.  
3.2.3 Break Out Session – Day 2 
The initial plan for this break out session was to capitalize on the information we all received from the research 
reports and break into separate groups to discuss three subjects:  
• Gap Analysis - what are the problem areas that the research is not currently addressing  
• Baseline Capabilities -  what are the fundamental characteristics that should be possessed by any embed-
ded component claiming to consider trustworthiness  
• Barriers - what are the barriers to adoption 
However, due to the unplanned but welcome case study on Stuxnet, the group decided to stay in plenary ses-
sion and use the time remaining on day two to have a moderated group discussion around the topic of gap 
analysis. 
The following is a summary of the key points of the group’s discussion related to identifying problem areas in 
leveraging trusted computing in embedded systems. 
• A reference implementation of end-to-end usage of trusted computing in an embedded system would 
serve as a useful proof of concept. 
• The questions of usability versus operational overhead that are engendered by trusted computing, espe-
cially in an embedded system environment, are currently unanswered. 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 11 
• Requirement specifications for trusted computing in embedded systems need better definitions and better 
understanding by the acquirers. 
• Tools need to be developed to assess hardware, especially if it is made offshore. Some potential tool can-
didates are boundary scanning tools able to look for extra gates. This idea may be closely associated with 
the work on IC fingerprinting from IBM Research [Agrawal 2007]. 
• Embedded development and design teams seldom have designers with computer science degrees and rare-
ly have security experts. Research is needed to identify tools to aid the design and development teams 
such as CAD tools, checklists, and other design tools and processes. 
• Trust must go beyond security and correctness otherwise the next generations will be condemned to brit-
tle solutions. Coherent trust models that relate to identified threat models are missing. Research should 
develop the underlying principles rather than relying just on anecdotal scary stories. There needs to be a 
quantitative notion of trust (recognizing that finding lower bounds is hard in computer science). While it 
is easy to find witnesses to lack of trust, it is hard to find evidence of rewards of building reliable trusted 
systems. 
• Risk analysis measures and techniques are needed that tell us when to say no. 
• At present, the safety and security communities rarely talk. That may be a cultural issue, but we need to 
find ways to remove the barriers and encourage coordination and collaboration. 
• Research is needed to develop model-based checking for development and enforcement of trusted 
attributes in embedded systems. Does there exist a set of “synthetic” natural laws that apply to trusted 
computing in embedded systems? 
• Research is needed to determine reasonable inputs and outputs of a trusted embedded system. These may 
be somewhat analogous to type safety but research should test that claim. Investigation of abstractions 
and languages is needed to cross the barriers from the real-time bounded world of embedded systems to 
the transactional world of general purpose computing. 
• Because reality requires a bounded amount of money in real products, there should be research on intelli-
gent ways to make tradeoffs to get the highest practical security as well as some type of measurement of 
return on investment. Given the dominance of 8-bit microcontrollers in the embedded systems world, 
there needs to be research on what security enhancements are appropriate. Supporting research in memory 
management restrictions at the 8-bit level will support understanding possible and practical enhance-
ments. Understanding isolation mechanisms applicable to the 8-bit microcontrollers will be useful. 
• Simple tasks are hard to do today. Answering questions such as, “is my code still there on a remote de-
vice and has it been modified,” is hard today. Research is needed on how to answer such seemingly sim-
ple questions given the characteristics of embedded distributed systems. 
• Research is needed to develop theoretical constructs for IT and physical systems operating together. Dis-
covering a way to make IT and physical complementary rather than exacerbating would be a significant 
breakthrough. 
• The workshop participants challenged themselves to identify some challenge problems for the group to 
look at.  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 12 
4 Conclusion and Recommendations 
4.1 Conclusions 
This workshop met its stated goals. The goal of the workshop was to bring industry, government and research-
ers from the communities of trusted computing and embedded systems together for a candid exchange of ideas 
and problems. The presentations and ongoing discussions were intended to build a shared understanding of the 
means of instilling trust in embedded systems, the limitations that currently bind that trust, and promising areas 
for future research. The candid discussions in the plenary, the breakout sessions, and in the extemporaneous 
sessions, were meant to identify relevant research areas. The presentations and discussions during the work-
shop were the primary ingredients that lead to the creation of this summary report and the authors’ interpreta-
tion of promising research areas identified, as well as projected timeframes for practical application of the re-
search areas. The workshop provided the venue for researchers, producers and users to make connections for 
future information exchange and possible collaborative projects.  
The theme of the workshop and the challenge of the field attracted many of the thought leaders from industry 
and government working to instill trust into embedded systems and many of the researchers exploring new 
approaches to potential solutions. The aim of the workshop organizers was to bring in more government partic-
ipants to describe the challenges they face each day in system specification, acquisition, and implementation. 
Unfortunately, due to the timing of the workshop soon after the start of the new government fiscal year, travel 
for government participants was difficult. The lesson we learned from this is to schedule future such work-
shops in the February – July timeframe to maximize the opportunity for government participation. 
The primary reason for inviting this particular set of participants was to build a shared understanding of the 
embedded systems, trusted computing technology, and the hard challenges these two communities of interests 
face. The workshop accomplished this goal not only via the presentations of the participants related to their 
areas of expertise and concern, but also the free-flowing dialogs and contributions by all. Each of the invitees 
was willing to share areas of their work as well as explore promising areas to address current limitations. A 
benefit of this workshop was that by assembling the differing communities of interest into a focused workshop 
they were able to explore promising areas for future research. Even if total shared understanding was not 
achieved, a shared appreciation of the hard problems facing the community was certainly accomplished. 
Against the background discussion of the current state in the fields of embedded systems and trusted compu-
ting, the current research efforts and directions, and the example of a directed attack were all contributors to a 
targeted discussion of necessary research areas. Focused attention, especially through collaboration of re-
searchers and individuals concerned with practical application of the research findings, could result in signifi-
cant progress on this set of challenging problems.  
4.2 Recommendations 
At the risk of omitting some important ideas, the compliers of this report feel that the two days discussion and 
the 15 key points identified by the group on day two distill down to six recommendations for attention. With-
out ascribing any priority based on ordering of the list, the recommended areas of focus, some background on 
the authors’ reasoning in deriving these recommendations from the workshop’s ideas, and the authors’ estima-
tion of a probable timeframe for reaching useful results follows: 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 13 
• Recognizing that 8-bit microcontrollers dominate the embedded systems of today, research is needed on 
what isolation and memory management methods may be applied to address the level of trust feasible in 
such systems today. It was clear from Philip Koopman’s presentation that the preponderance of embed-
ded systems are simple, 8-bit devices with all the incumbent limitations on space, weight, cost, and pow-
er. This class of devices has traditionally assumed either a benign environment or the absence of an inten-
tional adversary. During the initial breakout session it became clear that inventive experts could develop 
reasonable attack scenarios directed against this type of device. The authors felt that the density of devic-
es provides the opportunity and, as explored briefly in the scenario-sessions, the motivation will be found. 
A target-rich environment will not go un-targeted. The effort to define existing vulnerabilities and poten-
tial cost-effective remedies is near to mid-term research. Success in describing the problem and providing 
sufficient insight into possible solutions has the potential to influence the chip design and the fabrication 
market.  
• Coherent trust models based on sound criteria for, and principles of, trust are necessary to support both 
acquirers and researchers. Defining principles of trust provides a guide against which to measure specifi-
cations, requirements, and results. The need for developing sound principles was raised during the gap-
analysis discussion and fostered by numerous side-bar discussions during the networking sessions. The 
desire is to have a precise set of criteria that will allow measurement of success or failure in meeting those 
criteria. If the criteria expressed as a principle, cannot be met, then the community needs to amend their 
composite notion of achievable trust. The authors feel that the initial research in developing a set of prin-
ciples of trust should be a near-term objective. The creation of such a set will hopefully drive a longer 
term discussion, debate, and experimental implementations that will in turn test and refine the founda-
tional principles. 
• A reference implementation of end-to-end use of trusted computing in an embedded system as a proof-of-
concept would be a valuable community resource to explore the necessary characteristics of such a sys-
tem and to understand necessary compromises, shortfalls and limitations. This suggestion arose during 
the gap-analysis brainstorming session. The opportunity to template an embedded system as a proof of 
concept demonstration that could be emulated and improved by others resonated with the authors of this 
report. The model could be similar to the capability that Kevin Fu, University of Massachusetts, described 
in the domain of trustworthy medical devices. This research could be initiated by a number of groups in 
the near-term with the aim of demonstrating numerous specialized applications that are applicable to 
broad classes of problems.  
• Tool support to aid embedded development and design teams in their consideration and incorporation of 
security and trust into their requirements, specifications, designs, and implementations. Embedded sys-
tems design and acquisition teams are rarely staffed with needed expertise. Tools and processes that aid or 
contribute to adoption of security in embedded systems are needed. Recognizing that few teams have se-
curity experts or computer scientists, there is an opportunity to bring security best practices to the embed-
ded design community. Tools and processes identified by this group range from hardware validation (is 
trust in off-shored hardware justified), usability (operational overhead accompanying increased levels of 
trust), risk analysis measures and techniques, and engineering tradeoff decision criteria. The need for re-
search and ultimately solutions in this area came up during the gap analysis session. This long-term re-
search requires evolving the tools as the required attributes of trusted systems get defined and the tech-
nology emerges to support them. 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 14 
• Building a community that spans the safety, security, dependability, and trust communities requires re-
search to identify the points of intersection and diversion as well as encouraging sponsorship and leader-
ship. One of drivers that prompted this workshop was the conjecture that the community of embedded 
systems researchers and practitioners and the community concerned with trusted computing rarely ex-
changed ideas or shared perspectives. During the discussions, both planned and unplanned, the observa-
tion was made that the same siloed mentality applies to a number of fields that would benefit from shar-
ing knowledge and experience. Defining the covalent (where electrons are shared) aspects of the desirable 
conditions should be near-term research involving collaboration between members from the trusted com-
puting and the embedded systems community to build on the previous work of [Avizienis 2004] and oth-
ers. Establishing and maintaining a dialog among these communities to address such issues as abstrac-
tions and languages that can cross between transactional and embedded computing will require 
workshops and venues for shared experiences and interactions. 
• The interrelatedness of IT and physical systems has direct relevance to the DoD and other government 
entities (e.g., DoE, DHS, DHHS, etc.). Research is needed to appreciate the relationship and dependen-
cies inherent in cyber-physical systems and to evaluate how that interrelatedness impacts trust. As was 
pointed out by numerous speakers (e.g., Helen Gill, Al Mok, and Insup Lee), this is long-term research 
dealing with a wide-spectrum of issues spanning the fields of embedded systems, system of systems, trust 
enablers, and failure mitigation. Although NSF is funding academic research in this area, the direct appli-
cation to DoD systems such as unmanned and autonomous system, makes this area of high importance to 
the DoD. 
 
 
 
  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 16 
Appendix A - TCES 2010 Agenda 
URLs are valid as of the date of publication. 
 
Tuesday, November 9, 2010 
Focus is on Practice 
Welcome, Michael May, OSD 
 
Hard challenges, Archie Andrews, CMU CERT 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/archie%20andrews.pdf 
 
Networked embedded systems, Aloysius Mok, University of Texas-Austin 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/al_mok.pdf 
 
Trusted computing concepts and recent advances, Jonathan McCune, CMU CyLab 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/jon%20mccune.pdf 
 
Problem panels: Explore the various aspects of integrating trust in embedded systems from the perspec-
tive of the consumers, designers, integrators, and acquirers  
 
Helen Gill, NSF  
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/helen_gill.ppt.pdf 
 
Ron Perez, AMD 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/ron%20perez.pdf 
 
Duane Gilmour, AFRL 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/duane%20gilmour.pdf 
 
Tom Schaffnit, Ford 
 http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/tom%20schaffnit.pdf 
 
Bob Thibadeau, Wave Systems 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/robert%20thibadeau.pdf 
 
Breakout Sessions 1: Attack – Defend scenarios on example embedded systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 17 
Wednesday, November 10, 2010 
Focus is on Research 
Reality Check on Embedded Systems constraints, Philip Koopman, CMU 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/philip%20koopman%20part%202.pdf 
Report out on Current Research from researchers in academia, industry and government (part 1) 
Tom Eisenbarth, Florida Atlantic 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/thomas%20eisenbarth.pdf 
 
Kevin Fu, University of Massachusetts 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=shTj9WVhVyU 
 
Richard Han, University of Colorado 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/richard%20han.pdf 
 
Trent Jaeger, Penn State University 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/trent%20jaeger.pdf 
 
Ramesh Karri, Polytech, NYU 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/ramesh%20karri.pdf 
 
Report out on Current Research from researchers in academia, industry and government (part 2) 
 
Philip Koopman, CMU 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/philip%20koopman.pdf 
 
Farinaz Koushanfar, Rice University 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/farinaz%20koushanfar.pdf 
 
Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/insup%20lee.pdf 
 
Roy Porter, AFRL 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/roy%20porter.pdf 
 
Ed Suh, Cornell University 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/ed%20suh.pdf 
 
Doug Blough, Georgia Tech 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/doug%20blough.pdf 
 
Case Study in a directed attack – Stuxnet Dossier, Liam O Murchu, Symantec 
http://www.cert.org/tces/pdf/liam%20o%20murchu.pdf 
Breakout Session 2: Gap Analysis, Plenary 
  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 18 
Appendix B – Attendees 
Government 
Bennett, Daren  NSA 
Dean, Richard  DARPA 
Gill, Helen  NSF 
Gilmour, Duane  AFRL 
Martin, William B. NSA 
May, Michael  OSD 
Porter, Roy  AFRL 
 
Industry 
Aldridge, Hal  Sypris 
Fansler, Aaron  Northrop Grumman 
Forest, Tom  GM 
Kalb, George  Northrop Grumman 
Markham, Tom  Honeywell 
McNamee, Dylan Galois 
Millen, Jon  Wave 
O Murchu, Liam  Symantec 
Peirce, Ken  GM 
Perez, Ron  AMD 
Prowell, Stacy  ORNL 
Schaffnit, Tom  Ford 
Thibadeau, Bob  Wave 
 
 
 
Academia 
Andrews, Archie CMU 
Blough, Doug  Georgia Tech 
Chen, Peter  CMU 
Eisenbarth, Thomas Florida Atlantic 
Farb, Michael  CMU 
Fisher, David  CMU 
Fu, Kevin  Univ. of Mass 
Gligor, Virgil  CMU 
Han, Richard  Univ. of Colorado 
Jaeger, Trent  Penn State 
Karri, Ramesh  NYU Poly 
Koopman, Philip CMU 
Koushanfar, Farinaz Rice University 
Lee, Insup  Univ. of Pennsylvania 
Lipson, Howard  CMU 
McCune, Jonathan CMU 
Mok, Aloysius  Univ. of Texas-Austin 
Perrig, Adrian  CMU 
Shannon, Greg  CMU 
Suh, G. Edward  Cornell 
Szilagyi, Chris  CMU 
Tsudik, Gene  UC Irvin
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 19  
 
 
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 20  
References 
URLs are valid as of the publication date of this document. 
[Agrawal 2007] 
Dakshi Agrawal, et al. Trojan Detection using IC Fingerprinting (IBM Research Report 
RC24110[W0604-109]), April 21, 2006. 
[Avizienis 2004] 
Avizienis, Algirdas; Laprie, Jean-Claude; Randell, Brian & Landwehr, Carl. “Basic Concepts and 
Taxonomy of Dependable and Secure Computing.” IEEE Transaction son Dependable and Se-
cure Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, Jan-Mar 2004. 
  
 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 | 21  
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE Form Approved OMB No. 0704-0188 
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, search-
ing existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regard-
ing this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters 
Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of 
Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 
1. AGENCY USE ONLY 
(Leave Blank) 
2. REPORT DATE 
March 2011 
3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES 
COVERED 
Final 
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 
Trusted Computing in Embedded Systems Workshop 
5. FUNDING NUMBERS 
FA8721-05-C-0003  
6. AUTHOR(S) 
Archie Andrews, Jonathan McCune 
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
Software Engineering Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION  
REPORT NUMBER 
CMU/SEI-2011-SR-002 
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
HQ ESC/XPK 
5 Eglin Street 
Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2116 
10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 
 
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 
 
12A DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
Unclassified/Unlimited, DTIC, NTIS 
12B DISTRIBUTION CODE 
 
13. ABSTRACT (MAXIMUM 200 WORDS) 
This report describes the November 2010 Trusted Computing in Embedded Systems Workshop held at Carnegie Mellon University. This 
workshop brought together various groups concerned with advancing research into improving the trustworthiness in embedded systems. 
The workshop format provided the opportunity to focus on embedded systems while examining the application of related trust technolo-
gies in order to foster collaborative approaches and information exchange in this area. Presentations and discussion addressed the ca-
pabilities and limitations of effectively employing trusted hardware-enabled components in embedded systems. This included, but was 
not restricted to, the following areas: new research and development in enabling trust in embedded systems, methods and techniques 
for establishing trust in embedded systems, lessons learned from research and development projects on embedded systems security, 
and gaps in current research. The workshop resulted in identification of gaps in current research and recommendations for potential re-
search directions. 
14. SUBJECT TERMS 
trust, trust technology, trusted systems, embedded systems, trusted computing 
15. NUMBER OF PAGES 
32 
16. PRICE CODE 
 
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF 
REPORT 
Unclassified 
18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 
Unclassified 
19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 
Unclassified 
20. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 
UL 
NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 
298-102 
 
 

