MSc/PgDip
Robotics and
Embedded Systems
This Postgraduate programme is for students who already have an Engineering, Computer Science or 
Bio-engineering, and Mechanical background and wish to specialise in Systems engineering, Robotics 
and Real time systems.
With a particular emphasis on Advanced Robotics, the learning will focus on systems that are designed to 
operate with a degree of intelligence and autonomy.
After spending 4 weeks in Salford (G.B.), the students will stay in Biarritz (French bask seaside), taught by the Salford lecturers, 
by Estia lecturers, and by Industrial experts.
The MSc Robotics and Embedded Systems will give you a firm grounding in control engineering and intelligent systems 
concepts, along with the ability to comprehend and fully specify integrated Embedded Systems embodying intelligence, 
Robotic and Onboard hardware and software, and real time software technologies. This qualification also provides a suitable 
background for research in advanced autonomous systems with reference to robotics.
Graduate profiles
Joan GOYENETCHE
Responsable du développement de systèmes em-
barqués et d’architecture/installation électrique
(BHR Aircraft Corporation).
“Lors de ma mission de fin d’étude 
ESTIA, j’ai conçu un prototype de 
Govemor pour un hélicoptère bi-
place ultraléger développé par 
BHR. à l’issue de cette mission, j’ai 
été recruté par cette entreprise afin 
de porter ce Govemor à un niveau 
industriel de mise en production. 
Depuis 2010, je suis Responsable Électronique chez 
BHR pour le développement et la fabrication des équipe-
ments embarqués. Les enseignements et les nombreux 
projets réalisés en groupe à l’ESTIA m’ont bien préparé à 
prendre en main les technologies et méthodologies liées 
aux systèmes critiques.”
Thierry MOINE
Ingénieur en Recherche et Développement
(CFD Suresnes).
“Mon parcours de fin d’étude ES-
TIA c’est plutôt déroulé dans le 
domaine de la robotique et j’ai par-
ticipé par exemple à la conception, 
la réalisation et la mise au point 
d’un poste robotisé de triage de 
plaquette d’usinage ou encore la 
mise en œuvre d’un système de 
vision et d’une application informatique de pilotage et 
de supervision du poste (Actemium, Toulouse, France). 
Depuis 2010, je travaille au sein du département R&D 
de CFD Suresnes en tant que chef d’un projet qui porte 
sur l’élaboration d’un système embarqué temps réel 
pour la géolocalisation d’une locomotive et l’orientation 
d’essieux. Je suis issu de l’école d’ingénieurs Ferroviaire.”
Staff profile
Prof Samia NEfTI-MEzIANI (Salford)
“Prof Samia Nefti-Meziani is the Head of the Autono-
mous Systems and Robotics Research Centre. She is a 
leading expert in Artificial Intelligence and Robotics. Her 
research interests are concerned with the development 
of cognitive models for information processing, decision 
support systems and robotics. She has published and 
edited extensively in the above areas in leading academ-
ic journals and leads an expert team of researchers pro-
ducing work that is recognised internationally.”
She is the Director and the programme leader of the Ro-
botics curriculums.
Dr Olivier PATROUIX (Estia)
“Dr Olivier PATROUIX, a lecturer and researcher in ro-
botics and image processing, is the academic referent 
for this programme in Estia, while several Estia teachers 
and researchers and involved to complete the Systems 
Engineering point of view.”
Embedded System are ever more capable engineering systems that we all use in our daily lives, 
ranging from applications in mobile telephones to washing machines, cars to aeroplanes. 
This is currently one of the major growth areas and there is an increasing demand from industry 
for engineers who possess in-depth expertise in embedded systems.. Another important 
field of engineering involves robotic systems. This programme brings both fields together to 
provide  multidisciplinary skills with employment potential in a wide range of areas. These include 
the utilities, transport systems management, automated manufacturing, consumer electronics, 
robot systems, design, process control, the space industry, entertainment, robotics and smart 
homes. Students develop practical skills in the design, programming and interfacing of embedded 
microcontrollers and you will have the opportunity to  design autonomous  embedded  systems 
through robotic and  aerospace applications.
Systems Engineering
Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary field of engineering that focuses on how complex 
engineering projects should be designed and managed over the life cycle of the project. Issues such 
as automatic control of machinery, logistics, and the coordination of different teams become more 
difficult when dealing with large, complex projects. Systems engineering deals with work-processes 
and tools to manage risks on such projects, and it overlaps with both technical and human-centered 
disciplines such as control engineering, industrial engineering and project management.
Modules
Embedded Systems
This Module provides a detailed understanding of the tools, techniques and platforms that are used 
for programming of Embedded Systems. Further it gives in-depth insight into a family of currently 
used microcontrollers. The module also aims at developing a comprehensive knowledge of Real 
Time needs of the Embedded System, by understanding the framework of RTOS and using state of 
the art microcontrollers to designing and programme a range of RTOS based applications.
Advanced Embedded Systems
The aim of this module is to explore different 32-bit microcontroller hardware architectures, to 
understand ARM core architecture and provide a deep insight into programming and optimization 
on ARM7.  In addition a practical understanding of device I/O types including UART and  interfacing 
using I2C, USB, CAN and high speed buses- ISA, PCI, PCI-X, cPCI is fully addressed. The Module 
also develops a comprehensive knowledge of  Embedded Linux programming with ARM, RTLinux 
APIs and Device Driver programming.
Artificial Intelligence
Explore the role of Artificial Intelligence in engineering applications. The module develops both 
theoretical understanding and practical experience of using Knowledge Based Systems, Fuzzy 
Logic, Artificial Neural Networks, Evolutionary Computing and Swarm Intelligence in a broad range 
of Engineering applications. You will gain experience at applying AI techniques to a broad range of 
industrial problems including diagnostics, control. robotics, scheduling, planning and optimisation.
Mobile Robotics
Autonomous intelligent systems are at the forefront of technology. This module will give you an 
understanding of  the underlying principles of mobile systems, a practical knowledge of its 
applications, and an ability to to analyse and solve related real-world autonomous systems problems. 
With this knowledge you will be able to critically review and analyse current autonomous systems 
by  having the opportunity to programme and deploy a range of industrial standard mobile robotic/
software platforms.
MSc Project
You will work under the direction of an academic supervisor to carry 
out an advanced research or development project related to Robotics, 
Automation and/or Systems Engineering. As part of this project you will 
be expected to:
-  Plan, manage and implement a project related to Robotics and/or 
Automation and Systems Engineering
-  Utilise appropriate sources of information to carry out and produce a 
literature review
-  Develop a framework for critical assessment and evaluation
-  Organise and produce an MSc Dissertation.
It may be carried out everywhere in the world, specially in 
conjunction with scientific platforms or companies associated 
with the University of Salford or with Estia.
Teaching and assessment
Teaching is by a series of lectures and workshops with many modules 
taught via extensive hands-on practical lab-based design and 
implementation of lecture material. Practical experience includes the 
use of robotics platforms to produce a software system using the 
MATLAB toolboxes or the C programming language or to produce a 
finished hardware/software based Embedded or Robotics System.
facilities
There are dedicated labs and facilities for Robotics and Automation 
students, including: Industrial robots, humanoid robots (Nao), 
embedded platform (ARM μC board, real time OS kernel) and various 
mobile Robots, stereovision cameras, industrial cameras, plus dedicated 
computing facilities.
If you carry out your MSc Project with an aerospace or automotive 
company, as many of our students do, then you will also have access 
to their facilities.
Job Prospects
Graduates can expect to find employment in a range of industries. 
Robotics and Automation presents many career opportunities in 
areas such as control systems design and integration, manufacturing 
automation, robotic design, software engineering, mechanical and 
mechatronic engineering, process control, engineering management 
and research. Our graduates have gone on to successful careers with 
organizations such as Airbus, Thales, Dassault Systems, Dassault 
Avation, RATP and Siemens, BAE Systems, Electro Impact.
Enquiries
Prof Samia NEfTI-MEzIANI
s.nefti-meziani@salford.ac.uk
Hélène MARTY
h.marty@estia.fr
Entry requirements:
A minimum of a 2.2 honours degree in engineering or sciences and English proficiency.
The French equivalent is : a Master-M1 (part1 validated) ; a Master degree (M2), a French or Spanish 
“titre d’ingénieur” / “titulo de ingeniero” are also suitable for this programme. 
Estia has been in partnership with the University of Salford for seven years. If you are currently 
studying an engineering subject at Estia you will be able to complete this MSc as part of your 
final year of study. Please enquire for further information.
for information about the University of Salford visit www.salford.ac.uk
about Estia visit www.estia.fr or www.compositadour.estia.fr
See also : Msc/PgDip Robotics and automation
ESTIA
BIDART
SAlfORD
MANCHESTER
The MSc Robotics and Embedded Systems is closely aligned with the research carried out in our Centre for Advanced Robotics 
Research. The Centre houses a multidisciplinary group lead by Prof. Samia NEFTI-MEZIANI with interests in Artificial Cognitive 
Systems and Robotics and their constituent technologies. The group has strong National and International links with both 
industry and other research institutes.
The Centre’s activities have their origin in 1987 when Salford University was chosen as the site of the United Kingdom’s 
National Advanced Robotics Research Centre. Since then Robotics has formed a major strategic direction within Engineering 
in the University of Salford where Researchers have been at the forefront of strategic national developments initiated by the 
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) and the Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) and international developments within the E.U.
ESTIA is a well known Academic French Institute in UK. They have been in Partnership with the University of Salford for nearly 
a decade. ESTIA has a very strong partnership with the industry (primes and SMEs). They has been chosen as a site to host 
the technical Centre «Compositadour» for Research, Knowledge transfer, and training in the aread of Robotics, Composites 
products design and manufacturing. www.estia.fr
AtlAntic oceAn
MediterrAneAn SeA
PARIS
MADRID
lONDON

