 
Developing speed-up methods from Applied Mathematics 
and Computer Science for the optimization of energy 
systems models 
BEAM-ME 
 
 
Aim of the project:   
BEAM-Me is a research proposal for a three year project within the German 6th Energy 
research program funded by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 
The research project aims at improving computational performance of energy system models.  
Energy system models (ESM) are widely used in research and industry to analyze today’s and 
future energy systems and potential pathways for the European energy transition. Current 
studies address future policy design, analysis of technology pathways and the analysis of 
future energy systems. To analyze these questions and support the transformation of today’s 
energy systems, ESM are required to become increasingly complex in order to provide 
valuable quantitative insights for policy makers and industry. Especially when analyzing 
uncertainty and integration of large shares of renewable energies, ESM requires a detailed 
implementation of the underlying electricity system. Due to the increasing complexity of the 
models, for research institutions and industries all over Europe applying ESM becomes more 
and more difficult, as boundaries with regard to computational power of today’s decentralized 
workstations impose significant constraints to energy market modelling. Severe 
simplifications of the models regarding complexity are required to allow them to solve in a 
reasonable amount of time – with significant influence on the validity of results and reliability 
of the models in general. 
Within this project the consortium of researchers from different research fields (system 
analysis, mathematics, operations research and informatics) develop new strategies to increase 
computational performance of energy system models and to apply energy system models to 
high performance computing. Within the project, ESM will be applied to two of Germans 
fastest supercomputers. The project further implements a “modelling experiment” for up to 
seven energy system models in order to jointly develop, implement and benchmark speed-up 
methods. The project aims at identifying efficient strategies and developing general standards 
for increasing computational performance and for applying ESM to high performance 
computing. The project consists of the following objectives:  
 Identification, implementation and comparison of strategies for optimizing computing 
time for high resolution energy system models.  
 Standardization of acceleration strategies (e.g. parallelization) for different types of 
large scale energy system models.  
 Implementation of energy system models on High Performance Computing.  
 Development and adaptation of mathematical algorithms for parallel solving of energy 
market models on High performance Cluster 
 Development of new complex energy system models that cannot be solved today. 
These models address new research questions especially with regard to robust scenario 
development and decisions under uncertainty.  
Structure of the project:  
The project consists of nine work packages:  
 
Consortium:  
The interdisciplinary consortium is led by the German Aerospace Agency in cooperation with 
five German research partners:    
1. German Aerospace Agency  (DLR), Department for System Analysis and Technology 
Assessment at the Institute for Technical Thermodynamics (TT) 
2. Forschungszentrum Juelich (FZJ), Juelich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) 
3. University of Stuttgart, High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS)  
4. Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB), Department for Mathematical Optimization and Scientific 
Information  
5. TU Berlin, Institute for Mathematics   
6. GAMS Software GmbH 
 
Model experiment  
Six additional ESM will be incorporated into the project in order to ensure transferability of 
speed-up methods and to jointly develop common standards for energy system modelling and 
its application to high performance computing. The members of the model experiment are 
funded through the project and will contribute their own ESM to the project. The project 
partners will help to further develop these models, apply all models to HPC and provide a 
thorough analysis of different speed-up methods for each model (model implementation, 
algorithm development, HPC) and benchmark analysis between the models. The members of 
the model experiment will be determined based on a public tender at the beginning of the 
project.    
 
  
WP7
Application of methods for 
large-scale distributed memory 
computing for energy systems 
models 
WP3
Definition of standards for modelling and implementation:
Developing standards and providing access to results of this study and to the 
developed algorithm
WP 9
Project coordination, conference, documentation and publication of results
WP8
Developing methods to answer  
new research questions and 
implementing new aproaches 
to find and calculate robust 
scenarios
WP4
Application of existing methods from 
operations research, informatics and 
math to energy system models to 
speed-up model calculations. 
WP2
Model comparison and experiment:
Applicaton of strategies to improve speed-up of energy system models to 
external energy system models provided by partners. Analysing 
transferability of these strategies. 
WP5
Development of new solver algorithms 
with special focus on applicability with 
regard to high perfomance computing. 
WP6
Improving and developement of energy 
system models and their 
parametrisation for application with 
high perfomance grid computing. 
WP 1
Basic concepts:
Strategies, methods and 
solution approaches to solve 
complex energy system 
models
Steering group and access of international partners  
The consortium seeks an additional steering group based on ten leading international experts 
from different disciplines. The steering group will participate in annual meetings and 
contribute to a conference at the end of the project. Aim of the steering group is to:  
• provide guidelines to the project  
• discuss and review the results of the different work packages  
• ensure transparency of the overall results and transferability of the developed methods   
• support the definition of standards  
• develop new research questions and approaches to energy system models together 
with the project partners.  
The steering group will have early access to all the results with regard to speed-up methods, 
benchmark analysis and future approaches to ESM. The steering committee will help to 
ensure that insight from this project will be distributed and provide benefits for the 
international energy modelling community on the one hand, and insights for leading experts 
in supercomputing, on the other hand.   
The steering committee will meet once a year over a period of three years. These meetings 
will be accompanied by three to four annual telephone conference calls.   
The consortium is further open to integrate international partner organizations/ consortia with 
own ESM and access to high performance computing into the project.  
 
Flow chart of the project:  
 
Basic Research Application
TUB ZIB GAMS
Mathematical 
Algorithms
High 
Performance 
Computing 
(HPC)
DLRModelling experimentHLRSJSC
Theoretical 
development
Energy system 
modeling (ESM)
Experimental 
analyses
Development of 
optimization 
software
Experimental 
analyses
Development of 
HPC-Software
Experimental 
analyses
Development of 
ESM-Software
Robust energy 
scenarios for 
policy advice
 
 
 
  
Contacts 
Frieder Borggrefe 
frieder.borggrefe@dlr.de 
T: +49 (0) 711-6862-431  
 
Dr. rer. nat. Benjamin Fuchs  
benjamin.fuchs@dlr.de 
T: +49 (0) 711-6862-261 
  
German Aerospace Center (DLR) 
Institute for Technical Thermodynamics 
System Analysis and Technology Assessment  
Wankelstraße 5  
70563 Stuttgart,  
Germany 
Dr. Ambros Gleixner 
gleixner@zib.de 
T: +49 (0) 30-84185-213 
 
The Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB)  
Mathematical Optimization and Scientific Information 
Takustraße 7  
14195 Berlin,  
Germany 
 
Prof. Dr. Thorsten Koch 
koch@zib.de 
T: +49 (0) 30 314 - 78790 
  
 
Technische Universität Berlin (TUB) 
Software and Algorithms for Discrete Optimization  
Straße des 17. Juni 136,  
10623 Berlin 
Germany 
Dr. Bastian Koller 
koller@hlrs.de  
T: +49 (0) 711- 6856-5891 
   
 
High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart 
(HLRS)  
at the University of Stuttgart  
Numerical Methods & Libraries  
Nobelstr. 19,  
70569 Stuttgart 
Germany 
Dr. Daniel Rohe 
d.rohe@fz-juelich.de  
T: +49 (0) 2461-61-8846 
Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH 
Institute for Advanced Simulation (IAS) 
Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) 
Wilhelm-Johnen-Straße 
52425 Juelich 
Germany 
Dr. Michael R. Bussieck 
MBussieck@gams.com  
T: +49 (0) 221-949-9170  
GAMS Software GmbH 
P.O. Box 4059 
50216 Frechen 
Germany 
 
 
 

