Chatbots as Conversational Recommender Systems in
Urban Contexts
Pavel Kucherbaev
Delft University of Technology
Mekelweg 4
Delft, the Netherlands 2628 CD
p.kucherbaev@tudelft.nl
Achilleas Psyllidis
Delft University of Technology
Mekelweg 4
Delft, the Netherlands 2628 CD
a.psyllidis@tudelft.nl
Alessandro Bozzon
Delft University of Technology
Mekelweg 4
Delft, the Netherlands 2628 CD
a.bozzon@tudelft.nl
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we outline the vision of chatbots that facilitate
the interaction between citizens and policy-makers at the city
scale. We report the results of a co-design session attended
by more than 60 participants. We give an outlook of how
some challenges associated with such chatbot systems could
be addressed in the future.
KEYWORDS
Conversational Recommender Systems, Chatbots, UrbanCon-
text
1 INTRODUCTION
Messenger applications, such as Messenger, Telegram, What-
sapp and WeChat, represent a popular medium of commu-
nication, which people use to interact with friends, family
members and various brands. In 2015 the total number of ac-
tive users of such applications surpassed the total number of
users of conventional social network applications [4]. Chat-
bots, on the other hand, are computer programs living in
messenger applications and emulating a conversation with
a human to provide a certain service [7]. Conversational
recommender systems derive user preferences by convers-
ing with users in natural language [3]. There are several
examples of using chatbots in urban contexts, such as for
pedestrian navigation [5], sightseeing [6], and policy deci-
sions [1, 2]. While these examples serve users in very speci￿c
use cases, our vision is to develop a chatbot system that pro-
vides various recommendations to people in city regions and,
further, facilitates citizens to interact with the municipality.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for pro￿t or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ￿rst page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).
Preprint, June 2017, Delft, the Netherlands
© 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
While the open data movement is spreading wide, the ma-
jority of municipal datasets remain siloed, making it di￿cult
for people to use and bene￿t from. Solutions provided by
municipalities are usually implemented in the form of stan-
dalone applications or web portals, which citizens have usu-
ally no motivation installing or visiting. With the proposed
chatbot systemwe help citizens (a) receive recommendations,
based on open data sources (e.g. good kindergartens, parking
lot locations, closest library holding a book etc.); (b) provide
information to municipal authorities (e.g. to report a pothole,
to renew a parking permit); and (c) directly communicate
with municipality employees or with other citizens, if the
requested information is not available in any data source. To
understand if such a chatbot system is needed, as well as to
derive requirements and collect use cases that both citizens
and policy makers want to see in it, we organised a co-design
workshop.
2 CO-DESIGNWORKSHOP
We organised a workshop on February 17, 2017 at Pakhuis
de Zwijger in Amsterdam, which is a platform for discussing
city-related topics. More than 60 people with diverse back-
grounds (e.g. students, industry employees, researchers, mu-
nicipality employees) attended the session. About 50% of the
audience expressed their prior familiarity with chatbots. We
wanted to brainstorm with the participants about possible
use cases and requirements of chatbot systems for urban
data retrieval and recommendation. In order to give them
an idea of what is possible to do with chatbots, we created
a mockup1 showing how citizens can ask information and
recommendations about Amsterdam, provide extra infor-
mation to the chatbot, and even be asked proactively by it.
Table 1 summarises the examples developed together with
our participants. Later, we asked people in the audience to
pick any use case and come up with a paper mockup of the
conversation with the system. We spread around conversa-
tion templates along with printed stencils of things users
and bots can reply to.
1Amsterdam chatbot mockup and the results of the work by participants
are available here: https://github.com/pavelk2/CitRec2017
Preprint, June 2017, Del￿, the Netherlands P. Kucherbaev et al.
Table 1: Ideas derived from co-design workshop about
chatbot usage in the urban context
Citizens can ask the bot about Citizens can provide the bot with
What is being built here? Report a pothole
What is the construction schedule? Report children-friendly places
Where is the best place to buy X? Report full trash cans
What is the closest open night market? Report things available for free
What is the best time to visit the o￿ce? Report sentiment and feelings
What is a good place to dance? Report about neighbourhoods
What is the coolest place right now?
What is the building on the photo?
Participants worked on their mockups in 10 teams of 5-7
people. The co-design session allowed us to identify a num-
ber of domains where current solutions do not yet satisfy
users well. At the same time, surprisingly, the navigation
use case, which is discussed a lot in the literature [5, 6],
did not arise during the session, suggesting that this par-
ticular use case is already well covered by other systems
(e.g. GoogleMaps) or that participants did not consider it
appropriate for a conversational interface. There is a big
room for solutions recommending places (e.g for shopping,
dancing, or spending free time), and presenting municipal,
governmental, and information relating to neighborhoods
(e.g. constructions, residence application, trash bin statuses).
3 OUTLOOK
Taking into consideration the use cases from the co-design
session, we introduce a conceptual schema of the interac-
tions citizens and policy makers are engaged in through the
chatbot system (Figure 1). We envision that citizens can re-
quest information via the chatbot system from connected
data sources. Moreover, citizens can proactively report new
information, which will be stored in associated data sources.
Policy makers can as well request relevant information for
decision-making purposes. If it is not possible to automati-
cally satisfy an information need of a citizen, a responsible
municipality employee is assigned by the chatbot system,
such that the citizen can interact with this employee through
the chatbot directly. Similarly, some citizens can express their
willingness to be contacted by policy makers to provide their
feedback to new policies and regulations.
Developing such a chatbot system is not trivial, but there
are various approaches that make it possible to obtain com-
parable results today. Human computation could be used to
address limitations of fully automatic chatbots, such when
they do not understand user requests and, therefore, cannot
provide a useful response. A Wikipedia-like approach en-
couraging contributions to create integration with new data
sources can help make the chatbot work across di￿erent top-
ics. Gami￿cation strategies can be implemented to motivate
citizens to collect and report information about the city.
Citizens Policy makers
Information need, 
information report
Recommendation
Direct interaction 
with policy makers
Chatbot system
...Data sources
Information need, 
information report
Aggregated analytics
Direct interaction 
with citizens
Figure 1: The interactions of citizens and policy makers
through the chatbot system
We are con￿dent that such a chatbot system can signi￿-
cantly improve the civic engagement of citizens, making it
easy to contribute to the city and to be involved in discus-
sions about urban issues. The accessibility of such a chatbot
system is very high, as existing messaging systems facilitate
the on-boarding of citizens and minimize the learning curve.
Eventually, it could even happen that citizens vote using
systems similar to the chatbot we proposed. While imple-
menting such a chatbot system is much easier in cities which
are on the forefront of urban development, the system could
be transferred to cities of developing countries to facilitate
the interaction of people with city stakeholders.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the participants of the workshop and the personnel
of Pakhuis de Zwijger. The research is supported by the
Amsterdam Institute for Advanced Metropolitan Solutions
with the AMS Social Bot grant.
REFERENCES
[1] Agnese Augello, Giovanni Pilato, and Salvatore Gaglio. 2009. An
Intelligent Agent to Support City Policies Decisions. In Conference on
Neural Nets WIRN09. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 163–168.
[2] Cordula Boden, Jessika Fischer, Kathrin Herbig, and Ulrike Spierling.
2006. CitizenTalk: Application of Chatbot Infotainment to E-Democracy.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 370–381.
[3] Konstantina Christakopoulou, Filip Radlinski, and Katja Hofmann.
2016. Towards Conversational Recommender Systems. In Proceedings
of the 2016 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (KDD ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 815–824.
[4] Business Insider. 2015. Messaging apps are now bigger
than social networks. http://www.businessinsider.com/
the-messaging-app-report-2015-11.
[5] Srinivasan Janarthanam, Oliver Lemon, X. Liu, Philip Bartie, William
Mackaness, and Tiphaine Dalmas. 2013. A Multithreaded Conversa-
tional Interface for Pedestrian Navigation and Question Answering.
[6] Hideki Kashioka, Teruhisa Misu, Etsuo Mizukami, Yoshinori Shiga,
Kentaro Kayama, Chiori Hori, and Hisashi Kawai. 2011. Multimodal
Dialog System for Kyoto Sightseeing Guide.
[7] Michael McTear, Zoraida Callejas, and David Griol. 2016. The Conver-
sational Interface: Talking to Smart Devices. Springer, Cham.

