ELECTRONIC WORKSHOPS IN COMPUTING
Series edited by Professor C.J. van Rijsbergen
Jonathan Furner, School of Information and Media Studies, and David
Harper, School of Computer and Mathematical Studies, The Robert Gordon
University, Aberdeen, Scotland. (Eds)
Information Retrieval Research
Proceedings of the 19th Annual BCS-IRSG Colloquium on IR Research,
Aberdeen, Scotland, 8-9 April 1997
Paper:
The User Interface and Content-Based Image
Retrieval Systems
C.C. Venters, J.P. Eakins and R.J. Hartley
Published in collaboration with the 
British Computer Society
BCS
©Copyright in this paper belongs to the author(s)
The  User  Interface  &  Content-Based
Image  Retrieval  Systems.
Colin  C.  Venters
Department  of  Information  &  Library  Management,  University  of  Northumbria  at  Newcastle,  Lipman
Building,  Newcastle  Upon  Tyne,  NE1  8ST.  colin.venters@unn.ac.uk
Dr.  John  P.  Eakins.
Department  of  Computing,  University  of  Northumbria  at  Newcastle,  Ellison  Building,  Newcastle  Upon
Tyne,  NE1  8ST.  john.eakins@unn.ac.uk
Richard  J. Hartley
Department  of  Information  &  Library  Management,  University  of  Northumbria  at  Newcastle,  Lipman
Building,  Newcastle  Upon  Tyne,  NE1 8ST.  richard.hartley@unn.ac.uk
Abstract.
User  interface  design  for  content-based  image  retrieval  systems  is  proving  to  be  a  fruitful   area  of  research.
However,  a  number  of  design  issues  need  to  be  addressed.   The  major  problem  lies  in  the  need  to  provide
users  with  high-quality  interfaces  for  query  formulation  and  display  of  results.   This  paper  describes  the
background  and  intentions  of  a  new  Department  of  Education  and  Employment (DfEE) Information  Science
Research  project.   The  project  aims  to  investigate  the  design  and  development  issues  of  a  user  interface  for  a
content-based  image  retrieval  system.   The  following  areas  are  discussed:  the  background,  the  research  problem,
the  aims  and  objectives,  and  the  methodology.
1. Introduction.
New  approaches  to  the  problems  of  indexing  visually  oriented  material  have  focused  on  the
development  of  interactive  systems  that  allow  the  automatic  retrieval  of  images  on  the  basis  of  image
content.   Despite  the  importance  of  designing  usable  interfaces,  the  current  interfaces  for  a  number  of
these  systems  suggest  that  the  design  of  an  effective  user  interface  has  not  yet  been  achieved.   The
design  and  development  of  a  user  interface  for  these  retrieval  systems  is  proving  to  be  particularly
problematic.   The  major  difficulty  lies  in  the  need  to  provide  users  with  high-quality  interfaces  for
query  formulation  and  display  of  results.
This  paper  outlines  a  DfEE  Information  Science  Research  Studentship  project  at  the  University
of  Northumbria  at  Newcastle  (UNN).   The  research  seeks  to  address  the  problems  of  user  interface
design  by  investigating  the  design  and  development  of  a  Graphical  User  Interface (GUI)  for  the
ARTISAN (Automatic  Retrieval  of  Trademark  Images  by  Shape  Analysis)  system.   The  paper  focuses
on  the  following  areas:  the  background,  the  research  problem,  the  aims  and  objectives,  and  the
methods  by  which  we  hope  to  achieve  the  overall  aim.
2. Background.
2.1. Digital  Images.
Developments  in  computing  technology  have  resulted  in  a  growing  number  of  computer-based
applications  and  systems  which  produce  and  utilise  image  data  e.g.  engineering  and  architectural
systems.   This  technological  development  has  resulted  in  an  escalation  in  the  number  of  digital
images  in  the  world.   Digital  images  are  defined  as  images  that  consist  of  a  set  of  elements (pixels),
defined  on  an  n-dimensional  regular  grid  that  have  the  potential  for  display [1].
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 2
For  example,  NASA’s  Earth  Observing  satellite  generates  approximately  1  terabyte  of  image  data  per
day [2].   This  proliferation  of  digital  images  has  created  a  need  for  efficient,  economic  storage  and
flexible  retrieval  and  manipulation  of  vast  amounts  of  image  data [3].   However,  information
professionals  have  only  focused  their  attention  on  the  challenge  of  managing  visually  oriented
material  in  the  last  decade [4].   Visually  oriented  material  is  defined  as  material  that  consists  of  non-
textual  data.
2.2. Image  Retrieval.
From  cave  paintings  to  computer-generated  graphics  the  visual  image  has  existed  in  many  forms
throughout  the  development  of  the  human  race.   From  an  information  management  perspective  the
ability  to  effectively  manage  visually  oriented  material   has  posed  enormous  problems.   These
difficulties  have  been  addressed  in  some  depth  by  Cawkell [5],  Enser [6],  Shatford [7]  and  Svenonius [8].
However,  such  is  the  recognition  of  the  indexing  problem,  it  is  noticeable  by  its  absence  in  a
number  of  image  collection  projects [5].
Efforts  to  address  the  problems  have  resulted  in  attempts  to  develop  effective  indexing  systems.
A  number  of  major  indexing  systems  now  exist  e.g.  Art  &  Architecture  Thesaurus (AAT),
ICONCLASS,  and  TELCLASS.   However,  these  indexing  systems  have  only  provided  a  partial
solution  to  the  problem.   The  AAT  system  is  designed  only  to  handle  Western  art  and  architecture
out  of  the  totality  of  art  and  architecture.   ICONCLASS  covers  the  same  subject  area  with  a  different
emphasis.    Cawkell  also  suggests  that  the  verbal  descriptors  available  to  describe  the  visual  content
of  an  image  are  often  inadequate  to  express  meaning  for  non-subject  specialists [5].
The  main  difficulty  of  indexing  images  arises  from  the  intrinsic  ‘non-verbal  symbolism’  of
images  and  the  ‘reading’  process [9].   The  ability  to  read  visually  oriented  material  is  subject  to  the
knowledge  and  subject  expertise  of  the  reader,  and  their  ability  to  translate  and  interpret  meaning.
For  example,  the  goddess  Venus  may  be  used  to  symbolise  love.   This  example  illustrates  that  in
order  to  interpret  the  ‘non-verbal  symbolism’  of   a  picture  some  degree  of  background  knowledge  and
subject  expertise  is  required  on  the  reader’s  part.   As  Enser’s  research  illustrates,  description  and
meaning  of  a  visual  image  is  open  to  individual  interpretation [10].   Sunderland  also  demonstrates  that
the  ability  to  interpret  visually  oriented  material  is  subject  to  a  number  of  factors  which  compound
the  problem  further  e.g.  age,  gender,  social  grouping [11].   The  phrase  “one  picture  is  worth  a
thousand  words” [12] emphasises  the  difficulty  faced  by  information  professionals  in  developing
effective  indexing  systems  to  manage  such  material.
The  physical  task  of  indexing  images  is  a  labour-intensive  operation.   For  example,  The
Durham  Record [13] was  a  major  2  year  project  undertaken  by  Durham  County  Council  Arts,  Libraries
&  Museums  Department.   It  attempted  to  make  available  the  Council’s  collections  of  pictorial  images
and  other  data  relating  to  the  history  and  industrial  tradition  of  County  Durham.   The  main  element
of  the  system  was  Durham  County  Council’s  photographic  collection.   This  included  all   the
photograph  collections  at  Durham  City  Library  and  other  smaller  branches,  together  with  selected
photographs  from  the  15,000  held  in  the  Darlington  Local  Studies  Centre,  The  Durham  Light  Infantry
Museum,  the  County  Archaeological  Service  and  some  special  collections  at  the  County  Record
Office.   One  of  the  many  problems  the  project  faced  was  the  time  taken  to  index  the  volume  of
digital  images.   The  indexing  was  undertaken  by  a  small  team,  and  initial  estimates  had  envisaged
indexing  an  average  of  200+  images  a  day.   In  reality  only  a  maximum  of  60  images  could  be
indexed  in  any  one  day.
So  as  more  projects  involving  the  electronic  storage  and  retrieval  of  images  have  been
developed,  the  problems  of  indexing  digital  images  have  become  more  acute [4].   The  difficulties
involved  in  finding  appropriate  solutions  to  the  problems of  indexing  images,  combined  with  the
physical  task  of  indexing  the  volume  of  images,  make  the  task  of  human  indexing  almost  beyond  the
bounds  of  possibility.   It  is  evident  from  the  problems  outlined  that  there  is  now  a  growing
requirement  to  develop  alternative  approaches  and  methods  to  manage,  organise,  navigate  and  retrieve
an  ever  increasing  number  of  visually  oriented  material.   However,  the  issues  involved  in  developing
effective  alternative  approaches  are  complex.
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 3
Research  and  development  in  the  field  of  image  processing  and  recognition  has  grown  from
modest  beginnings  to  a  thriving  area  of  research  and  development.   There  is  now  a  growing  number
of  world  wide  research  projects  which  are  investigating  image  processing  and  recognition [14-22].   One
particular  area  under  investigation  focuses  on  the  retrieval  of  images  on  the  basis  of  a  direct
matching  operation  between  a  specified  dataset  of  images  and  a  visual  query.   This  research  has
advanced  significantly  over  recent  years  and  has  resulted  in  a  number  of  working  prototype  content-
based  image  retrieval (CBIR) systems.   These  CBIR  systems  allow  users  to  query  and  retrieve  images
based  on  a  specific  criterion  or  combination  of  criteria  e.g. colour,  texture,  shape,  volume,  spatial
constraints,  objective  and  subjective  attributes [2].   This  ability  to  store  and  retrieve  images  within  a
single  application  has  created  exciting  and  new  opportunities  for  improved   management  and  access  to
visually  oriented  material.   A  review [2] of  CBIR  systems  outlined  the  numerous  and  diverse
applications  in  which  these  systems  have  the  potential  to  play  a  principal  role  e.g.  art  galleries  and
museums  management;  architectural  and  engineering  design;  interior  design;  remote  sensing  and
management  of  earth  resources;  geographic  information  systems;  scientific  database  management;
weather  forecasting;  retailing,  fabric  and  fashion  design;  trademark  and  copyright  database
management;  law  enforcement  and  criminal  investigation;  picture  archiving  and  communication
systems.   Nevertheless,  the  difficulties  involved  in  developing  such  systems  are  problematic  e.g.  image
encoding,  storage,  compression,  transmission,  display,  shape  description  and  matching.   The  following
sections  briefly  outline  a  number  of   prototype  CBIR  systems:
2.2.1. QBIC:  Query  By  Image  Content.
IBM  have  developed  a  system  called  QBIC (Query By Image Content) [14,  23].   The  system  allows  users
to  perform  a  variety  of  searches  based  on  the  principles  of   visual  properties.   Images  can  be
searched  by  percentages  of  properties  such  as  colour,  colour  layout,  shape,  and  textures  occurring  in
the  images  e.g.  40%  of  a  specific  shade  of  green,  20%  of  a  shade  of  white.   The  search  will  return
hits  arranged  by  rank  output.   For  example,  a   query  using  a   white  house  on  a  green  background
could   produce  a   match  with  a  white  bird  on  a  green  background.   QBIC  also  allows  users  to
restrict  the  number  of  returned  hits  by  using  a  combination  of  keywords  such  as  the  artist’s  name,
and  media  with  the  visual  image  content  query.
QBIC  is  currently  being  tested  by  a  number  of  institutions  e.g.  the  Art  and  Art  History  project
at  the   University  of  California,  Davis (UCD) [24],  the  Fine  Art  Museum  of  San  Francisco [25],  and  the
French  Ministry  of  Culture [26].   The  initial  results  of  these  test  were  variable.   While  the  retrieval
performance  for  some  images  is  encouraging,  specific  images  highlighted  the  limitations  of  the  QBIC
software.   For  example,  the  UCD  database  contained  approximately  38  images  of  horses  in  various
positions  e.g.  side,  front,  back  three-quarter  views.   When  a  query  was  performed  on  any  of  these
images,  only  3-4  images  containing  horses  were  retrieved.   This  poor  retrieval  performance  was  the
result  of  the  software’s  inability  to  discern  between  horses  if  the  views  were  significantly  different
[27].
2.2.2. VIRAGE.
VIRAGE [15] are  developing  similar  image  recognition  technology  to  that  of  IBM.   The  technology  lets
users  search  and  sort  collections  of  photographs,  graphics,  and  other  images  based  on  the  visual
attributes  of  the  image  data.   The  Visual  Information  Retrieval (VIR)  technology  developed  by
VIRAGE  uses  attributes  of  images,  e.g.  colour,  texture,  structure,  and  composition,  to  perform
searches  through  collections  of  visual  assets  to  find  images  that  are  visually  similar.   To  allow  for
the  different  needs  of  each  search,  the  weighting  of  search  criteria,  such  as  colour,  texture  or
composition,  can  be  adjusted  to  interactively  refine  the  results.   Similar  to  QBIC,  the  VIRAGE
system  also  allows  searching  by  keyword.   The  success  of  VIR  technology  is  reflected  in  a  number
of  commercial  organisations  incorporating  the  technology  into  their  products e.g.  Oracle [28],  Kodak
[29],  PhotoDisc [30].
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 4
2.2.3. ARTISAN:  Automatic  Retrieval  of  Trademark  Images  by  Shape  Analysis.
Work  on  image  processing  and  recognition  within  UNN  has  focused  on  providing  automatic  retrieval
of  images  containing  specified  shape-similarity [20,  31].   Initial  research  concentrated  on  the
development  and  evaluation  of  a  prototype  system  for  a  restricted  class  of  images [32].   The  resulting
system,  known  as  SAFARI (Shape  Analysis  For  Automatic  Retrieval  of  Images),  supported  a  database
of  two-dimensional  line  drawings  of  simple  machined  parts,  performed  automatic  shape  analysis,  and
provided  both  example-based  similarity  retrieval  and  partial  shape  matching  facilities.   The
encouraging  retrieval  performance  of  the  initial  prototype  suggested  that  its  principles  of  shape
description  and  feature  extraction  were  worth  further  development.  The  findings  of  this  research  have
been  developed  a  stage  further  with  the  ARTISAN  project.   ARTISAN  assessed  the  feasibility  of
generalising  the  image  retrieval  approach  developed  in  the  earlier  SAFARI  system  to  a  wider
range  of  image  types.   The  dataset  used  was  a  set  of  abstract  geometric  images  from  the  UK
Patent  Office’s  Trade  Marks  Registry.   A  recent  evaluation  of  the  systems  image  retrieval
performance  produced  encouraging  retrieval  results  despite  difficulties  in  retrieving  a  relatively  small
number  of  image  classes.   However,  these  problems  suggest  that  the  current  system  does  not  yet  offer
reliable  enough  performance  to  form  the  basis  of  an  commercial  image  retrieval  system [33].
3. Research  Problem.
One  of  the  primary  elements  of  any  computer-based  system  is  the  user  interface [34],  yet  Chang [3]
fails  to  stress  the  importance  of  the  user  interface  as  a  major  feature  in  his  assessment  of  the
requirements  for  pictorial  information  systems.   In  contrast,  Eakins [35] in  his  review  of  the  prospects
and  problems  of  pictorial  information  systems  believes  that  the  effectiveness  of  image-based  retrieval
systems  is  being  hampered  by  a  number  of  existing  problems,  one  of  which  is  the  user  interface.
This  disparity  in  opinion  together  with  the  apparent  lack  of  literature  focusing  on  user  interface
design  for  CBIR  systems  suggests  that  the  problems  of  designing  suitable  user  interfaces  for  such
systems  have  not  been  addressed  in  any  great  depth.    However,  the  design  of  a  user  interface  is
complex.
3.1. User  Interface  Design.
Most  systems  are  well-defined  in  terms  of  the  technical  tasks  that  are  to  be  performed,  yet  the  user
interfaces  are  generally  the  least  understood  and  the  most  hastily  designed  components [36].   Poor
interface  design  can  result  in  a  number  of  problems  e.g.  increased  frequency  of  errors  in  system
operation  and  data  entry,  poor  systems  performance,  systems  failure,  and  user  frustration.
The  design of  any  user  interface  requires  some  appreciation  of  human  psychology  in  order  to
understand  human-computer  interaction,  principally,  perception  and  cognition,  and  needs  to  take  these
human  cognitive  abilities  and  limitations  into  account.   However,  systems  and  people  are  complex.
Difficulties  arise  between  the  end-users  ability  to  communicate  their  requirements,  and  the  system
developer’s  ability  to  assess  and  analyse  user  interaction,  user  requirements,  and  to  evaluate  users
opinions  to  produce  a  flexible  and  usable  interface  design.   For  example,  users  may  have  identified
specific  requirements  that  could  improve  their  ability  to  perform  various  tasks.   However,  although
users  may  verbalise  there  requirements,  they  generally  lack  the  technical  jargon  and  knowledge  to
convey  these  requirements  to  system  developers [37].   In  comparison,  system  developers  assume  that
users  understand  their  technical  jargon  and  overestimate  the  knowledge  of  the  user [38].
This  recognition  of  the  complexities  of  designing  user  interfaces  by  the  majority  of  system
designers  has  resulted  in  a  proliferation  of  approaches  to  the  design  of  the  user  interface [39].   Several
methodological  approaches  have  been  devised  which  have  established  a  suitable  criterion  for  designing
user  interfaces  and  providing  the  means  for  evaluating  them [34,  40-43].   However,  in  our  opinion  this
recognition  does  not  appear  to  have  been  adopted  by  developers  of  CBIR  systems.   The  major
problem  of  designing  a  user  interface  for  CBIR  systems  lies  in  the  need  to  provide  users  with  high-
quality  interfaces  for  query  formulation  and  display  of  results.
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 5
The  ability  to  formulate  and  communicate  a  query  is  a  fundamental  function  of  all  information
retrieval  systems.   The  difficulty  encountered  with  this  approach  to  image  retrieval  lies  with  the
formulation  of  a  visual  query.   The  more  complex  the  shape  and  structure,  the   more  difficult  it  is
for  the  user  to  formulate  and  produce  a  usable  visual  example.   Some  appreciation  of  a  specific
dataset  will  help  demonstrate  the  problem.   The  dataset  used  by  ARTISAN  was  a  set  of  images  from
the  UK  Patent  Office’s  Trade  Marks  Registry.   A  sizeable  number  of  the  Trade  Marks  Registry
dataset  is  made  up  of  abstract  geometric  design  which  have  little  or  no  representational  meaning.
Typical  images  for  this  class  are  monochrome,  multi-component,  with  few  textured  areas.   The
following  images  are  examples  from  the  UK  Patent  Office's  Trade  Marks  Registry:
           Figure.  1.             Figure.  2.   Figure.  3.
Crown  Copyright  reserved.
The  problems  of  indexing  visually  oriented  material  have  been  briefly  outlined  in  Section  2.2.
These  examples  demonstrate  the  difficulties  involved  in  attempting  to  apply  an  indexing  language  to
abstract  geometric  shapes.   Simply,  the  same  image  can  be  described  in  a  number  of  different  ways.
Figure  1.  demonstrates  the  subjective  nature  of  describing  abstract  geometric  shapes.   For  example,
the  image  could  plausibly  be  described  as  twelve  individual  bars,  four  wedge-shaped  blocks,  three
concentric  arcs  or  one  thick  circular  arc.   The  limitations  and  difficulties  of  applying  an  indexing
language  to  an  abstract  geometric  shape  demonstrates  the  importance  of  developing  alternative
methods  that  allow  query  formulation  and  retrieval  of  such  images.   However,  the  problem  lies  in
designing  suitable  tools  and  features  that  allow  the  formulation  of  such  complex  visual  queries.   The
following  section  briefly  outlines  the  current  features  of  the  QBIC,  VIRAGE  and  ARTISAN  user
interfaces:
3.1.1. The  QBIC  &  VIRAGE  User  Interface.
Currently  QBIC [14] and  VIRAGE [15] demonstrate  their  imaging  technology  through  the  Web.   The
Web  interface  to  both  systems  allows  the  user  to  select  an  image  from  a  randomly  displayed  group
of  thumbnail  images  by  clicking  on  the  chosen  image.   Features  to  refine  the  search  criteria,  such  as
colour,  texture  or  composition,  can  be  selected  through  a  variety  of  buttons,  drop-down  menus,  icons
and  dialogue  boxes.   Hits  are  again  displayed  as  thumbnails  in  rank  output  in  an  expandable  holding
area  which  can  display  12-48  images  at  a  time.   Remaining  images  can  be  viewed  by  scrolling
through  the  holding  window.   However,  one  important  feature  missing  from  these  Web  interfaces  is  a
facility  that  allows  end-users  to  construct  a  visual  query.   The  user  interface  for  the  QBIC
experimental  system  at  the  Art  and  Art  History  project  at  UCD [24]  differs  slightly  from  that
accessible  over  the  Web.   The  GUI  on  the  QBIC  prototype  system  allows  users  to  form  a  visual
query  by  painting,  sketching  or  selecting  graphical  elements [2,  27].   However,  no  formal  evaluation
has  been  conducted  into  the  usability  and  functionality  of  such  features.
3.1.2. The  ARTISAN  User  Interface.
Since  the  main  focus  of  the  projects  research  to  date  has  been  the automatic  retrieval  of  images
containing  specified  shape-similarity  and  not  the  user  interface,  the  current  ARTISAN [20] system  has
neglected  the  overall  design  of  the  user  interface.   The  ARTISAN [20] system  runs  on  a  PC  under  a
Windows  3+  platform.   The  current  interface  has  the  look  of  a  standard  Windows  environment  e.g.
buttons,  dialogue  boxes,  check  lists,  scroll  bars,  menu  bar,  icons,  drop-down  menus,  tiled  windows.
To  run  a  query  users  can  use  a  specified  or  randomly  selected  file  number  from  the  database.   Users
can  select  a  criteria  of  run-time  matching  options  by  checking  a  number  of  retrieval   preferences  e.g.
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 6
symmetric  and  asymmetric  spread,  boundary  shapes  and  positions,  blackness,  family  characteristics.
Retrieved  images  are  displayed  in  rank  output  with  the  initial  query  image  included  in  the  search
output  for  comparison.   Images  not  currently  visible  on  the  screen  can  be  viewed  by  using  a  scroll
bar.  Again  no  facility  is  currently  provided  by  the  system  to  allow  end-users  to  interrogate  the
database  by  means  of  formulating  a  visual  query.
The  approach  to  image  processing  and  recognition  adopted  by  QBIC [14,  23],  VIRAGE [15],  and
ARTISAN [20] suggest  that  searching  for  images  visually,  rather  than  by  keywords  or  associated
descriptors  is  worth  pursuing.   However,  the  current  interfaces  for  QBIC,  VIRAGE,  and  ARTISAN
lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  design  of  an  effective  user  interface  has  not  been  investigated  in  any
depth.   If  CBIR  systems  are  to  be  viable  applications,  the  design  of  a  suitable  user  interface  for
query  formulation  and  the  display  of  results  is  one  of  most  fundamental  aspects  of  developing  the
systems.   The  design  of  an  appropriate  user  interface  which  allows  the   formulation  of  an  accurate
visual  query  still  requires  investigation.
4. Aims  &  Objectives.
The  current  interfaces  for  ARTISAN,  QBIC,  and  VIRAGE  demonstrate  the  need  to  produce  flexible
and  usable  interface  designs  for  CBIR  systems.   This  research  project  aims  to  design  and  evaluate  a
GUI  for  ARTISAN,  and  in  so  doing  establish  a  framework  for  future  developments  and  designs of
user  interfaces  for  CBIR  systems.   To  achieve  this  aim  there  are  various  objectives  that  must  be
achieved:
• investigate  user  interface  design  with  a  particular  emphasis  on  human-computer  interaction.
• examine  user  needs  and  requirements  for  content-based  image  retrieval  systems (CBIRS)  in  general,
and  the  ARTISAN  shape  retrieval  system  in  particular.
• develop  and  evaluate  several  interface  test  designs  for  the  ARTISAN  shape  retrieval  system.
To  accomplish  this,  the  following  methods  will  be  employed:
4.1. Assessing  User  Requirements.
It  has  been  suggested  in  Section  3.1  that  a  user  centred  approach,  focusing  on  the  human-computer
interaction (HCI),  is  required  to  produce  a  sound,  flexible  and  usable  interface  design.   Therefore,
building  on  the  areas  identified  in  the  review  of  the  literature,  e.g.  user  interface  design,  HCI
approaches  and  methods,  data  collection  and  field  work  concerning  users  requirements  will  be  a
necessity  prior  to  prototype  interface  development.   It  is  important  at  this  stage  to  gain  in-depth
knowledge  and  insight  into  end-user  requirements  in  order  to  develop  appropriate  and  possible
interfaces.   Potential  volunteers  will  be  identified  based  on  suitability  and  willingness  to  participate
e.g.  patents  and  trademark  agents.   A  criterion  for  selecting  the  sample  will  be  developed  as  the
project  progresses,  however,  at  the  time  of  writing  it  is  not  possible  to  state  what  this  will  be.
Combining  the  experience  and  knowledge  of  the  selected  volunteers  and  a  demonstration  of  the
current  ARTISAN  system,  data  concerning  possible  interface  requirements  will  be  collected  using
recorded,  semi-structured  interviews.   The  scale  of  the  data  collection  will  be  constrained  by  both
time  and  money  but  sufficient  data  will  be  collected  to  enable  an  interface  specification  to  be
developed  for  the  design  of  possible  prototype  interfaces  for  ARTISAN.
4.2. Design  and  Development  of  the  User  Interface.
The  results  of  the  data  collection,  identification  and  application  of  interface  design  issues,  and  the
specification  developed  in  the  previous  stage  will  lead  to  the  design  and  subsequent  development  of
a  possible  number  of  prototype  interfaces  for  ARTISAN.   Whilst  the  design  and  features  cannot  be
determined  in  advance  of  the  user  requirements,  it  is  helpful  to  illustrate  some  possible  approaches.
For  example,  three  types  of  user  interfaces  could  be  developed  for  the  ARTISAN  system.
• an  example-based  interface,  in  which  a  query  can  be  scanned  on  the  screen  by  placing  the  sketch
under  a  scanner,  or  submitted  to  the  system  as  a  rough  sketch  using  existing  commercial  drawing
packages.
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 7
• a  menu-based  interface,  allowing  users  to  select  and  combine  query  features,  represented  as  text
descriptors  or  icons,  perform  Boolean  searches  on  the  database,  examine  results  and  amend  queries
where  required.
• a  browsing  interface.   Images  could  be  computed  and  clustered  according  to  similarity
measurements  with  icons  representing  each  cluster  displayed  on  the  screen.   Selection  of  an  icon
would  then  allow  the  display  of  full  information  about  the  object  and  its  drawing  file.
However,  our  initial  ideas  lead  us  to  hypothesise  that  specific  features  of  the  user  interface
will  be  more  intuitive  to  particular  types  of  users.   This  could  be  overcome  by   introducing  a
‘wizard’  that  offers  a  variety  of  methods  for  interrogating  the  database.   For  example,  one  ‘wizard’
feature  could  help  the  user  build  and  formulate  a  visual  query  by  selecting  and  combining  various
predetermined  search  preferences  and  shape  features.   This  might  be  ideally  suited  to  a  novice  user
who  has  little  experience  of  using  image  retrieval  systems.   While  the  concept  of  ‘wizards’  are  not
new  they  have  not  yet  been  applied  to  the  problem  of  visual  query  formulation  or  CBIR  systems.
4.3. Evaluation.
The  effectiveness  of  interface  designs  should  be  measured  in  terms  of  usability,  utility,  control,
efficiency  and  ultimately  user  satisfaction.   Evaluation  and  analysis  of  users  opinions  of  the  design  of
a  suitable  interface  for  ARTISAN  will  be  the  cornerstone  of  the  research.   The  user  interface  will  be
evaluated  using  a  mixture  of  both  naive  and  expert  users.   The  precise  mixture  of  techniques  will  be
developed  as  the  project  develops  but  is  likely  to  include  questionnaires,  observation  and  interviews.
It  is  important  to  continually  re-evaluate  the  prototype.   If  time  and  resources  allow,  a  sample  of
users  will  be  used  for  a  follow  up  interview  to  gain  more  extensive  and  qualitative  information.   The
interface  will  be  refined  further  as  a  result  of  the  information  gained  in  the  evaluation.
5. Summary.
User  interfaces  are  critical  to  the  success  of  any  software  system.   Accepting  the  hypothesis  that  one
of  the  major  obstacles  to  effective  content-based  image  retrieval  systems  design  lies  in  the  need  to
provide  users  with  high-quality  interfaces  for  query  formulation  and  display  of  results,  interface
design  is  a  fundamental  element  to  the  overall  success  of  CBIR  systems.   A  number  of  interfaces
could  be  developed  for  these  system  e.g.  example-based  interface,  menu-based  interface,  browsing
interface  that  may  provide  a  suitable  interface  for  query  formulation.   However,  what  constitutes  an
appropriate  interface  for  query  formulation  and  display  of  results  for  CBIR  systems  still  has  to  be
investigated  in  greater  depth.   Whilst  the  investigation  will  concentrate  on  the  specific  case  of  the
ARTISAN  system,  this  research   project  will  attempt  to  highlight  the  unique  problems  associated  with
human-computer  interaction (HCI) and  the  design  requirements  for  a  user  interface  for  CBIR  systems
in  general.   If  successful  it  is  hoped  that  the  findings  will  contribute  a  framework  of  theoretical
principles,  guidelines  and  models  for  the  development  of  more  user  centred  interfaces  for content-
based  image  retrieval  systems.   In  terms  of  research  into  CBIR  systems  it  can  be  concluded  that  the
user  interface  remains  the  least  researched  and  developed  element  of  the  system.
6. Acknowledgements.
We  would  like  to  thank  the  Department  for  Education  &  Employment (DfEE) for  funding  the  research
project  through  an  Information  Science  Research  Studentship  to  Colin  C. Venters.
7. References.
1. Dictionary  of  Computing,  4th  edition.  Oxford  University  Press,  1996,  p.  140.
2. Gudivada,  Venkat  N.,  and  Raghavan,  Vijay  V.,  Content-Based  Image  Retrieval  Systems,  Computer,
IEEE  Computer  Society,  September  1995,  p.  18-22.
3. Chang,  Shi-Kuo,  Principles  of  Pictorial  Information  Systems  Design,  Prentice-Hall,  1989,  p.  1.
4. Fidel,  Raya  et  al.,  Challenges  in  Indexing  Electronic  Text  and  Images,  ASIS,  1994,  p.  3.
5. Cawkell,  A.,  E.,  Indexing  Collections  of  Electronic  Images:  a  review,  British  Library  Research
Review (15),  BLR&DD,  1993.
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 8
6. Enser,  Peter  G.,  B.,  Pictorial  Information  Retrieval,  Journal  of  Documentation,  Vol.  51 (2)  June
1995,  pp.  126-170.
7. Shatford,  S.,  Analysing  the  Subject  of  a  picture:  a  theoretical  approach,  Cataloguing  and
Classification  Quarterly (6),  1986.
8. Svenonius,  E.,  Access  to  Non-Book  Materials:  the  limits  of  subject  indexing  for  visual  and  aural
languages,  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for  Information  Science,  45 (8),  1994.
9. Hidderley,  R.  et  al.  Capturing  Iconology:  a  study  in  retrieval  modelling  and  image  indexing,
Electronic  Library  &  Visual  Information  Research:  ELVIRA  2,  ASLIB,  1995,  p  79-91.
10. Enser,  Peter  G.,  B.,  An  Indexing-Free  Approach  to  the  Retrieval  of  Still  Images,  Proceedings  of
the  13th  British  Computer  Society  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group  Research  Colloquium,
Lancaster  University,  April  1992.
11. Sunderland,  John,  Image  Collections,  Art  Libraries,  7  (2),  1982.
12. The  Oxford  Library  of  Words  &  Phrases:  the  concise  oxford  dictionary  of  proverbs,  Vol.  II,  Guild
Publishing,  1982.  p.  177.
13. Watson,  Ian,  The  Durham  Record,   PLDIS  Report,  BLR&D,  1996.
14. QBIC  Home  Page.  URL:http://wwwqbic.almaden.ibm.com/~qbic/qbic.html.
15. VIRAGE  Home  Page.  URL:http://www.virage.com/
16. TRADEMARK Home  Page.  URL:http://www.etl.go.jp:8080/etl/taiwa/HumanMedia/HM-ETL/trademark/
17. Ogle,  Virginia  E.,  and  Stonebraker,  Michael,  CHABOT:  Retrieval  from  a  Relational  Database  of
Images,  Computer,  IEEE  Computer  Society,  September  1995,  pp.  40-48.
18. Srihari,  Rohini  K.,  Automatic  Indexing  and  Content-Based  Retrieval  of  Captioned  Images,
Computer,  IEEE  Computer  Society,  September  1995,  pp.  49-56.
19. Mehrotra,  Rajiv,  and  Gary,  James  E.,  Similar-Shape  Retrieval  in  Shape  Data  Management,
Computer,  IEEE  Computer  Society,  September  1995,  pp.  57-62.
20. Eakins,  John  P.,  et  al.  Retrieval  of  Trademark  Images  by  Shape  Feature,  British  Library  Research
and  Innovation  Report  26,  BLR&IC,  1996.
21. Jose,  Joemon  M.,  et  al.  A  Spatial  Feature  Based  Photograph  Retrieval  System,  Proceedings  of  the
19th  Annual  International  ACM  SIGIR  Conference  on  Research  and  Development  in  Information
Retrieval,  Zurich,  Switzerland,  August  18th-22     1996,  p.  341.
22. Han,  Kyung-Ah,  and  Myaeng,  Sung-Hyun,  Image  Organisation  and  Retrieval  with  Automatically
Constructed  Feature  Vectors,   Proceedings  of  the  19th  Annual  International  ACM  SIGIR
Conference  on  Research  and  Development  in  Information  Retrieval,  Zurich,  Switzerland,  August
18th-22     1996,  p.  157-165
23. Flicker,  Myron  et  al.  Query  by  Image  and  video  Content:  The  QBIC  System,  Computer,  IEEE
Computer  Society,  September  1995,  pp.  23.
24. University  College,  Davis  Home  Page.  http://libra.ucdavis.edu/
25. Fine Art Museum of San Francisco Home  Page. http://www.thinker.org/imagebase/index-2.html
26. French  Ministry  of  Culture Home Page.  http://www.culture.fr:8099/
27. Holt,  Bonnie  and  Hartwick,  Laura,  Retrieving  Art  Images  by  Image  Content:  the  UC  Davis  QBIC
Project,  Electronic  Library  &  Visual  Information  Research:  ELVIRA  1,  ASLIB,  1995,  pp.  93-100.
28. http://www.virage.com/news/hot.html#oracle-1
29. http://www.virage.com/news/hot.html#kodak
30. http://www.virage.com/news/hot.html#photodisc
31. Eakins,  John P.,  Retrieval  of  Trade  Mark  Images  by  Shape  Feature:  the  ARTISAN  Project,  IEE
Colloquium  on  Intelligent  Image  Databases,  May  1996.
32. Eakins,  John  P.,  Design  and  Evaluation  of  a  Shape  Retrieval  System,  Ph.D.  thesis,  University  of
Newcastle upon  Tyne,  1990.
33.Eakins,  John  P.  et  al.,  Evaluation  of  a  Trademark  Image  Retrieval  System,   Proceedings  of
the  19th  BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  Aberdeen,
1997.
34. Preece,  Jenny et  al.,  Human-Computer  Interaction,  Addison-Wesley,  1994.
35. Eakins,  J.  P.,  Pictorial  Information  Systems:  Prospects  and  Problems,  Proceedings  of  the  14th  BCS
Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group  Research  Colloquium,  Lancaster,  1992,  p. 1.
36. McGraw,  Karen  L.,  Designing  and  Evaluating  the  User  Interface  for  Knowledge-Based  Systems,
Ellis  Horwood,  1992,  p.  5.
37. Kay,  A.,  Doing  with  Images  Makes  Symbols:  Communicating  with  Computers,  1987.
38. Powell,  James E.,  Designing  User  Interfaces,  Microtrend  Books,  1990,  p.  22
39. Marchi,  Carlo  A.,  et  al.  A  Formal  Framework  for  the  Evaluation  of  User  Interfaces,  Preliminary
Proceedings  of  the 3rd  Visual  Database  Systems,  March  27th-29th,  Lausanne,  Switzerland,  1995,
pp.  379-391.
BCS  Information  Retrieval  Specialist  Group 19th  Annual  Research  Colloquium,  1997. 9
40. Galitz,  Wilbert,  3rd  ed.  User-Interface  Screen  Design,  QED,  1989.
41. Johnson,  G.  I.,  et  al.  Towards  a  Practical  Method  of  User  Interface  Evaluation,  Applied
Ergonomics,  20  (4),  1989.
42. Shneiderman,  Ben.  Designing  the  User  Interface:  strategies  for  effective  human-computer
interaction,  2nd  edition., Addison-Wesley,   1992.
43. Sutcliffe,  A.  G.,  Human  Computer  Interface  Design,  2nd  Ed.  Macmillan,  1995.

