Artificial Intelligence and Law manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Evaluation of Information Retrieval for E-Discovery
Douglas W. Oard · Jason R. Baron · Bruce
Hedin · David D. Lewis · Stephen Tomlinson
Received: December 24, 2009 / Accepted: April 16, 2010
Abstract The effectiveness of information retrieval technology in electronic discovery
(e-discovery) has become the subject of judicial rulings and practitioner controversy.
The scale and nature of e-discovery tasks, however, has pushed traditional informa-
tion retrieval evaluation approaches to their limits. This paper reviews the legal and
operational context of e-discovery and the approaches to evaluating search technology
that have evolved in the research community. It then describes a multi-year effort car-
ried out as part of the Text Retrieval Conference to develop evaluation methods for
responsive review tasks in e-discovery. This work has led to new approaches to measur-
ing effectiveness in both batch and interactive frameworks, large data sets, and some
surprising results for the recall and precision of Boolean and statistical information re-
trieval methods. The paper concludes by offering some thoughts about future research
in both the legal and technical communities toward the goal of reliable, effective use
of information retrieval in e-discovery.
Keywords E-Discovery · Information Retrieval · Interactive Search · Evaluation
The first three sections of this article draw upon material in the introductory sections of two
papers presented at events associated with the 11th and 12th International Conferences on
Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL) (Baron and Thompson, 2007; Zhao et al, 2009) as well
as material first published in (Baron, 2008), with permission.
Douglas W. Oard
College of Information Studies and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA, E-mail: oard@umd.edu
Jason R. Baron
Office of the General Counsel, National Archives and Records Administration, College Park,
MD 20740 USA, E-mail: jason.baron@nara.gov
Bruce Hedin
H5, 71 Stevenson St., San Francisco, CA 94105 USA, E-mail: bhedin@h5.com
David D. Lewis
David D. Lewis Consulting, 1341 W. Fullerton Ave., #251, Chicago, IL 60614 USA, E-mail:
ailj10paper@DavidDLewis.com
Stephen Tomlinson
Open Text Corporation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, E-mail: stomlins@opentext.com
2
1 Introduction
The legal profession and its corporate and other institutional clients are increasingly
confronting a new reality: massive and growing amounts of electronically stored infor-
mation (ESI) required to be retained under both records laws1 and in light of pending
litigation (The Sedona Conference, 2007a). The phenomenon known as “e-discovery”
(i.e., the requirement that documents and information in electronic form stored in cor-
porate systems be produced as evidence in litigation) is sweeping the legal profession
in the U.S., and is a potential international force for change in the ways institutions
of all stripes manage and preserve their proprietary information. Not a week now goes
by without a new decision issued by a court which turns on the failure to find and/or
preserve important evidentiary information in electronic form—sometimes resulting in
sanctions to lawyers and their clients.2 In turn, a spotlight has now formed on how
lawyers decide to meet their obligations in various e-discovery contexts. A major aspect
of this involves how they go about directing “searches” for relevant electronic evidence
in response to discovery requests or due to some other external demand for information
coming from a court or an inquiring party with standing to make such a request. The
“how” is increasingly important, given spiraling legal costs. For example, a Forrester
report issued in 2006 estimated that the secondary market for information technology
solutions in the legal technology sector will grow just in the U.S. to $4.8 billion by
2011.3
The potential magnitude of the search problem is highlighted by past research
indicating that lawyers greatly overestimate their true rate of recall in civil discovery
(i.e., how well their searches for responsive documents have uncovered all relevant
evidence, or at least all potential “smoking guns”). A seminal study evaluating the
success of text retrieval methods in a legal setting was conducted by Blair and Maron
in 1985 (Blair and Maron, 1985). That study established a gap between the perception
on the part of lawyers that using their specific queries they would retrieve on the order
of 75% of the relevant evidence to be found in a collection of 40,000 documents gathered
for litigation purposes, whereas the researchers were able to show that only about 20%
of relevant documents had in fact been found.
The unprecedented size, scale, and complexity of electronically stored data now
potentially subject to routine capture in litigation presents Information Retrieval (IR)
researchers with a series of important challenges to overcome, not the least of which
is a fundamental question as to how best to model the real world. At least two of the
major research efforts on legal applications aimed at evaluating the efficacy of the search
task—the Blair and Maron study and the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC) Legal
Track—required manual assessments of the responsiveness of approximately 3 × 104
documents (drawn from a much larger population of documents of 7×106 for the TREC
Legal Track). These past efforts have utilized certain designs and evaluation criteria
that may or may not prove to be optimal for future research projects involving data sets
1 See, e.g., Sarbanes-Oxley Act, Title 18 of the U.S. Code, Section 1519 (U.S. securities
industry requirement to preserve email for 7 years); National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration regulations, 36 Code of Federal Regulations Part 1236.22 (all email that is considered
to fall within the definition of “federal records” under Title 44 of the U.S. Code, Section 3301,
must be archived in either paper or electronic systems).
2 See, e.g., Qualcomm v. Broadcom, 539 F. Supp. 2d 1214 (S.D. Cal 2007), rev’d 2010 WL
1336937 (S.D. Cal. Apr. 2, 2010); In re Fannie Mae Litigation, 552 F.3d 814 (D.C. Cir. 2009).
3 http://www.forrester.com/Research/Document/Excerpt/0,7211,40619,00.html
3
with perhaps orders of magnitude of more responsive and non-responsive documents.
It is now well understood that as data sets get larger, high-precision searches generally
become somewhat easier, but “indeterminacy multiplies making it increasingly difficult
to conduct successful specific or exhaustive searches” (Blair, 2006). Thus, faced with a
full spectrum of candidate search methods, we may legitimately ask: are the evaluation
measures in present use adequate to explore the range of research questions we need
to consider? If not, what new developments are needed?
We begin our investigation in Section 2 by examining how the context of law,
and the practice of law, affects the nature of text search performed in e-discovery. In
Section 3 we examine changing judicial views of what has become known as “keyword
search” in the legal profession, ending with a cautionary note on the differences between
the ways similar technical vocabulary have been used by practitioners of e-discovery
and by IR researchers. Section 4 reviews the history of work on evaluation of IR,
culminating in the well known TREC conferences. Section 5 describes our efforts to
bring TREC-style evaluation to bear on e-discovery problems through the TREC Legal
Track. We discuss the Interactive, Ad Hoc, and Relevance Feedback tasks, as well as
the TREC tobacco and email test collections. We look beyond TREC in Section 6 to
discuss large-scale situated studies, going beyond search to modeling the full e-discovery
process, and what a research path towards certifying “process quality” for e-discovery
might look like. We conclude in Section 7 with some final thoughts.
2 The Legal Context
As an initial step in thinking about how to structure IR research for the purpose of
advancing our knowledge about improving the efficacy of legal searches in a real world
context, three types of relevant factors potentially serve to inform the discussion: (i)
the size and heterogeneity of data sets made subject to discovery in current litigation;
(ii) what the nature of the legal search task is perceived by lawyers to be; and (iii) how
the search function is actually performed by real lawyers and agents acting on their
behalf in concrete situations. A fourth factor, namely, the degree to which the legal
profession can be expected to absorb new ways in which to do business, or to tolerate
alternative methodologies, is optimistically assumed, but not further considered here.
Note that for present purposes, we primarily focus on the experience of lawyers in civil
litigation within the U.S., although the principles discussed would be expected to have
broader application.
2.1 Size and Heterogeneity Issues
An unquantified but substantial percentage of current litigation is conducted by parties
holding vast quantities of evidence in the form of ESI. Directly as the result of the
unparalleled volume and nature of such newly arising forms of evidence, Congress
and the Supreme Court approved changes to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, in
effect as of December 1, 2006, which inter alia added “ESI” as a new legal term of
art, to supplement traditional forms of discovery wherever they may have previously
pertained or applied to mere “documents.” As just one example of this phenomenon,
32 million email records from the White House were made subject to discovery in U.S.
v. Philip Morris, the racketeering case filed in 1999 by the Justice Department against
4
several tobacco corporations. Out of the subset represented by 18 million presidential
record emails, using a search method with hand-built queries combining search terms
using Boolean, proximity and truncation operators, the government uncovered 200,000
potentially responsive electronic mail (email) messages, many with attachments. These
in turn were made subject to further manual review, on a one-by-one basis, to determine
responsiveness to the litigation as well as status as privileged documents. The review
effort required 25 individuals working over a six month period (Baron, 2005). Apart
from this one case, it appears that in a number of litigation contexts over 109 electronic
objects have been preserved for possible access, as part of ongoing discovery (Jensen,
2000).4 Accordingly, the volume of material presented in many current cases precludes
any serious attempt being made to solely rely on manual means of review for relevance.
Thus, “in many settings involving electronically stored information, reliance solely
on a manual review process for the purpose of finding responsive documents may be
infeasible or unwarranted. In such cases, the use of automated search methods should
be viewed as reasonable, valuable, and even necessary.”5 However, greater reliance
on automated methods will in turn raise questions of their accuracy, efficacy, and
completeness.
In addition to exponential increases in volume, the collections themselves are rapidly
evolving. The past decade has seen not only an explosion in email traffic, but also the
growth of dynamic structured databases and unstructured content of all kinds, includ-
ing universes of data found in Web 2.0 applications, both in corporate intranets as
well as out in the Internet “cloud,” and in all formats ranging from audio to video
to virtual reality (e.g., Second Life). Electronic storage devices have similarly evolved
rapidly, thus making the search problem one needing to encompass evidence stored on
all forms of current and legacy media, hard drives, network servers, backup tapes, and
portable devices of all kinds. In turn, the universe of data made available to the typical
end user performing functions on today’s corporate desktop computers constitutes a
prime target in civil litigation. Thus, the subject of search is a worthy candidate for
academic research evaluating the efficacy of search methods.
2.2 Nature of the Legal Search Task
For the most part discovery is conducted by means of inquiring on an open-ended basis
into selected topics of relevance to a particular case, including through depositions,
interrogatories, and requests to produce documents (including now ESI). Although
exceptional situations arise where lawyers are focused on retrieving a known small set
of one or more particular documents, in the vast majority of cases the lawyers’ inquiry
in discovery is intended to be broadly worded, to capture “any and all” (or certainly
as many as possible) relevant pieces of evidence to the case at hand. Thus, the “ad
hoc” nature of the lawyer’s search task. In turn, “relevance” is defined broadly under
the law: if any fragment of text in a document has bearing on a contested issue, the
document as a whole is found to be relevant and should presumptively be turned over
to opposing counsel, absent assertion of privilege.
4 See also Report of Anton R. Valukas, Examiner, In re Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.
(U.S. Bankruptcy Ct. S.D.N.Y. March 11, 2010), vol. 7, Appx. 5 (350 billion pages subjected
to dozens of Boolean searches), available at http://lehmanreport.jenner.com/
5 See Practice Point 1 in (The Sedona Conference, 2007b) (referred to herein as the “Sedona
Search Commentary”).
5
2.3 How Legal Searches Are Actually Performed
The state of practice as it generally exists today consists of lawyers, in response to
broadly worded discovery demands, directing key custodians and their IT staff coun-
terparts to search for relevant information using a set of keywords dreamed up unilat-
erally, with limited use made of Boolean, proximity, or other operators. It may strike
some as incredible that until only very recently lawyers in some of the most complex
litigations failed to employ any particularly advanced strategies for developing search
protocols as an aid in conducting searches—and that this situation still continues to
this day as the status quo reality, rather than being the exceptional case. This entire
area of the law is now changing, however, with the advent of the new federal rules
of civil procedure, and the emergence of a body of case law questioning the ad hoc,
unexplained, and/or unilaterally deployed use of single keywords as search terms.
As a starting proposition, it is well understood, at least in the U.S., that “broad
discovery is a cornerstone of the litigation process contemplated by the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure.”6 In other words, “fishing expeditions” seeking the broadest amount
of evidence have been encouraged at all levels of the legal profession, as an “engine” of
the discovery process. How lawyers go about propounding and responding to discovery
didn’t materially change between the 1930s and the 1990s (and for some increasingly
isolated practitioners, has never changed). Under well-known U.S. rules of civil proce-
dure governing the so-called “discovery” phase of civil litigation prior to trial, lawyers
constructed what are known as “interrogatories” and “document requests,” as two sta-
ples of the art of discovery practice. Document requests (i.e., requests that the other
side produce documents relevant to a named topic) were propounded with the expec-
tation that the producing party would perform a reasonably diligent search for records
found in corporate hardcopy repositories—including file room areas and work stations.
Although the rules require lawyers to certify that they have performed a “complete”
good faith response to discovery requests, a “perfect” search has never been required.7
A party has always, however, had the right to challenge the adequacy of a given search
for relevant documents, if they have reason to believe based on documents produced
(if any) that an opposing party failed to account for all known sources of relevant
evidence. The latter could include a failure to check with all reasonable custodians of
documents, including key players known to be material witnesses in the litigation.
During these seven decades, “motion practice” over document requests usually has
consisted of sequences of interactions akin to chess moves: one party crafting requests in
the broadest conceivable way; the producing party reflexively opposing such language
as overbroad, vague, ambiguous, and not leading to the discovery of relevant evidence;
the requesting party filing a motion to compel a ruling from the court on the ambiguity
inherent in the requests, with a demand that the adversary “do something” to respond
to the original queries; and the court finally stepping in at some later stage in the
process, to assist in the crafting of narrower or more precise inquiries and to require
production under a fixed deadline. All of this litigation gamesmanship was routinely
carried out prior to any “meeting of the minds” by the parties to attempt to resolve
the scope of production amicably, and prior to any production whatsoever of actual
6 Zubulake v. UBS Warburg LLC, 217 F.R.D. 309, 311 (2003); see generally, The Sedona
Conference, The Sedona Principles (2d ed. 2007).
7 See Pension Committee of the University of Montreal Pension Plan et al. v Banc of America
Securities LLC, et al., 2010 WL 184312, *1 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 15, 2010) (“Courts cannot and do
not expect that any party can reach a standard of perfection.”).
6
relevant documents by either side in a case. Objectively speaking, there was some
measure of rationality in not proceeding to undertake responses to discovery where the
relevant evidence at issue “merely” consisted of hardcopy documents in traditional file
cabinets and boxes. Any search meant hours of intensive labor manually performing
file and document level review for relevant evidence, plus a second pass to determine
potentially “privileged” documents out of those documents segregated as responsive to
particular requests.
This general model for civil discovery carried even into the era of office automation;
however, the growth of networks and the Internet, resulting in exponential increases in
ESI, has changed the legal terrain considerably. Lawyers familiar with structured col-
lections of cases and legislation, as created by Lexis and Westlaw, became readily adept
at using basic Boolean, and occasionally ranked retrieval, searches on free text and/or
controlled vocabulary terms to find relevant precedents. To the same end, lawyers also
increasingly were able to utilize simple search strategies to tackle the task of finding
relevant documents in poorly structured corporate document collections.
3 The Jurisprudence of “Keyword” Search
As IR researchers have long known, and recent legal scholarship has recognized, text
retrieval systems suffer from a variety of limitations, given the inherent ambiguity of
language, the well characterized limitations in the ability of people to formulate effective
queries, and further complexities introduced by preprocessing (e.g., optical character
recognition for scanned documents).8 Nor did the mere utilization of automated means
for conducting searches change the basic procedural equation between legal adversaries
throughout discovery (since there is an inherent asymmetry in the positions of parties
with respect to the state of their knowledge of what relevant documents exist—with
one side flying completely “blind”).9
Only a few years ago, the idea that there would be a jurisprudence devoted to
analyzing the strengths and limitations of text retrieval would be unheard of, for at
least two reasons. First, until recent times, discovery practice, even in the largest and
most complex cases in the U.S., consisted entirely of paper productions of documents,
sometimes in admittedly massive quantities. For example, just short of ten million
documents in hardcopy form have been amassed in a repository, pursuant to a Master
Settlement Agreement, between a variety of State Attorneys General and the tobacco
industry.10
8 See (The Sedona Conference, 2007b), at 202.
9 There is, at virtually all times, an admitted asymmetry of knowledge as between the
requesting party (who does not own and therefore does not know what is in the target data
collection), and the receiving or responding party (who does own the collection and thus in
theory could know its contents). For an exploration into ethical questions encountered when
the existence of documents is not reached by a given keyword search method, see (Baron,
2009).
10 For example, see, People of the State of California v. Philip Morris, et al., Case No.
J.C.C.P. 4041 (Sup. Ct. Cal.) (December 9, 1998 consent decree incorporating terms of Master
Settlement Agreement or “MSA”). These documents have for the most part been digitized
using Optical Character Recognition (OCR) technology and are available online on various
Web sites. See the Legacy Tobacco Collection, available at http://legacy.library.ucsf.edu/.
The OCR portions of the MSA collection have been used in conjunction with the TREC Legal
Track.
7
Second, with the advent of proprietary computerized databases of case law, repre-
sented most prominently by Westlaw and Lexis, lawyers have become well versed in
conducting searches to find relevant case precedent for use in legal pleadings and briefs.
The beauty of text retrieval in this context is that no lawyer wishes or needs to read
more than a handful of cases as an aid in stating a legal position in writing, except in
the rare instance where more exhaustive searches are necessary. Further, databases of
case law contain few enough and valuable enough items that vendors can apply rich
controlled vocabulary indexing, in addition to the crucial content indicators provided
by citations among cases.
In contrast, the limitations of simple search techniques become more apparent as
the task changes from finding case precedent to finding “all” relevant evidence related
to the discovery topic at hand. This has become especially clear with the exponential
growth of databases and data stores of all kinds, especially with respect to email (Paul
and Baron, 2007).
3.1 Keywords, Concepts, and the Courts
Discussions of the challenges of search in the e-discovery context have focused on the
perceived weaknesses of “keyword” search, a point of terminology to which we will
return in Section 3.2. The Sedona Conference’s commentary on search and IR methods
presents the issues this way:
Keyword searches11 work best when the legal inquiry is focused on finding
particular documents and when the use of language is relatively predictable.
For example, keyword searches work well to find all documents that mention a
specific individual or date, regardless of context. However, . . . the experience
of many litigators is that simple keyword searching alone is inadequate in at
least some discovery contexts. This is because simple keyword searches end up
being both over- and under-inclusive in light of the inherent malleability and
ambiguity of spoken and written English (as well as all other languages).12
The Sedona Search Commentary describes how keywords have the potential to
miss documents that fail to contain the word either because other terms with the same
meaning have been used, or due to common or inadvertently misspelled instances of the
keyword term. The Commentary then goes on at length to describe some of the tech-
nologies that have been proposed for dealing with weaknesses of simple term matching,
including Boolean operators, fuzzy logic, statistical techniques, and taxonomies and on-
tologies.13 The Commentary makes the point that lawyers “are beginning to feel more
comfortable” using these forms of alternative search tools, based on anecdotal evidence
from a small (but increasing) number of companies and law firms.14
While the limitations of simple term matching have been well-known to the IR
community for decades, U.S. jurisprudence has only recently begun to grapple with
the problems inherent in the task of conducting a reasonable search for all of the
11 As used by e-discovery practitioners, “keyword search” most often refers to the use of single
query terms to identify the set of all documents containing that term as part of a pre-processing
step to identify documents that merit manual review.
12 (The Sedona Conference, 2007b) at 201. See also (Paul and Baron, 2007).
13 Id. at 202–03; 217 (Appendix describing alternative search methods at greater length).
14 Id. at 202–03.
8
needles in what turn out to be very large e-haystacks. In a short interval of time,
some courts have gone from extolling the power of keyword searching to questioning
its efficacy (at least as articulated by counsel). Compare the case of In re Lorazepam
& Clorazepate Antitrust Litigation, 300 F. Supp. 2d 43, 46 (D.D.C. 2004):
“[t]he glory of electronic information is not merely that it saves space but that
it permits the computer to search for words or ‘strings’ of text in seconds,”
to U.S. v. O’Keefe, 537 F. Supp. 2d 14, 24 (D.D.C. 2008):
“Whether search terms of ‘keywords’ will yield the information sought is a com-
plicated question involving the interplay, at least, of the sciences of computer
technology, statistics, and linguistics. . . . Given this complexity, for lawyers
and judges to dare opine that a certain search term or terms would be more
likely to produce information than the terms that were used is truly to go where
angels fear to tread.”
Until mid-2007, the overarching approach taken by a number of courts in this area
has been to define the reasonableness of the search conducted by a party solely by
the number of keyword terms being requested and their relevance to the subject at
hand. Thus, in the case of In re Lorazepam, the district court endorsed the employ-
ment of a number of search terms as a reasonable means of narrowing the production
for relevant ESI.15 In another case, as few as four keyword search terms were found to
be sufficient.16 In certain decisions, the court ordered a producing party (usually the
defendant) to conduct searches using the keyword terms provided by plaintiff.17 More
recently, judges that have taken a more activist approach have attempted to force par-
ties to cooperate on reaching an agreement for a reasonable search protocol, including
the use of certain search terms.18
On June 1, 2007, U.S. Magistrate Judge John Facciola issued an opinion in the case
of Disability Rights Council of Greater Washington v. Metropolitan Transit Author-
ity19 in which for the first time in published case law a judge suggested that parties
contemplate the use of an alternative to merely reaching a set of keywords by con-
sensus. The dispute in question involved disabled individuals and an advocacy group
bringing an action against a local transit authority alleging that inadequacies in para-
transit services amounted to disability discrimination. The plaintiffs moved to compel
the production of electronic documents residing on backup tapes in the defendants’
possession. After engaging in a routine balancing analysis of the considerations set out
15 In re Lorazepam & Clorazepate Antitrust Litigation, 300 F. Supp. 2d 43 (D.D.C. 2004).
16 J.C. Associates v. Fidelity & Guaranty Ins. Co., 2006 WL 1445173 (D.D.C. 2006).
17 For example, see Medtronic Sofamor Danck, Inc. v. Michelson, 229 F.R.D. 550 (W.D. Tenn.
2003); Treppel v. Biovail, 233 F.R.D. 363, 368–69 (S.D.N.Y. 2006) (court describes plaintiff’s
refusal to cooperate with defendant in the latter’s suggestion to enter into a stipulation defining
the keyword search terms to be used as a “missed opportunity” and goes on to require that
certain terms be used); see also Alexander v. FBI, 194 F.R.D. 316 (D.D.C. 2000) (court places
limitations on the scope of plaintiffs’ proposed keywords in a case involving White House
email).
18 In addition to cases discussed infra, see, e.g., Dunkin Donuts Franchised Restaurants, Inc.
v. Grand Central Donuts, Inc, 2009 WL 175038 (E.D.N.Y. June 19, 2009) (parties directed to
meet and confer on developing a workable search protocol); ClearOne Communications, Inc. v.
Chiang, 2008 WL 920336 (D. Utah April 1, 2008) (court adjudicates dispute over conjunctive
versus disjunctive Boolean operators).
19 242 F.R.D. 139 (D.D.C. 2007)
9
in Rule 26(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the court ordered that some form
of restoration of the backup tapes be ordered to recover relevant documents. It is at this
juncture that the opinion broke new ground: the magistrate judge expressly required
that counsel meet and confer and prepare for his signature a “stipulated protocol” as
to how the search of the backup tapes would be conducted, and pointed out “I expect
the protocol to speak to at least the following concerns,” including both “How will the
backup tapes be restored?”, and
“Once restored, how will they be searched to reduce the electronically stored
information to information that is potentially relevant? In this context, I bring
to the parties’ attention recent scholarship that argues that concept searching,
is more efficient and more likely to produce the most comprehensive results.”20
Following this decision, Judge Facciola, writing in U.S. v. O’Keefe,21 chose to in-
clude a discussion of the use of search protocols. The O’Keefe case involved the de-
fendant being indicted on the charge that as a State Department employee living in
Canada, he received gifts and other benefits from his co-defendant, in return for ex-
pediting visa requests for his co-defendant’s company employees. The district court
judge in the case had previously required that the government “conduct a thorough
and complete search of both its hardcopy and electronic files in a good faith effort to
uncover all responsive information in its possession custody or control.”22 This in turn
entailed a search of paper documents and electronic files, including for emails, that
“were prepared or received by any consular officers” at various named posts in Canada
and Mexico “that reflect either policy or decisions in specific cases with respect to
expediting visa applications.”23
The defendants insisted that the government search both active servers and certain
designated backup tapes. The government conducted a fairly well-documented search,
as described in a declaration placed on file with the court, in which 19 specific named
individuals were identified as being within the scope of the search, along with certain
identified existing repositories by name and the files of at least one former member of
staff. The declarant went on to describe the search string used as follows:
“early or expedite* or appointment or early & interview or expedite* & inter-
view.”24
Upon review of the results, only those documents “clearly about wholly unrelated
matters” were removed, for example, “emails about staff members’ early departures
or dentist appointments.” Nevertheless, the defendants objected that the search terms
used were inadequate. This led the magistrate judge to state that on the record before
him, he was not in a position to decide whether the search was reasonable or adequate,
and that given the complexity of the issues he did not wish “to go where angels fear
to tread.” The court went on to note, citing to the use of “expert” testimony under
Federal Rule of Evidence 702:
20 Id. at 148 (citing to (Paul and Baron, 2007), supra).
21 537 F. Supp. 2d 14, 24 (D.D.C. 2008).
22 Id. at 16 (quoting U.S. v. O’Keefe, 2007 WL 1239204, at *3 (D.D.C. April 27, 2007))
(internal quotations omitted).
23 537 F. Supp. 2d at 16.
24 Based only on what is known from the opinion, it is admittedly somewhat difficult to
parse the syntax used in this search string. One is left to surmise that the ambiguity present
on the face of the search protocol may have contributed to the court finding the matter of
adjudicating a proper search string to be too difficult a task.
10
“This topic is clearly beyond the ken of a layman and requires that any such
conclusion be based on evidence that, for example, meets the criteria of Rule
702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence. Accordingly, if defendants are going to
contend that the search terms used by the government were insufficient, they
will have to specifically so contend in a motion to compel and their contention
must be based on evidence that meets the requirements of Rule 702 of the
Federal Rules of Evidence.”25
Whether it is the view of the magistrate judge that expert opinion testimony must
be introduced in all cases on the subject of the reasonableness of the search method
or protocol employed immediately generated discussion in subsequent case law and
commentary.26
In 2008, Magistrate Judge Paul Grimm further substantially contributed to the
development of a jurisprudence of IR through issuance of a comprehensive opinion
on the subject of privilege review in Victor Stanley, Inc. v. Creative Pipe, Inc.27 At
issue was whether the manner in which privileged documents were selected from a
larger universe of relevant evidence was sufficient to protect a party from waiver of
attorney-client privilege, where 165 privileged documents were provided to the opposing
counsel as the result of a keyword search. At the outset, Judge Grimm reported that
“he ordered the parties’ computer forensic experts to meet and confer in an effort to
identify a joint protocol to search and retrieve relevant ESI” in response to the plaintiff’s
document requests. The protocol “contained detailed search and information retrieval
instructions, including nearly five pages of keyword/phrase search terms.”28
The defendants’ counsel subsequently informed the court that they would be con-
ducting a separate review to filter privileged documents from the larger [universe] of
4.9 gigabytes of text-searchable files and 33.7 gigabytes of non-searchable files. In doing
so, they claimed to use seventy keywords to distinguish privileged from non-privileged
documents; however, Judge Grimm, applying a form of heightened scrutiny to the as-
sertions of counsel, found that their representations fell short of being sufficient for
purposes of explaining why mistakes took place in the production of the documents
and in so doing, avoiding waiver of the privilege. In the court’s words:
“[T]he Defendants are regrettably vague in their description of the seventy key-
words used for the text-searchable ESI privilege review, how they were devel-
oped, how the search was conducted, and what quality controls were employed
to assess their reliability and accuracy. . . . [N]othing is known from the affidavits
provided to the court regarding their [the parties’ and counsel’s] qualifications
for designing a search and information retrieval strategy that could be expected
to produce an effective and reliable privilege review. . . .
[W]hile it is universally acknowledged that keyword searches are useful tools
for search and retrieval of ESI, all keyword searches are not created equal; and
there is a growing body of literature that highlights the risks associated with
25 537 F. Supp. 2d at 24.
26 Equity Analytics v. Lundin, 248 F.R.D. 331 (D.D.C. 2008) (stating that in O’Keefe “I
recently commented that lawyers express as facts what are actually highly debatable proposi-
tions as to efficacy of various methods used to search electronically stored information,” and
requiring an expert to describe scope of proposed search); see also discussion of Victor Stanley,
Inc. v. Creative Pipe, Inc., infra.
27 250 F.R.D. 251 (D. Md. 2008).
28 Id. at 254.
11
conducting an unreliable or inadequate keyword search of relying exclusively
on such searches for privilege review.”29
The opinion goes on to set out at length the limitations of keyword searching,
and the need for sampling of the results of such searches, finding that there was no
evidence that the defendant did anything but turn over all documents to the plaintiff
that were identified by the keywords used as non-privileged. Later in the opinion, in
several lengthy footnotes, Judge Grimm first goes on to describe what alternatives exist
to keyword searching (including fuzzy search models, Bayesian classifiers, clustering,
and concept and categorization tools), citing the Sedona Search Commentary,30 and
second, provides a mini-law review essay on the subject of whether Judge Facciola’s
recent opinions in O’Keefe and Equity Analytics should be read to require that expert
testimony under Federal Rule of Evidence 702 be presented to the finder of fact in
every case involving the use of search methodologies. In Judge Grimm’s view:
“Viewed in its proper context, all that O’Keefe and Equity Analytics required
was that the parties be prepared to back up their positions with respect to a
dispute involving the appropriateness of ESI search and information retrieval
methodology—obviously an area of science or technology—with reliable infor-
mation from someone with the qualifications to provide helpful opinions, not
conclusory argument by counsel. . . . The message to be taken from O’Keefe
and Equity Analytics, and this opinion is that when parties decide to use a
particular ESI search and retrieval methodology, they need to be aware of lit-
erature describing the strengths and weaknesses of various methodologies, such
as [the Sedona Search Commentary] and select the one that they believe is most
appropriate for its intended task. Should their selection be challenged by their
adversary, and the court be called upon to make a ruling, then they should
expect to support their position with affidavits or other equivalent information
from persons with the requisite qualifications and experience, based on sufficient
facts or data and using reliable principles or methodology.”31
Post-Victor Stanley, a number of other opinions have discussed various aspects of
keyword searching and its limitations. For example, one party’s attempt to propound
1,000 keywords, and another party’s refusal to supply any keywords altogether, led
U.S. Magistrate Judge Andrew Peck to lambast the parties for having the case be “the
latest example of lawyers designing keyword searches in the dark, by the seat of the
pants,” and to go on to hold that
“Electronic discovery requires cooperation between opposing counsel and trans-
parency in all aspects of preservation and production of ESI. Moreover, where
counsel are using keyword searches for retrieval of ESI, they at a minimum must
carefully craft the appropriate keywords, with input from the ESI’s custodians
as to the words and abbreviations they use, and the proposed methodology
must be quality control tested to assure accuracy in retrieval and elimination
of ‘false positives.’ It is time that the Bar—even those lawyers who did not
come of age in the computer era—understand this.”32
29 Id. at 256-57.
30 Id. at 259 n.9.
31 Id. at 260 n.10.
32 William A. Gross Construction Assocs., Inc. v. Am. Mftrs. Mutual Ins. Co., 256 F.R.D.
134, 135 (S.D.N.Y. 2009).
12
The new case law on search and IR amounts to a change in the way things were
before, for both the bar and the bench: counsel has a duty to fairly articulate how they
have gone about the task of finding relevant digital evidence, rather than assuming
that there is only one way to go about doing so with respect to ESI (for example, using
keywords), even if the task appears to be a trivial or uninteresting one to perform.
Arguably, the “reasonableness” of one’s actions in this area will be judged in large part
on how well counsel, on behalf of his or her client, has documented and explained the
search process and the methods employed. In an increasing number of cases, courts can
be expected not to shirk from applying some degree of searching scrutiny to counsel’s
actions with respect to IR. This may be greeted as an unwelcome development by some,
but it comes as an inevitable consequence of the heightened scrutiny being applied to all
aspects of e-discovery in the wake of the newly revised Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
Given decisions such as in Disability Rights, O’Keefe, and Creative Pipe, it seems
certain that in a few years’ time there will be large and increasing jurisprudence dis-
cussing the efficacy of various search methodologies as employed in litigation.33 Nev-
ertheless, the legal field is still very much a vast tabula rasa awaiting common law
development on what constitutes alternative forms of “reasonable” searches when one
or more parties are faced with finding “any and all” responsive documents in increas-
ingly vast data sets.
3.2 Keywords, Concepts, and IR Researchers
An IR researcher reading the above discussion may be justifiably concerned at the
casual use of technical terminology, and the technical import imputed to casual termi-
nology, in legal rulings on IR. The term “keyword searching,” for instance, has been
used in the IR literature to refer to any or all of exact string matching, substring
matching, Boolean search, or statistical ranked retrieval, applied to any or all of free
text terms (e.g., space-delimited tokens or character n-grams), manually assigned un-
controlled terms, or manually or automatically assigned controlled vocabulary terms,
with or without augmentation by any combination of stemming, wildcards, multi-word
phrase formation, proximity and/or word order restrictions, field restrictions, and/or
a variety of other operators.
Thus “keyword searching,” while having some implication of more or less direct
matching of terms in a query and document, is at best an extraordinarily vague term.
Indeed, in the IR research literature it is used almost exclusively in a derogatory fashion,
to refer to any method which an author believes is inferior to their preferred technique.
No one claims to have built a keyword search system, yet somehow the world is full of
them. At the bottom, all IR is based on terms that are often referred to as “keywords”
(i.e., words on which an index (a “key”) has been built to facilitate retrieval), and the
thought that legal penalties might be imposed based on whether someone has or has
not used “keyword searching” is therefore alarming.
In contrast, “concept searching” is almost uniformly used with a positive connota-
tion, in both technical and marketing literature. But the breadth of technologies that
“concept searching” has referred to includes controlled vocabulary indexing (manual
33 We note that at least one important decision has been rendered by a court in the United
Kingdom, which in sophisticated fashion similarly has analyzed keyword choices by parties at
some length. See Digicel (St. Lucia) Ltd. & Ors. v. Cable & Wireless & Ors., [2008] EWHC
2522 (Ch.).
13
or automatic, with or without thesauri), multi-word phrase formation (by statistical
and/or linguistic means), statistical query expansion methods, knowledge representa-
tion languages and inference systems from artificial intelligence, unsupervised learning
approaches (including term clustering, document clustering, and factor analytic meth-
ods such as latent semantic indexing), as well as simple stemming, wildcards, spelling
correction and string similarity measures. These technologies have wildly varying, and
often poorly understood, behavior. They also overlap substantially the list of technolo-
gies that have been referred to (by others) as “keyword searching.”
The need for more precise understanding of the usefulness of specific IR technologies
in e-discovery is clear, as is the need for much more attention to the overall process in
which they are used. We address these issues in the next two sections and then look
ahead to next steps in Section 6.
4 Information Retrieval Evaluation
Unlike typical data retrieval tasks in which the content of a correct response to a query
is easily specified, IR tasks treat the correctness of a response as a matter of opinion.
A correctly returned document (broadly conceived as any container of information) is
considered relevant if the user would wish to see it, and not relevant otherwise. The
concept of relevance is fundamental, and that therefore is where we begin our review
of IR evaluation. An important consequence of relevance being an opinion (rather than
an objectively determinable fact) is that retrieval effectiveness is a principal focus for
evaluation. That is not to say that efficiency is not important as well; just that there
would be little value in efficient implementation of ineffective techniques.
The history of IR system development has been shaped by an evaluation-guided
research paradigm known broadly as the “Cranfield tradition,” which we describe in
Section 4.2. As with any mathematical model of reality, evaluation in the Cranfield
tradition yields useful insights by abstracting away many details to focus on system
design, which is of course just one part of the rather complex process of information
seeking that people actually engage in. We therefore conclude this section with a review
of approaches to evaluation that involve interaction with actual users of those systems.
4.1 Defining Relevance
The term “relevance” has been used in many different ways by scholars and practi-
tioners interested in helping people to find the information that they need. For our
purposes, three of those ways are of particular interest. In information seeking behav-
ior studies, “relevance” is used broadly to essentially mean “utility” (i.e., whether a
document would be useful to the requestor). In most IR research, and particularly in
the Cranfield tradition described below, relevance is more narrowly defined as a rela-
tion between a topic and a document. In e-discovery, relevance (or, the more commonly
used term in a legal context, “relevancy”) is often used as a synonym for “responsive-
ness,” with the literal interpretation “what was asked for.” In this section, we begin
with a very broad conception of relevance; we then use that background to situate the
narrower context used in much of recent IR research.
In a metastudy based on nineteen information seeking behavior studies, Bales and
Wang identified fourteen relevance criteria that researchers had examined in one or
14
more of those studies (Bales and Wang, 2006). Among the criteria that might be of
interest in e-discovery applications were topicality, novelty, quality, recency, stature of
the author, cost of obtaining access, intelligibility, and serendipitous utility for some
purpose other than that originally intended. Their model of how relevance is decided
by users of a system is fairly straightforward: the users observe some attributes of a
document (e.g., author, title, and date), from those attributes they form opinions about
some criteria (e.g., novelty), and from those criteria they decide whether the document
is useful.
This closely parallels the situation in e-discovery, although naturally additional
attributes will be important (in particular, custodian), and (in contrast to information
seeking by end users) the criteria for “relevancy” are always stated explicitly. That’s
not to say that those explicitly stated criteria are specified completely, of course—
considerable room for interpretation often remains for the simple reason that it is not
practical to consider absolutely everything that might be found in any document when
specifying a production request.
The narrower conception of relevance in the IR research community arises not from
a difference in intent, but rather from a difference in focus. IR research is fundamentally
concerned with the design of the systems that people will use to perform information
seeking, so evaluation of those systems naturally focuses on the parts of the overall
information seeking task that the system is designed to help with. Although factors
such as novelty and quality have been the focus of some research (e.g., in the First
Story Detection task of the Topic Detection and Tracking evaluation (Wayne, 1998),
and in the widely used PageRank “authority” measure, respectively (Brin and Page,
1998)), the vast majority of IR evaluation is concerned principally with just one aspect
of relevance: topicality.
Although other definitions have been used, the most widely used definition of topical
relevance by IR researchers is substantive treatment of the desired topic by any part
of the document. By this standard, an email that mentions a lunch with a client in
passing without mentioning what was discussed at that meeting would be relevant
to a production request asking for information about all contacts with that client,
but it would not be relevant to a production request asking for information about all
discussions of future prices for some product. Relevance of this type is typically judged
on a document by document basis, so the relevance of this one document (in the sense
meant by IR researchers) would not be influenced by the presence in the collection of
another document that described what was discussed at that lunch.
It is important to recognize that the notion of relevance that is operative in e-
discovery is, naturally, somewhat more focused than what has been studied in infor-
mation seeking behavior studies generally (which range from very broad exploratory
searches to very narrowly crafted instances of known-item retrieval), but that it is at
the same time somewhat broader than has been the traditional focus of Cranfield-style
IR research. We therefore turn next to describe how the “Cranfield tradition” of IR
evaluation arose, and how that tradition continues to shape IR research.
4.2 The Cranfield Tradition
The subtleties of relevance and complexities of information seeking behavior notwith-
standing, librarians for millennia have made practical choices about how to organize
and access documents. With the advent of computing technology in the late 1950’s,
15
the range of such choices exploded, along with controversy over the best approaches
for representing documents, expressing the user’s information needs, and matching the
two. Ideally each approach would be tested in operational contexts, on users with real
information needs. In practice, the costs of such experiments would be prohibitive, even
if large numbers of sufficiently patient real world users could be found.
A compromise pioneered in a set of experiments at the Cranfield Institute of Tech-
nology in the 1960’s (Cleverdon, 1967) was to represent the basics of an information
access setting by a test collection with three components:
– Users are represented by a set of text descriptions of information needs, variously
called topics, requests, or queries. (The last of these should be avoided, however,
as “query” is routinely used to refer to a derived expression intended for input to
particular search software.)
– The resources searched are limited to a static collection of documents.
– Relevance is captured in a set of manually-produced assessments (relevance judg-
ments), which specify (on a binary or graded scale) the (topical) relevance of each
document to the topic.
The effectiveness of a retrieval approach is then measured by its ability to retrieve,
for each topic, those documents which have positive assessments for that topic. Assum-
ing binary (i.e., relevant vs. non-relevant) assessments, two measures of effectiveness
are very commonly reported. Recall is the proportion of the extant relevant docu-
ments that were retrieved by the system, while precision is the proportion of retrieved
documents which were in fact relevant. Together they reflect a user-centered view of
the fundamental tradeoff between false positives and false negatives. These measures
are defined for an unordered set of retrieved documents, such as would be produced
by a Boolean query, but they were soon extended to evaluate systems which produce
rankings of documents (e.g., by defining one or more cutoff points in the ranked list).34
The test collection approach greatly reduced the cost of retrieval experiments.
While the effort to build a test collection was substantial, once built it could be the basis
for experiments by any number of research groups. The relative ease of test collection
experiments undoubtedly contributed to the statistical and empirical bent of modern
IR research, even during the decades of the 1970’s and 1980’s when most other work
on processing natural language was focused on knowledge engineering approaches.
This test collection model of IR research evolved with relatively minor changes from
the 1960’s through the 1980’s. As new test collections were (infrequently) produced,
they grew modestly in size (from hundreds to a few thousands of documents). Even this
small increase, however, ruled out exhaustively assessing each document for relevance
to each topic. Pooling (i.e., taking the union of the top ranked documents from a variety
of ranked retrieval searches based on each topic) and having the assessor judge this pool
of documents was suggested as a solution; traditional effectiveness measures could then
be computed as if the pooling process had found all of the relevant documents (Spärck
Jones and van Rijsbergen, 1975). The strategy was implemented in a minimal fashion
34 Strictly speaking, unlike for a set, it is not meaningful to refer to the “recall” or “precision”
of a ranking of documents. The popular ranked-based measures of Recall@k and Precision@k
(which measure recall and precision of the set of top-ranked k documents) nominally suggest
a recall or precision orientation for ranking, but actually compare ranked retrieval systems
identically on individual topics. One can observe the recall-precision tradeoff in a ranking,
however, by varying the cutoff k; e.g., increasing k will tend to increase recall at the expense
of precision.
16
for producing several test collections of this era. For instance, the widely used CACM
collection used relevance judgments based on the top few documents from each of seven
searches, all apparently executed with the same software (Fox, 1983).
A handful of small test collections thus supported the development of the major
approaches to statistical ranked retrieval of text, approaches which are now ubiquitous
within search engines and a wide range of text analysis applications. By the end of the
1980’s, however, a variety of weaknesses in existing test collections were apparent. The
size of document collections searched by commercial vendors, government agencies, and
libraries had vastly exceeded the size of test collections used in IR research. Further, the
full text of documents was increasingly available, not just the bibliographic abstracts
in most test collections of the time. Managers of operational IR systems were largely
ignoring the results of IR research, claiming with some justification that the proposed
methods had not been realistically tested. IR research was itself not in a healthy state,
with plausible techniques failing to show improvements in effectiveness, and worries
that the field as a whole had overfit to the available test collections. A further nagging
problem was variation among researchers in their choices of which topics and documents
to use in any given experiment, and in how effectiveness figures were computed, leading
to difficulties in comparing even results generated from the same test collection.
The TREC evaluations by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) were a response to these problems (Voorhees and Harman, 2005). The test
collection produced in TREC’s first year (1992) had 100 times as many documents as
the typical test collection of the time, with full text instead of bibliographic records.
The first TREC evaluation introduced numerous other innovations, including pool-
ing from multiple research groups, a synchronized timetable of data release and result
submissions, more detailed descriptions of information needs, relevance assessment by
paid professionals using carefully specified procedures, computation of effectiveness
measures by a single impartial party using publicly available software, and a confer-
ence with attendance restricted to groups participating in the evaluation. Subsequent
TRECs have greatly expanded the range of information access tasks studied and the
number and size of the data sets used (Voorhees and Harman, 2005; Harman, 2005),
and several IR evaluation forums inspired by TREC have emerged around the world
(Peters and Braschler, 2001; Kando et al, 2008; Kazai et al, 2004; Majumder et al,
2008).
The large size of the TREC collections led to initial doubts that pooling meth-
ods could produce reliable relevance judgments. Studies conducted on the first TREC
test collections, with sizes on the order of a few hundred thousand documents, were
reassuring because the relative ordering of systems by effectiveness was found to be
largely unchanged if different assessors were used or if a particular system’s submitted
documents were omitted from the pool (Buckley and Voorhees, 2005). The latter result
is particularly encouraging, in that it suggested that pools could be used to provide
reliable relevance assessments for systems which had not themselves participated in
the corresponding TREC evaluation.
Collections continued to grow in size, however, and a study on the AQUAINT
collection (over 1 million documents) was the first to find a clearly identifiable pool
bias against a particular class of retrieval systems (Buckley et al, 2006). By then,
test collections with as many as 25 million documents were in routine use (Clarke
et al, 2005), so worries increased. Anecdotal reports also suggested that Web search
companies were successfully tuning and evaluating their systems, by then handling
billions of documents, using approaches very different from traditional pooling.
17
These concerns sparked a blossoming of new evaluation approaches for ranked re-
trieval. Various combinations of the following approaches have been recently proposed:
– After-the-fact unbiasing of biased document pools (Büttcher et al, 2007)
– Using effectiveness measures and/or statistical significance tests that are more ro-
bust to imperfect relevance judgments (Buckley and Voorhees, 2004; Sanderson and
Zobel, 2005; Yilmaz and Aslam, 2006; Sakai and Kando, 2008; Moffat and Zobel,
2008)
– Treating effectiveness values computed from a limited set of relevance judgments
as estimators (with various statistical properties) of effectiveness on the collection
(Aslam et al, 2006; Baron et al, 2007; Yilmaz and Aslam, 2006; Carterette et al,
2008)
– Using sampling or pooling methods that concentrate assessments on documents
which are most likely to be relevant, representative, revealing of differences among
systems, and/or able to produce unbiased estimates of effectiveness (Lewis, 1996;
Zobel, 1998; Cormack et al, 1998; Aslam et al, 2006; Baron et al, 2007; Soboroff,
2007; Carterette et al, 2008)
– Leveraging manual effort to find higher quality documents (Cormack et al, 1998;
Sanderson and Joho, 2004)
– Using larger numbers of queries, with fewer documents assessed per query (Sander-
son and Zobel, 2005; Carterette et al, 2008)
In Section 5 we look at the particular combinations of these techniques that have been
brought to bear in the TREC Legal Track.
4.3 Interactive Evaluation
A test collection abstracts IR tasks in a way that makes them affordably repeatable,
but such an approach leads directly to two fundamental limitations. First, the pro-
cess by which the query is created from the specification of the information need (the
topic) will necessarily be formulaic if strict repeatability is to be achieved. Second, and
even more important, the exploratory behavior that real searchers engage in—learning
through experience to formulate effective queries, and learning more about what they
really are looking for—is not modeled. In many cases, this process of iterative query
refinement yields far larger effects than would any conceivable improvements in auto-
mated use of the original topic (Turpin and Scholer, 2006). Accordingly, IR research has
long encompassed, in addition to Cranfield-style experiments, other evaluation designs
that give scope for human interaction in carrying out retrieval tasks (Ingwersen, 1992;
Dumais and Belkin, 2005). In this section, we review some key aspects of interactive
evaluations.
Design considerations. In designing an interactive evaluation, it is important to
recognize that there is more than one way in which an end user can interact with a
retrieval system. In some cases, for example, the end user will interact directly with the
system, specifying the query, reviewing results, modifying the query, and so on. In other
cases, the end user’s interaction with the system will be more indirect; the end user
defines the information need and is the ultimate arbiter of whether that need has been
met, but does not directly use the retrieval software itself. If an interactive evaluation
is to model accurately a real-world task, it must model the mode of interaction that
characterizes real-world conditions and practice for that task.
18
Gauging effectiveness. While incorporating end-user interaction in an evaluation
of IR systems can make for a more realistic exercise, it can also make for a more
complex (and more resource-intensive) task. There are three reasons for this. First,
by introducing the end user into the task, one introduces additional dimensions of
variability (e.g., background knowledge or search experience) which can be difficult
to control for. Second, by introducing some specific end user as the arbiter of success,
standardizing a definition of relevance becomes more challenging. Third, the presence of
a user introduces a broader range of measures by which the success of a given retrieval
process can be gauged. Apart, for example, from quantitative measures of retrieval
effectiveness, such as recall and precision, one may also be interested in measures of
learnability, task completion time, fatigue, error rate, or satisfaction (all of which are
factors on which the system’s likelihood of real-world adoption could crucially depend).
These considerations have resulted in considerable diversity of interactive eval-
uation designs, each of which strikes a different balance among competing desider-
ata (Ingwersen and Järvelin, 2005). Interactive evaluation trades away some degree of
generalizability in order to gain greater insight into the behavior and experiences of
situated users who can engage in a more complex information seeking process than is
typically modeled in the Cranfield tradition. It is therefore useful to think of interactive
and Cranfield-style evaluation as forming a natural cycle: through interactive evalua-
tion, we learn something about what our systems must do well, through Cranfield-style
evaluation we then learn how to do that well, which in turn prompts us to explore the
problem space further through interactive evaluation, and so on. In the next section,
we describe how these two evaluation paradigms have informed the design of the TREC
Legal Track.
5 The TREC Legal Track
In 2006, three of the authors organized the first evaluation in the TREC framework of
text retrieval effectiveness for e-discovery: the 2006 TREC Legal Track (Baron et al,
2007). Subsequent TREC Legal Tracks have been organized by some of us (and others)
in 2007 (Tomlinson et al, 2008), 2008 (Oard et al, 2009) and 2009 (Hedin et al, 2010),
with another planned for 2010.
As with all TREC tracks, we have sought to attract researchers to participate in
the track (in our case, both from industry and academia), develop guidelines both
for participating research teams and for relevance assessors, manage the distribution
of large test collections, gather and analyze results from multiple participants, and
deal with myriad technical and data glitches. Other challenges have been unique to
the Legal Track. The biggest ones flow from the fact that we have two audiences for
our results: IR researchers whose efforts we hoped to attract to work on e-discovery
problems, and the much larger legal community for whom we hoped the TREC results
would provide some measure of insight and guidance. Making our results compelling
to the legal community required that queries be provided with substantial context in
the form of simulated legal complaints (as discussed in Section 5.3 below). Documents
similar to those encountered in e-discovery were desirable as well; Sections 5.1.1 and
5.1.2 introduce the test collections we used.
Attempting to capture all the important aspects of an e-discovery setting in a single
simulation would likely lead to a task too expensive to run and too complex to attract
19
researcher interest. We instead designed three tasks that measure the effectiveness of
different aspects of search processes and IR technology (Sections 5.2 to 5.4).
The particular nature of relevance in the e-discovery context led us to believe that
relevance assessments should be carried out by personnel with some legal background.
This has required recruiting and training literally hundreds of law students, paralegals,
and lawyers as volunteer relevance assessors, as well as the creation of two Web-based
systems to support a distributed assessment process.
A final challenge is that good retrieval effectiveness in an e-discovery context means
high recall (i.e., that the vast majority of relevant documents must be retrieved). Most
IR evaluations, and in particular recent work with an eye toward Web search engines,
have focused most strongly on precision (or more specifically, on the presence of rel-
evant documents) near the top of a ranked list. This focus has affected not just the
choice of effectiveness measures, but also how topics were selected and how documents
were chosen for assessment. In particular, ad hoc evaluations at TREC have typically
assumed that pooling the top-ranked 100 documents from each participating system
would cover most of the relevant documents for each topic, which we quickly learned
was inadequate for the scale of the test collections and topics in the Legal Track. Hence
the evaluation approach had to be rethought for the Legal Track, with the result that
stratified sampling and corresponding estimation methods have played a larger role in
the Legal Track (see Sections 5.2 and 5.3) than in previous TREC tracks.
5.1 Test Collections
Two test collections have been used in the TREC Legal Tracks. Each captures some
aspects of current e-discovery settings, while missing others. Because they include doc-
uments of types not previously available in IR test collections, the collections are also
likely to be of interest to IR researchers working on those specific document types.
5.1.1 The IIT CDIP Collection
Our first test collection, used for all tasks except the 2009 Interactive task, was the
Illinois Institute of Technology Complex Document Information Processing Test Col-
lection, version 1.0, referred to here as “IIT CDIP” and informally in the TREC
community as the “tobacco collection.” IIT CDIP was created at the Illinois Institute
of Technology (Lewis et al, 2006; Baron et al, 2007) and is based on documents re-
leased under the Master Settlement Agreement (MSA) between the Attorneys General
of several US states and seven US tobacco companies and institutes.35 The University
of California San Francisco (UCSF) Library, with support from the American Legacy
Foundation, has created a permanent repository, the Legacy Tobacco Documents Li-
brary (LTDL), for tobacco documents (Schmidt et al, 2002), of which IIT CDIP is a
cleaned up snapshot generated in 2005 and 2006.
IIT CDIP consists of 6,910,192 document records in the form of XML elements.
Records include a manually entered document title, text produced by Optical Character
Recognition (OCR) from the original document images, and a wide range of manually
created metadata sub-elements that are present in some or all of the records (e.g.,
35 http://ag.ca.gov/tobacco/msa.php
20
sender, recipients, important names mentioned in the document, controlled vocabulary
categories, and geographical or organizational context identifiers).
IIT CDIP has strengths and weaknesses as a collection for the Legal Track. The
wide range of document lengths (from 1 page to several thousand pages) and genres
(including letters, memos, budgets, reports, agendas, plans, transcripts, scientific arti-
cles, email, and many others), as well as the sheer number of documents, are typical of
legal discovery settings. The fact that documents were scanned and OCRed, however,
is more typical of traditional discovery than e-discovery settings. The fact that the
MSA documents were the output of discovery proceedings raised questions as to their
appropriateness as input to TREC’s simulation of a legal discovery situation. This con-
cern was mitigated to some extent by the fact that the MSA documents resulted from
hundreds of distinct document requests in multiple legal cases. We further addressed
this concern by using a range of topics in the Legal Track experiments, some with
content highly similar to MSA discovery requests, and others very different.
One disappointment was that the OCR errors in the IIT CDIP collection occupied
so much of participants’ attention, and indeed appeared to discourage participation.
An early TREC track investigated retrieval from simulated OCR text (Voorhees and
Garofolo, 2005), and while effectiveness was shown to be reduced by OCR noise, it did
not leave the impression that OCR errors were a huge issue. At the scale of the IIT
CDIP collection, however, OCR errors inflate vocabulary size to such an extent that
the use of standard word-based indexing methods was no longer practical for some
participants. Thus Legal Track participants had to spend time dealing with systems
issues that, while interesting, were not particularly relevant to e-discovery.
5.1.2 The TREC Enron Collection
Email is without question the sine qua non of present practice in e-discovery. De-
velopment of an email test collection was therefore important if we were to support
representative evaluation for existing e-discovery tools, and perhaps to foster the de-
velopment of a new generation of tools. The IIT CDIP collection actually contains a
substantial number of email messages (estimated at about 10% of the collection), but
the printing, scanning, and OCR process makes recovery of the content of those emails,
and particularly the important metadata in their headers, difficult. A second alterna-
tive would have been to use a collection of email messages from the Enron Corporation
that had been obtained by MIT in 2004 from Aspen Systems, a company acting on be-
half of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). Researchers at MIT, SRI
International, and Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) worked together to make this
collection of about 250,000 email messages (after de-duplication) freely available on
the Internet from CMU (for this reason, we refer to this collection as the “CMU Enron
collection”). This resulted in an explosion of research using the collection in a large
number of applications, including internal use of the collection by a substantial number
of e-discovery vendors. The CMU Enron collection has one key limitation, however: it
contains no attachments. This is problematic for e-discovery because present practice
requires that decisions about responsiveness be reached at the level of a “record,” which
in the case of email is typically interpreted as a message together with its attachments.
We therefore elected to create a new Enron email collection that includes attach-
ments for use in the TREC Legal Track. There is no single “Enron collection” for the
simple reason that Aspen Systems distributes all available messages (with their at-
tachments) on whatever date the collection is requested. On some occasions, messages
21
have been withdrawn from the collection by FERC for specific reasons (e.g., ongoing
litigation). On other occasions, messages have been added to the collection (e.g., as
additional materials became available from FERC). The net effect is that more emails
are now available than were available at the time that the CMU Enron collection was
created.
Our new collection, which we call the “TREC Enron collection” contains 569,034
messages after de-duplication. We employed an existing commercial processing
pipeline36 to convert the format that had been received from Aspen Systems into
a format similar to the mbox standard used by Unix mail handling systems (which
closely resembles the format of the messages in the CMU Enron collection). Metadata
extracted from the headers was also provided using an XML format developed by the
Electronic Discovery Reference Model project (see Section 6.2) to support interchange
of processed collections among heterogeneous systems.
The attachments received from Aspen Systems were in their original format (e.g.,
Microsoft Word, PDF, or JPEG); where possible, ASCII text was extracted from each
attachment using the same commercial processing pipeline as had been used for pro-
cessing the email messages. The distributed version thus contains each message in the
“native” form received from Aspen Systems, and also (where possible) in a more easily
handled text-only form. A third form, document images, was also created using the
same commercial processing pipeline. This avoided the need for the relevance assess-
ment platform to deal with multiple content formats: it simply displayed an image of
each page to the assessor. The document image files are fairly large, so they are not
normally distributed with the collection. We consider the collection used in 2009 to be
a beta release. A number of issues (most notably de-duplication) are still being worked
through, and it is expected that an improved collection will be used for the 2010 Legal
Track.
5.2 The Interactive Task
There are, in the course of a lawsuit, a wide range of tasks to which an attorney
can usefully apply IR methods and technologies. Early in the lawsuit, an attorney
may conduct exploratory searches of a document collection in order to test hypotheses
and to build a theory of the case; further along, an attorney may search for documents
relevant to the activities of a particular individual in order to prepare for the deposition
of a witness; as trial approaches, an attorney may search through the set of generally
relevant documents in order to find the small subset that he or she would like to enter as
exhibits in trial; and so on. The particular task that the Legal Track’s Interactive task
(and, indeed, all tasks in the TREC Legal Track to date) models is responsive review :
the circumstance in which a party to litigation is served, by the opposing party, with
a request for production of documents and, in order to comply with the request, must
find and produce, to an extent commensurate with a reasonable good-faith effort, any
and all documents that are responsive to the request. In this section, we review key
elements of the design of the Interactive Task and summarize results from the first
36 Clearwell Systems obtained the collection from Aspen Systems and performed the process-
ing described in this section.
22
two years in which the task was run, 2008 (Oard et al, 2009) and 2009 (Hedin et al,
2010).37
Modeling the conditions and objectives of a responsive review, the Interactive task
provides a mock complaint and an associated set of requests for production; for pur-
poses of the exercise, each of the requests serves as a separate topic. The task also
features a role, that of the “Topic Authority,” (TA) modeled on the part played by
the senior attorney who would be charged with overseeing the responding party’s reply
to the request for production and who, in keeping with that role, would form a con-
ception of what sort of material was and was not to be considered responsive to the
request. The role of a team participating in the task is modeled on that of a provider
of document review services who has been hired by the senior attorney to find the
documents that match his or her conception of responsiveness; as such, the goal of a
participating team is to retrieve from the test collection all (and only) the documents
that are consistent with the TA’s definition of what is responsive to the given request.
The task is designed to measure how closely each team comes to meeting that goal
by estimating the recall, precision, and F1 (the balanced harmonic mean of recall and
precision) attained for a topic by a team.
The senior attorney must eventually certify to the court that their client’s response
to the request is (commensurate with a reasonable good-faith effort) accurate and
complete. In keeping with that role, the TA takes into account both considerations
of subject-matter relevance and considerations of legal strategy and tactics (e.g., to
what extent a broad interpretation of responsiveness, one that reduces the likelihood
of a challenge for underproduction, would serve the client better than a narrow inter-
pretation of responsiveness, one that reduces the likelihood of producing potentially
damaging material that arguably could have been held back) in arriving at a concep-
tion of what should and should not be considered responsive to the request (topic).
Each topic has a single TA, and each TA has responsibility for a single topic.
In the Interactive task, the TA’s role is operationalized in three ways. The first
is topic clarification; the TA acts as a resource to which teams can turn in order to
clarify the scope and intent of a topic. A team can ask for up to 10 hours of a TA’s
time for this purpose. While we instruct the TAs to be free in sharing the information
they have about their topics, we also ask that they avoid volunteering to one team
specific information that was developed only in the course of interaction with another
team. The second is review oversight. In order to be able to obtain valid measures of
effectiveness, it is essential that the samples be assessed in accordance with the TA’s
conception of relevance; it is the role of the TA to provide assessors with guidance as to
what is and is not relevant. The third is final adjudication. As discussed below, teams
are given the opportunity to appeal specific relevance assessments they believe have
been made in error (i.e., inconsistently with the TA’s conception of responsiveness); it
is the role of the TA to render a final judgment on all such appeals.
When an attorney vouches for the validity of a document production, he or she is
vouching for the accuracy of a binary classification of the document population impli-
cated by the request: a classification of the population into the subset that is responsive
to the request for production and the subset that is not. When an e-discovery firm sup-
ports an attorney in this effort, it must make a similar responsiveness determination.
The Interactive task, modeling this requirement, specifies that each participant’s final
37 A pilot Interactive task was run in 2007 (Tomlinson et al, 2008), but with a very different
task design.
23
deliverable be a binary classification of the full population for relevance to each tar-
get topic. Teams are of course free to use relevance ranking as a means of arriving at
their result sets, but the final deliverable is a single binary classification (relevant/not
relevant) of the full population of documents.
Effectiveness measures are computed using a stratified sampling design that enables
us to obtain unbiased estimates for precision and recall. For each topic, the population
is stratified on the basis of team submissions. One stratum contains the documents
all teams submitted as responsive, another contains documents no team submitted as
responsive, and other strata are subsets representing various conflicting submissions.
In sampling from those strata, we oversample strata that are likely to contain more
responsive documents, as they have the most impact on system comparisons. This
inevitably means that very large strata, and in particular the “All-Negative” stratum,
are under-represented in the sample, and so our estimates of responsiveness in those
strata have higher variance. This is, however, both inevitable to a degree given the low
frequency of responsive documents in these strata, and at least an improvement over
the ignoring of these documents in traditional pooling.
We use a two-stage procedure to assess the sample for relevance. In the first stage,
volunteer assessors, under the guidance of the TA, conduct a complete first-pass review
of the sampled documents. Assessors are provided with topic-specific guidelines that
capture all guidance that the TA had provided to any team and with access to the TA
for any further clarification that they feel is needed. In the second stage, teams are given
access to the results of the first-pass assessment of the sample and invited to appeal
any assessments that they believe are inconsistent with specific guidance that they
received from the TA. The TA personally renders a final judgment on all appealed
assessments. These final, post-adjudication, assessments are the basis for estimating
recall, precision, and F1; see the appendix to 2008 Legal Track overview paper for
details (Oard et al, 2009).
For the 2008 Interactive task, the test collection was the IIT CDIP collection of
scanned business records (see Section 5.1.1). The complaint was a realistic but fictitious
securities class action; associated with the complaint were three production requests
(topics). By way of illustration, one topic (Topic 103) called for:
All documents which describe, refer to, report on, or mention any “in-store,”
“on-counter,” “point of sale,” or other retail marketing campaigns for cigarettes.
As with real-world document requests, the topic, as stated, leaves scope for interpre-
tation (how, for example, do you define a “marketing campaign” or, more specifically,
a “retail marketing campaign”) and that is where the TA’s approach to the request is
decisive.
Four teams (two academic and two commercial) participated in the 2008 Interactive
task. Also, a pool formed from the 68 runs submitted to the 2008 Ad Hoc task (see
Section 5.3) which provided ranked retrieval results to a maximum depth of 100,000
(generated without any TA interaction for all three Interactive task topics) was included
as an additional result set (the “Ad Hoc Pool”).
The results for Topic 103 proved to be the most informative, as that is the one topic
for which all teams submitted results, and it was the only topic for which any team
made extensive use of the appeal and adjudication process. We observed considerable
variation in the amount of time with the TA that the teams used, from just 5 to 485
of the available 600 minutes. There was also considerable variation in the number of
documents that teams submitted as relevant, from 25,816 to 608,807 of the 6,910,192
24
documents in the collection. On the basis of the adjudicated sample assessments, we
estimated that there are 786,862 documents (11.4% of the collection) relevant to Topic
103 in the test collection (as the topic was defined by the TA). All four teams attained
quite high precision; point estimates ranged from 0.71 to 0.81. One team (notably the
one that made the most use of TA time) attained relatively high recall (0.62), while the
other three (all making significantly less use of TA time) obtained recall values below
0.20.
From this 2008 exercise, we learned that it is possible to attain a reasonably high
level of recall without sacrificing precision, at least for the one topic for which we have
results from several teams. We also found that the appeal and adjudication process
resulted in a change in the assessment for a significant number of documents. Of the
13,500 first-pass assessments (for all three topics), 966 were appealed to a TA (almost
all from Topic 103). Of these, 762 (79%) were decided in favor of the appealing team
(overturning the first-pass assessment). The impact of the appeal and adjudication
process was generally an across-the-board improvement in recall, precision, and F1
for all teams; in particular, adjudication did not result in a change in the relative
ordering of submitted results by F1. An additional lesson from 2008 was that running
the Interactive task with four teams provided an insufficient number of data points
to reach any firm conclusions (on, for example, the possible correlation between the
amount of time spent with the TA and the levels of recall and precision achieved).
For the 2009 Interactive task (Hedin et al, 2010), we developed a new test collec-
tion from Enron emails (see Section 5.1.2). The complaint was again a realistic but
fictitious securities class action. Associated with the complaint were seven production
requests (topics); the focus of these requests ranged from off-balance sheet accounting
to gambling on football. Topic 202, for example, called for:
All documents or communications that describe, discuss, refer to, report on, or
relate to the Company’s engagement in transactions that the Company char-
acterized as compliant with FAS 140 (or its predecessor FAS 125).
Topic 207 called for:
All documents or communications that describe, discuss, refer to, report on, or
relate to fantasy football, gambling on football, and related activities, including
but not limited to, football teams, football players, football games, football
statistics, and football performance.
Eleven teams (three academic and eight commercial, together representing three
countries) participated in the 2009 Interactive Task. There were no Ad Hoc submissions
to pool in the 2009 Interactive task.
As was the case in 2008, we saw considerable variation in the amount of their
allotted time with the TA that teams used. For Topic 207, for example, one team
used 0 minutes, while another used 295 minutes; for Topic 204 (on document deletion
and retention), one team used 0 minutes and another used 500 of their allotted 600
minutes. Also as was the case in 2008, we saw considerable variation in the number
of documents that teams submitted as relevant. For Topic 207, for example, one team
submitted 5,706 messages as relevant, while another submitted 25,404 of the 569,034
messages in the test collection as relevant. The appeal and adjudication process was
more widely utilized in 2009 than it was in 2008: of the seven 2009 topics, six had at
least 200 first-pass assessments appealed and one had 967 assessments appealed.
The post-adjudication results for the 2009 topics showed some encouraging signs.
Of the 24 submitted runs (aggregating across all seven topics), 6 (distributed across
25
5 topics) attained an F1 score (point estimate) of 0.7 or greater. In terms of recall,
of the 24 submitted runs, 5 (distributed across 4 topics) attained a recall score of 0.7
or greater; of these 5 runs, 4 (distributed across 3 topics) simultaneously attained a
precision score of 0.7 or greater. Further discussion of the results for the 2009 Interactive
task can be found in the 2009 track overview (Hedin et al, 2010).
5.3 The Ad Hoc Task
The Ad Hoc task was designed to compare single-pass (or first-pass) automatic search
approaches to e-discovery. It was run in the first three TREC Legal Tracks (Baron et al,
2007; Tomlinson et al, 2008; Oard et al, 2009). For each year’s task, approximately 50
new topics were created. Each topic was based on one of 3 to 5 realistic but fictitious
complaints; for example, complaint 2007-B described a patent infringement action on
a device designed to ventilate smoke. Each topic further included a specific request for
documents to produce; for example, topic 74 requested
All scientific studies expressly referencing health effects tied to indoor air qual-
ity.
In each year, the set of documents to search was the IIT CDIP collection (see Sec-
tion 5.1.1 for details).
For comparison to the primarily automatic “ranked” approaches (i.e., approaches
based on relevance-ranking formulas) that were anticipated from the TREC partic-
ipants, a reference Boolean query38 was created for each topic by two lawyers con-
ducting a simulated negotiation. For example, the negotiation for topic 74 was as
follows. The Boolean negotiation started with a fairly narrow initial proposal from the
defendant, “"health effect!" w/10 "air quality"”. The plaintiff responded with
a much broader query, “(scien! OR stud! OR research) AND ("air quality" OR
health)”. The negotiation concluded with a mutually agreeable final Boolean query,
“(scien! OR stud! OR research) AND ("air quality" w/15 health)”. The nego-
tiations for other topics followed a similar pattern. The Boolean negotiation was meant
to represent one conception of possible “best practice” (in contrast to the currently
more common present practice of searching using single keywords).
The evaluation approach evolved over the three years as experience was gained.
In 2006, the evaluation was conducted much like a traditional ad hoc TREC task. In
particular, the systems were required to rank the documents rather than just return a
set. Submitted results were limited to 5,000 documents per topic, and the pool of doc-
uments to judge was primarily based on the top-ranked 100 documents from a single
submission from each of the 6 participating research groups. A run manually created
by an expert interactive searcher and a sampling of the final negotiated Boolean query
run were also included in the pool. The production requests (topics) had deliberately
been made narrow in hopes of limiting the number of relevant documents to approxi-
mately a few hundred so that the pools (averaging 800 documents) could provide good
coverage of the relevant documents. The results showed that although many relevant
documents were missed by the negotiated final Boolean query, no ranked retrieval sys-
tem had an average effectiveness (precision at R, averaged over all topics) substantially
38 As is common, we use “Boolean query” somewhat loosely to mean queries built using not
just the three basic Boolean operators (and, or, not), but also truncation and (unordered)
proximity operators.
26
higher than that of the average effectiveness of the final Boolean queries. Both the fi-
nal Boolean queries and the ranked retrieval systems were outperformed by the expert
interactive searcher, despite several limitations imposed for reasons of practicality on
the interactive search process (most notably, the expert was limited to submitting 100
documents per topic). Some early experiments with sampling also suggested that the
pool’s coverage of the relevant documents was disconcertingly low (Tomlinson, 2007).
In 2007, a deeper sampling scheme was introduced. Submitted result sets of as
many as 25,000 documents per topic were allowed, and 12 participating research teams
submitted a total of 68 result sets, all of which were pooled, producing a set of ap-
proximately 300,000 documents per topic. The sampling scheme was used to select
between 500 and 1000 documents from the pool to judge for each topic. This sampling
process suggested that there were typically remarkably large numbers of relevant docu-
ments in the pool (with point estimates averaging about 17,000 relevant documents per
topic) even though the production requests had again deliberately been rather narrowly
crafted. The sampling also suggested that the negotiated final Boolean query matched
just 22% of the relevant documents in the pool (i.e., an average recall across all topics
no higher than 0.22), and its precision averaged just 0.29. However, the final Boolean
query was still estimated to have a higher precision and recall (when averaged over all
topics) than any submitted ranked retrieval run when evaluated at a depth equal to
the number of documents returned by the final Boolean query. Post hoc analysis found,
however, that when the ranked retrieval systems were measured at depth R for each
topic (where R was the estimated number of relevant documents for that topic from
the human relevance assessments), several systems achieved a higher F1 score than the
negotiated final Boolean query run. This observation motivated the introduction of a
set-based evaluation measure the next year.
In 2008, set-based evaluation became a principal focus of the ad hoc task with
the introduction of a requirement that each system specify an optimal retrieval depth
K for each topic, representing the depth at which it believed the F1 measure would
be maximized. The focus on relatively narrowly scoped topics was eliminated, and
the allowed submission set size was further increased to 100,000 documents per topic.
With this more representative range of topics, the relative order between the negotiated
final Boolean query run and the submissions from participating teams reversed, with
7 of the 10 participating teams each submitting at least one run with a higher mean
recall than the negotiated final Boolean query run (when compared at the number of
documents returned by that negotiated final Boolean query run). Comparison with
2007 was facilitated by the fact that the highest scoring submission in 2008 used the
same automated approach as a submitted run from 2007. The topics in 2008 were
indeed broader, averaging five times as many relevant documents as in 2007, although
the Boolean queries matched an average of eight times more documents in 2008 than
2007. Of course, Boolean queries are the product of a human activity, and it is certainly
possible that the differences that we saw between 2007 and 2008 are within the natural
range of variation. When evaluated with the new set-based evaluation measure, only
5 of the 10 teams submitted a run of higher mean F1 at depth K than the negotiated
Boolean query run, suggesting that picking the threshold K was challenging for the
ranked retrieval systems. The top average F1 at depth K score was just 0.2 (and rarely
above 0.4 for individual topics) indicating that either precision or recall (or both) was
relatively low for every system.
27
5.4 The Relevance Feedback Task
The Relevance Feedback task was designed to evaluate the second pass of multi-stage
search approaches for e-discovery. The task used a selection of topics from previous
years’ Ad Hoc or Interactive tasks. Systems were provided with all available relevance
judgments from use of the same topic in a previous year, typically consisting of 500
or more documents that had been marked relevant or not relevant. Evaluation of the
relevance feedback systems was based entirely on a new set of relevance assessments,
usually from a different assessor. This task was run for three years starting in the
second year of the TREC Legal Track (Tomlinson et al, 2008; Oard et al, 2009; Hedin
et al, 2010).
In 2007, 3 teams submitted a total of 8 runs (only 5 of which actually used the pre-
vious relevance judgments in some way) and 10 topics were assessed. In 2008, 5 teams
submitted a total of 29 runs (19 of which used the previous relevance judgments) and
12 topics were assessed. Interestingly, the runs that used a prior year’s relevance judg-
ments did not generally achieve higher F1 values on previously unassessed documents
(so-called “residual” evaluation) than those that did not. It may be that relevance
feedback is particularly challenging with the IIT CDIP collection, which has a fairly
high OCR error rate and some fairly long documents. (OCR errors are challenging
for some relevance feedback techniques because they create many rare, mostly useless
terms, interfering with length normalization and query expansion (Singhal et al, 1995;
Taghva et al, 1996).) The fact that a different assessor produced the new relevance
judgments is also a potential confounding factor; a small assessor consistency study in
2008 found that documents judged relevant by the original assessor were only judged
relevant 58% of the time by a second assessor (Oard et al, 2009).
In 2009, renamed generically as the Batch task (since either first-pass ad hoc or
second-pass relevance feedback techniques could be tried), relevance feedback systems
were provided with larger sets of relevance judgments (most notably for Topic 103,
for which 6,500 adjudicated relevance judgments from the 2008 Interactive task were
available, 2,981 of which were assessed as relevant). The submission limit was increased
to 1.5 million documents per topic to allow higher values for K to be reported by
systems as a basis for set-based measures. In prior years, only documents returned by at
least one system had been sampled (thus omitting documents not found by any system
from the computation of recall) and typically only 500 relevance assessments were
performed for each topic. In 2009, the entire collection was sampled, and the number
of documents judged per topic was increased to typically 2,500 in hopes of providing
both a more accurate evaluation of the participating runs and an improved potential
for comparably evaluating new systems in the future. Four teams submitted a total of
10 runs. On Topic 103 some relevance feedback systems obtained a higher value for F1
(up to 0.57) than the highest-scoring Interactive task run submitted the previous year
(0.51). On another topic (Topic 51), however, all of the automated systems scored less
than 0.01 for F1 despite seemingly ample numbers of training examples (1,361 relevance
judgments, 88 of which were assessed as relevant). This troublesome topic highlighted
a problem that prevents our present evaluation framework from being reliably used to
evaluate recall for topics with a very small proportion of relevant documents. When
sampling from 7 million documents, even a small assessor false positive rate (e.g.,
1 in 500) on a sample from a sparsely sampled stratum would lead us to estimate
the presence of thousands more relevant documents than actually exist, dominating
28
the computation of recall. As the actual number of relevant documents increases, the
impact of this problem naturally diminishes.
5.5 The Legacy of the TREC Legal Track
The TREC Legal Track has been a rather humbling experience for IR researchers (in-
cluding some of the organizers) who expected that modern ranked retrieval techniques
would quickly dominate more basic techniques such as manually constructed queries
using Boolean and proximity operators. That it took several years to achieve this per-
haps says more about what we needed to learn about evaluation design than it does
about specific techniques, however. Our thinking about sampling and the design of
evaluation measures has evolved considerably over this period, and that will likely be
one of the most lasting legacies of the TREC Legal Track. Two advances seem par-
ticularly notable in this regard: (1) estimation of recall based on deep sampling, and
(2) modeling the full range of topic diversity, including topics that generate far higher
yields than are usually studied in IR evaluations. We have also gained important ex-
perience with estimating the accuracy of our measurements, although more remains
to be done before we will understand the full implications of our sampling designs for
future use of our collections by research teams that did not contribute to the set of
runs from which the original samples were drawn.
The Legal Track was humbling also for the insight it has provided the IR research
community into the immense investment being made in manual review in day-to-day
operational e-discovery settings. While the scope of the TREC relevance assessment
process was large by TREC standards (in geography, technology, personnel, and data
set preparation), the total number of documents assessed across all four years of the
Legal Track has been far smaller than the number routinely assessed in even a single
real world e-discovery project. Investment at this scale also offers new opportunities.
For example, it would be useful to bring an entirely manual review effort into the
evaluation (not as assessors, but as a participating team) as a reference point against
which to gauge automated efforts.
One of the most lasting legacies of any TREC track is the research community
that coalesces around new research problems. The Legal Track has been particularly
rich in this regard, drawing IR researchers, e-discovery service providers, law firms and
law schools into a continuing dialog about the challenges of IR, and evaluation of IR,
in e-discovery applications. The results of that dialog to date (including this paper,
with authors from three of those groups) have been narrowly focused on techniques for
automating and evaluating responsive review, but it seems reasonable to anticipate that
continued interaction will lead to even richer collaboration on a broad range of issues
(e.g., establishing evidentiary best practices for responsive review, partially automating
privilege review, or rapidly making sense of vast quantities of material received through
an e-discovery process). This type of collaboration might also help to reign in some of
the more audacious claims now being made in the e-discovery community regarding
the efficacy of certain techniques. While we have indeed seen results from the TREC
Legal Track that are impressive for their efficacy relative to established baselines, we
continue to see marketing claims that seem well beyond what we are presently able to
measure, and perhaps even somewhat beyond what is actually possible.
The specific Interactive task design that we used is new to large-scale IR evaluation
in two important ways. In earlier work, intermediated search (e.g., search by a librarian
29
on behalf of a patron) was most often studied in the wild (i.e., by observing several
episodes of actual information seeking behavior). Scenario-based structured evaluation
of interactive search has been, for the most part, focused on settings in which single
users work alone (or, in recent work, in which small teams of searchers collaborate).
By modeling the role of the senior attorney with a single TA, we gained in both
task fidelity (e.g., facilitating system designs based on active learning techniques from
machine learning) and assessor consistency.
Progress in research often raises as many questions as it answers, so new issues
illuminated by our work and the work of others in the Legal Track are an important
legacy as well. Perhaps the most important of these questions is how best to evaluate
recall for low-yield topics. Our thinking on evaluation of interactive search has also
evolved, from an initial focus on retrieval effectiveness to a more nuanced view that
interaction defines a continuum and that the central issue is therefore the balance
between cost and effectiveness. In future Interactive evaluation, measuring effort with
sufficient fidelity therefore may well be as important as high-fidelity measurement of
effectiveness. More work also remains to be done on developing some form of typology
of production requests, with an eye towards better understanding of what makes some
production requests more challenging than others. There has been considerable work
on this question in a more general IR context (Carmel et al, 2006), but the structure
present in e-discovery may offer new opportunities to extend that work in interesting
directions.
Of course, another legacy of the Legal Track will be the results achieved by the
research teams. Batch evaluation has shown that in a substantial number of cases,
statistical ranked retrieval techniques can result in more comprehensive search for
responsive review than even a relatively sophisticated “best practice” model in which
lawyers negotiate queries with Boolean, proximity, and truncation operators without
(at the time the queries are negotiated) having access to the collection. The TREC 2008
paper from the University of Waterloo is a good exemplar of this line of research (Lynam
and Cormack, 2009). Interactive evaluation has also contributed new insights, most
notably that coupling high precision with high recall is possible, at least for some
topics. A set of papers published in the 2009 IEEE Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics by authors from H5 and elsewhere offer insight into how this was done for
one topic in the 2008 Interactive task (Bauer et al, 2009; Hedin and Oard, 2009).
Finally, the Legal Track’s two test collections provide for a legacy that may well
extend well beyond e-discovery. Earlier work at TREC had studied the effect of simu-
lated OCR errors on IR, but the IIT CDIP collection is the first large test collection
to include naturally occurring OCR. With relevance judgments now available for more
than 100 topics, this collection is well suited to support new research on OCR-based
IR. The presence of extensive metadata in this collection also offers scope for exploring
other important research questions, since scanned documents (e.g., books) are often ac-
companied by extensive metadata. Although the TREC Enron collection is far less well
developed, with only 7 topics at present, we expect that the TREC 2010 Legal Track
will extend that collection in ways that will make it of continuing value to researchers
who are interested in working with email. Although the CMU Enron collection has
been available for some time now, we expect the availability of attachments and of
topics with associated relevance judgments will facilitate new lines of research that
would otherwise not have been practical.
30
6 Thinking Broadly
TREC is, of course, just one way of thinking about evaluation for e-discovery. In this
section, we briefly address three other perspectives that further enrich the range of
available evaluation options.
6.1 Other Study Designs for Responsive Review
Evaluation design is, in the end, always based on a cost-benefit tradeoff. The prodi-
gious amount of manual effort being invested in manual review in ongoing e-discovery
proceedings therefore offers the possibility of basing evaluation of automated systems
on the results of an actual manual review. This is an appealing option both because
the found data (i.e., the existing relevance judgments from the manual review process)
is essentially free, and because the use of a real case rather than a fictitious complaint
removes one possible concern to the fidelity of the evaluation. On the other hand, us-
ing real data raises several challenges, including whether the process can be adequately
instrumented (e.g., to measure inter-annotator agreement) when it must be performed
under significant time pressure and resource constraints, and whether the resulting
evaluation resources can be shared with other researchers (which is important both for
new work by others, and for replication of reported results).
All of these benefits and challenges are illustrated in a recent study by the Electronic
Discovery Institute (Oot et al, 2010; Roitblat et al, 2010) using exhaustive relevance
judgments for more than 1.8 million documents that were assessed for responsiveness
as part of what is known as a “Second Request” in antitrust law. The documents were
originally reviewed for responsiveness in connection with a Department of Justice in-
vestigation of the acquisition of MCI by Verizon. In the study, the agreement between
two sets of independent assessors and the original review was measured on a sample of
5,000 documents and found to be substantially lower than is typical for TREC evalu-
ations. Two automated systems were then built and run on the full set of 1.8 million
documents, yielding results (when scored with the original exhaustive assessments)
that were comparable to the results reported for the other assessor’s agreement with
the original assessments. The low degree of agreement between the original and subse-
quent manual reviews makes it somewhat difficult, however, to draw clear conclusions
about the effectiveness of automated classification from the published results.
Although we are not yet aware of other studies using this type of found data, we
believe that this approach offers an important complement to the insights that we
can derive from TREC-style evaluations by bringing in results from actual e-discovery
practice. Moreover, over time we expect that it will be both possible and highly desir-
able to better instrument the original review process, thus further extending the range
of insights that can be gained through such an approach. If concerns about future use
by others of the resulting test collections can be resolved (e.g., through licensing ar-
rangements that restrict redistribution, or through innovative approaches such as the
“algorithm submission” that has been used in TREC to evaluate email spam filters on
sensitive content (Cormack and Lynam, 2006)), then this way of developing test collec-
tions eventually could and should replace the somewhat less realistic and considerably
more expensive process that we have used in the TREC Legal Track to date.
31
6.2 Looking Beyond Search
Concurrent with the evolution of the TREC Legal Track, a more comprehensive in-
dustry working group has coalesced around an initiative known as the “Electronic
Discovery Reference Model” (EDRM), whose stated purpose is“to develop guidelines
and standards for e-discovery consumers and providers.”39
EDRM complements the more limited scope of responsive review evaluations such
as the TREC Legal Track and the Electronic Discovery Institute study described above
by articulating a “lifecycle of e-discovery” consisting of nine broad task categories:
information management; identification; preservation; collection; processing; review;
analysis; production; and presentation. Virtually all of these broad task categories
could benefit from tailored application of IR or closely related technologies (e.g., text
classification), some quite directly, and many of them raise interesting and important
evaluation questions. For example, records management professionals seek to orga-
nize business records in ways that support both ongoing needs of the organization
and possible future uses such as e-discovery. The EDRM identification task category
includes a close analogue to the collection selection task in distributed IR research
(albeit one that in e-discovery depends more on selecting custodians than has typi-
cally been the focus in research to date on distributed IR). De-duplication (to reduce
effort and improve consistency) is a step in the EDRM processing task category that
would benefit substantially from well-designed task-based models of document similar-
ity. Sorting into broad categories (e.g., to avoid devoting review effort to email spam
or pornography) is another step in the EDRM processing task category in which text
classification techniques are needed. EDRM’s analysis task category includes “early
case assessment,” which could benefit from exploratory search such as clustering and
link analysis (Solomon and Baron, 2009). Privilege review (in the EDRM review task
category along with review for responsiveness) is another step in which text classifi-
cation could be useful. And, of course, opportunities abound for productive use of IR
techniques in the EDRM presentation task category in which the party receiving the
documents then seeks to make sense of them and to make use of them.
In setting up the TREC Legal Track, there was an obvious relationship between
TREC’s “Cranfield tradition” and the idea that lawyers are engaged in an IR pro-
cess (Baron, 2007). As EDRM makes clear, while this is most certainly true, the need
for IR extends well beyond responsive review, and indeed well beyond Cranfield-style
evaluation. Some of these related IR technologies have been evaluated in other con-
texts in TREC in the past (e.g., in the TREC interactive, filtering, and spam tracks),
but evaluation in an e-discovery context remains a future task. The EDRM project is
evolving a rich set of guidelines and standard reference collections for many of these
tasks, and as that process evolves it seems reasonable to expect that the work we
have done in the TREC Legal Track to date will one day be subsumed in some more
comprehensive effort.
6.3 Certifying Process Quality
Evaluation-guided research is to some extent a two-edged sword. On the one hand, it
fosters convergence on a set of well modeled challenge problems for which insightful
39 http://edrm.net/
32
and affordable evaluation resources can be constructed. On the other hand, the mere
existence of those resources tends to reinforce that convergence, regardless of whether
what was originally modeled remains the best approach. Of course, the marketplace,
despite sometimes inflated expectations and exhortations, does act to counterbalance
any tendency of the research community to focus its attention too narrowly. Ultimately,
what is needed is some way of balancing these two forces in a manner that maximizes
synergy and minimizes wasted effort. One broad class of approaches that has gained
currency in recent years for achieving that focus is broadly known as “process qual-
ity.” Essentially, the idea is that the important thing is that we agree on how each
performer of e-discovery services should design measures to gain insight into the qual-
ity of the results achieved by their particular process. The design of their process,
and of their specific measures, is up to each performer. Of course, some performers
might benefit from economies of scale by adopting measures designed by others, but
because the measures must fit the process and because process innovation should be
not just accommodated but encouraged, forced convergence on specific measures can
be counterproductive. So process quality approaches seek to certify the way in which
the measurement process is performed rather than what specifically is measured.
The Sedona Conference R© recognized in 2009 that “the legal profession is at a
crossroads,” in terms of its willingness to embrace automated, analytical and statistical
approaches to how law is practiced, at least in the area of e-discovery (The Sedona
Conference, 2009). Sedona, EDRM and others have called upon industry and academia
to assist in the development of standards, or at least best practices, in the area of IR.
Against this backdrop, an e-discovery certification entity that could reduce the need for
evidentiary hearings on the reasonableness of particular IR approaches would surely
be welcome. What might such a certification entity look like? Although there is as
of now no “right on point” model for such an entity, there are related standards and
benchmarking entities to which we might look for inspiration.
Perhaps the best known example is the ISO 9000 family of international quality
management system standards (International Organization for Standards, 2005). Stan-
dards in the ISO 9000 family serve two fundamental purposes: they provide guidance
to organizations that wish to institute or improve their management of process quality,
and they provide a basis for optionally certifying compliance by individual organiza-
tions with specific standards in the family. For example, a company or organization that
has been independently audited and certified to be in conformance with ISO 9001:2008
(one standard in the family) may publicly state that it is “ISO 9001 certified.” Such
a certification does not guarantee quality; rather, it certifies that formal processes for
measuring and controlling quality are being applied. These “quality management con-
trols” include, for example, providing for internal audits and for taking corrective and
preventive actions.
The basic ideas behind the ISO 9000 family of standards are also reflected in sev-
eral other types of standards and best practice guidelines. For example, the Statement
on Auditing Standards No. 70: Service Organizations (SAS 70) provides for audit re-
ports that comment on the “fairness of the presentation of the service organization’s
description of controls[,] . . . the suitability of the design of the controls to achieve the
specified control objectives[, and] ... whether the controls were operating effectively
during the period under review” (American Institute of Certified Public Accountants,
2009) Similarly, the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) pre-
scribes controls for the processing of credit card payments and describes a process
for certifying compliance with the standard (PCI Security Standards Council, 2009).
33
In software engineering, the Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) plays a
similar role, although with a less prescriptive approach. CMMI is a process improve-
ment process that helps “integrate traditionally separate organizational functions, set
process improvement goals and priorities, provide guidance for quality processes, and
provide a point of reference for appraising current processes.”40 Software development
organizations can be appraised and given a maturity level rating or a capability level
achievement profile.
At the present juncture, no such certification standard or body is on the horizon,
but there is no theoretical barrier to their formation, provided that some consensus
emerges in the legal community as to what types of certification would be appropriate.
The true legacy of the present-day TREC Legal Track, the Sedona Search Commentary,
the Electronic Discovery Institute study, and EDRM might therefore ultimately be
their role as “midwife” to the creation of some (possibly international) standard-setting
body.
7 Conclusion
Evaluation of IR for e-discovery is a complex task, but as we have seen substantial
progress has already been made. We now have useful frameworks for thinking through
the role of search technology, we have test collections with baseline results against
which future progress can be measured, and we have seen the emergence of a robust
research community with this important challenge as its focus. In the natural cycle
between interactive and Cranfield-style evaluation, interactive evaluation presently oc-
cupies much of the spotlight. Cranfield-style evaluation has a good deal to say, however,
and as the number of topics available for the new TREC Enron collection grows, fur-
ther progress in Cranfield-style evaluation of e-discovery can reasonably be expected.
Diversity is a hallmark of a maturing research community, so test collections for related
tasks (e.g., de-duplication and privilege review) will also surely be developed. TREC
is not likely to remain the principal evaluation venue for e-discovery indefinitely for
the simple reason that TREC’s work in e-discovery will be done when sufficiently rich
communities, collections, and comparative data (i.e., baseline results) are in place. But,
with the narrow exception of evaluation design, TREC itself has never been the true
center of gravity for e-discovery research. That honor goes to the research teams who
have designed and built the systems and interactive processes that have been tried to
date, and those that will be tried in the future.
Acknowledgements The authors first wish to thank a number of individuals who in discus-
sions with the authors contributed ideas and suggestions that found their way into portions
of the present paper, including Thomas Bookwalter, Gordon Cormack, Todd Elmer, Maura
Grossman and Richard Mark Soley. Additionally, the TREC Legal Track would not have been
possible without the support of Ellen Voorhees and Ian Soboroff of NIST; the faculty, staff
and students of IIT, UCSF, Tobacco Documents Online, and Roswell Park Cancer Institute
who helped build IIT CDIP or the LTDL on which it was based; Celia White (the 2006 Track
expert interactive searcher); Venkat Rangan of Clearwell Systems who helped to build the
TREC Enron test collection; Richard Braman of The Sedona Conference R© and the hundreds
of law students, lawyers and Sedona colleagues who have contributed pro bono time to the
project. Finally, the authors wish to thank Kevin Ashley and Jack Conrad for their support
40 Software Engineering Institute, “What is CMMI,”
http://www.sei.cmu/edu/cmmi/general/index.html
34
of and participation in the First and Third DESI Workshops, held as part of the Eleventh and
Twelfth International Conferences on Artificial Intelligence and Law, at which many of the
ideas herein were discussed.
References
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (2009) Statement on auditing stan-
dards no. 70: Service organizations. SAS 70
Aslam JA, Pavlu V, Yilmaz E (2006) A statistical method for system evaluation using
incomplete judgments. In: Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 541–548
Bales S, Wang P (2006) Consolidating user relevance criteria: A meta-ethnography
of empirical studies. In: Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology
Baron JR (2005) Toward a federal benchmarking standard for evaluation of information
retrieval products used in e-discovery. Sedona Conference Journal 6:237–246
Baron JR (2007) The TREC legal track: Origins and reports from the first year. Sedona
Conference Journal 8:237–246
Baron JR (2008) Towards a new jurisprudence of information retrieval: What consti-
tutes a ’reasonable’ search for digital evidence when using keywords? Digital Evi-
dence and Electronic Signature Law Review 5:173–178
Baron JR (2009) E-discovery and the problem of asymmetric knowledge. Mercer Law
Review 60:863
Baron JR, Thompson P (2007) The search problem posed by large heterogeneous data
sets in litigation: Possible future approaches to research. In: Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pp 141–147
Baron JR, Lewis DD, Oard DW (2007) TREC-2006 Legal Track Overview. In: The
Fifteenth Text REtrieval Conference Proceedings (TREC 2006), pp 79–98
Bauer RS, Brassil D, Hogan C, Taranto G, Brown JS (2009) Impedance matching of
humans and machines in high-q information retrieval systems. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp 97–101
Blair D (2006) Wittgenstein, Language and Information: Back to the Rough Ground.
Springer, New York
Blair D, Maron ME (1985) An evaluation of retrieval effectiveness for a full-text
document-retrieval system. Communications of the ACM 28(3):289–299
Brin S, Page L (1998) The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine.
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30(1-7):107–117
Buckley C, Voorhees EM (2004) Retrieval evaluation with incomplete information. In:
Proceedings of the 27th Annual International Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval, pp 25–32
Buckley C, Voorhees EM (2005) Retrieval system evaluation. In: Voorhees EM, Harman
DK (eds) TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp 53–75
Buckley C, Dimmick D, Soboroff I, Voorhees E (2006) Bias and the limits of pooling. In:
Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 619–620
Büttcher S, Clarke CLA, Yeung PCK, Soboroff I (2007) Reliable information retrieval
evaluation with incomplete and biased judgements. In: Proceedings of the 30th An-
35
nual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-
mation Retrieval, pp 63–70
Carmel D, Yom-Tov E, Darlow A, Pelleg D (2006) What makes a query difficult? In:
Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 390–397
Carterette B, Pavlu V, Kanoulas E, Aslam JA, Allan J (2008) Evaluation over thou-
sands of queries. In: Proceedings of the 31st annual International ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 651–658
Clarke C, Craswell N, Soboroff I (2005) The TREC terabyte retrieval track. SIGIR
Forum 39(1):25–25
Cleverdon C (1967) The Cranfield tests on index language devices. Aslib Proceedings
19(6):173–194
Cormack GV, Lynam TR (2006) TREC 2005 spam track overview. In: Voorhees EM,
Buckland LP (eds) The Fourteenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2005), Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), vol Special Publication 500-
266, pp 91–108
Cormack GV, Palmer CR, Clarke CLA (1998) Efficient construction of large test col-
lections. In: Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 282–289
Dumais ST, Belkin NJ (2005) The TREC interactive tracks: Putting the user into
search. In: Voorhees EM, Harman DK (eds) TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in
Information Retrieval, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 123–152
Fox EA (1983) Characterization of two new experimental collections in computer and
information science containing textual and bibliographic concepts. Tech. rep., Cornell
University
Harman DK (2005) The TREC text collections. In: Voorhees EM, Harman DK (eds)
TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, pp 21–52
Hedin B, Oard DW (2009) Replication and automation of expert judgments: infor-
mation engineering in legal e-discovery. In: SMC’09: Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE
international conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp 102–107
Hedin B, Tomlinson S, Baron JR, Oard DW (2010) Overview of the TREC 2009 Legal
Track. In: The Eighteenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2009), to appear
Ingwersen P (1992) Information Retrieval Interaction. Taylor Graham, London
Ingwersen P, Järvelin K (2005) The Turn: Integration of Information Seeking and
Retrieval in Context. Springer
International Organization for Standards (2005) Quality management systems—
fundamentals and vocabulary. ISO 9000:2005
Jensen JH (2000) Special issues involving electronic discovery. Kansas Journal of Law
and Public Policy 9:425
Kando N, Mitamura T, Sakai T (2008) Introduction to the NTCIR-6 special issue.
ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing 7(2):1–3
Kazai G, Lalmas M, Fuhr N, Gövert N (2004) A report on the first year of the INitiative
for the Evaluation of XML retrieval (INEX’02). Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 55(6):551–556
Lewis D, Agam G, Argamon S, Frieder O, Grossman D, Heard J (2006) Building a
test collection for complex document information processing. In: Proceedings of the
29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, pp 665–666
36
Lewis DD (1996) The TREC-4 filtering track. In: The Fourth Text Retrieval Conference
(TREC-4), pp 165–180
Lynam TR, Cormack GV (2009) Multitext legal experiments at TREC 2008. In:
Voorhees EM, Buckland LP (eds) The Sixteenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC
2008), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Majumder P, Mitra M, Pal D, Bandyopadhyay A, Maiti S, Mitra S, Sen A, Pal S (2008)
Text collections for FIRE. In: Proceedings of the 31st Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR
2008, pp 699–700
Moffat A, Zobel J (2008) Rank-biased precision for measurement of retrieval effective-
ness. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 27(1)
Oard DW, Hedin B, Tomlinson S, Baron JR (2009) Overview of the TREC 2008 Legal
Track. In: The Seventeenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2008)
Oot P, Kershaw A, Roitblat HL (2010) Mandating reasonableness in a reasonable
inquiry. Denver University Law Review 87:533
Paul GL, Baron JR (2007) Information inflation: Can the legal system adapt? Rich-
mond Journal of Law and Technology 13(3)
PCI Security Standards Council (2009) Payment card industry (pci) data
security standard: Requirements and security assessment procedures. URL
http://www.pcisecuritystandards.org, version 1.2.1
Peters C, Braschler M (2001) European research letter: Cross-language system evalua-
tion: The CLEF campaigns. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 52(12):1067–1072
Roitblat HL, Kershaw A, Oot P (2010) Document categorization in legal electronic dis-
covery: Computer classification vs. manual review. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 61:70–80
Sakai T, Kando N (2008) On information retrieval metrics designed for evaluation with
incomplete relevance assessments. Information Retrieval 11(5):447–470
Sanderson M, Joho H (2004) Forming test collections with no system pooling. In:
Proceedings of the 27th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 33–40
Sanderson M, Zobel J (2005) Information retrieval system evaluation: effort, sensitiv-
ity, and reliability. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 162–169
Schmidt H, Butter K, Rider C (2002) Building digital tobacco document libraries at the
University of California, San Francisco Library/Center for Knowledge Management.
D-Lib Magazine 8(2)
Singhal A, Salton G, Buckley C (1995) Length Normalization in Degraded Text Col-
lections. In: Proceedings of Fifth Annual Symposium on Document Analysis and
Information Retrieval, pp 15–17
Soboroff I (2007) A comparison of pooled and sampled relevance judgments. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 30th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pp 785–786
Solomon RD, Baron JR (2009) Bake offs, demos & kicking the tires: A practical liti-
gator’s brief guide to evaluating early case assessment software & search & review
tools. URL http://www.kslaw.com/Library/publication/BakeOffs Solomon.pdf
Spärck Jones K, van Rijsbergen CJ (1975) Report on the need for and provision of an
ideal information retrieval test collection. Tech. Rep. 5266, Computer Laboratory,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge (UK)
37
Taghva K, Borsack J, Condit A (1996) Effects of OCR errors on ranking and feedback
using the vector space model. Information Processing & Management 32(3):317–327
The Sedona Conference (2007a) The Sedona Principles, Second Edition: Best prac-
tice recommendations and principles for addressing electronic document production.
URL http://www.thesedonaconference.org
The Sedona Conference (2007b) The Sedona Conference Best Practices Commentary
on the Use of Search and Information Retrieval Methods in E-Discovery. The Sedona
Conference Journal 8:189–223
The Sedona Conference (2009) The Sedona Conference Commentary on Achieving
Quality in the E-Discovery Process. The Sedona Conference Journal 10:299–329
Tomlinson S (2007) Experiments with the negotiated Boolean queries of the TREC
2006 legal discovery track. In: The Fifteenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC
2006)
Tomlinson S, Oard DW, Baron JR, Thompson P (2008) Overview of the TREC 2007
Legal Track. In: The Sixteenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 2007) Proceedings
Turpin A, Scholer F (2006) User performance versus precision measures for simple
search tasks. In: Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 11–18
Voorhees EM, Garofolo JS (2005) Retrieving noisy text. In: Voorhees EM, Harman
DK (eds) TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp 183–197
Voorhees EM, Harman DK (2005) The Text REtrieval Conference. In: Voorhees EM,
Harman DK (eds) TREC: Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval, MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 3–19
Wayne CL (1998) Multilingual topic detection and tracking: Successful research enabled
by corpora and evaluation. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation
Yilmaz E, Aslam JA (2006) Estimating average precision with incomplete and imper-
fect judgments. In: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management (CIKM), pp 102–111
Zhao FC, Oard DW, Baron JR (2009) Improving search effective-
ness in the legal e-discovery process using relevance feedback. In:
ICAIL 2009 DESI III Global E-Discovery/E-Disclosure Workshop, URL
http://www.law.pitt.edu/DESI3 Workshop/DESI III papers.htm
Zobel J (1998) How reliable are the results of large-scale information retrieval experi-
ments? In: Proceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 307–314

