Evaluation Campaigns and TRECVid
Alan F. Smeaton
Centre for Digital Video Proc.
& Adaptive Information Cluster
Dublin City University
Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland
alan.smeaton@dcu.ie
Paul Over
Information Access Division
Information Technology Lab.
National Institute of Standards
and Technology
Gaithersburg,
MD. 20899, USA
over@nist.gov
Wessel Kraaij
TNO Information and
Communication Technology,
PO BOX 5050 2600 GB Delft
The Netherlands
wessel.kraaij@tno.nl
ABSTRACT
The TREC Video Retrieval Evaluation (TRECVid) is an
international benchmarking activity to encourage research
in video information retrieval by providing a large test col-
lection, uniform scoring procedures, and a forum for orga-
nizations 1 interested in comparing their results. TRECVid
completed its fifth annual cycle at the end of 2005 and in
2006 TRECVid will involve almost 70 research organiza-
tions, universities and other consortia. Throughout its ex-
istence, TRECVid has benchmarked both interactive and
automatic/manual searching for shots from within a video
corpus, automatic detection of a variety of semantic and
low-level video features, shot boundary detection and the
detection of story boundaries in broadcast TV news. This
paper will give an introduction to information retrieval (IR)
evaluation from both a user and a system perspective, high-
lighting that system evaluation is by far the most prevalent
type of evaluation carried out. We also include a summary
of TRECVid as an example of a system evaluation bench-
marking campaign and this allows us to discuss whether
such campaigns are a good thing or a bad thing. There are
arguments for and against these campaigns and we present
some of them in the paper concluding that on balance they
have had a very positive impact on research progress.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.1 [Multimedia Information Systems]: [Evaluation
/ methodology]
1Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may
be identified in this document in order to describe an experi-
mental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification
is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by
the National Institute of Standards, nor is it intended to im-
ply that the entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily
the best available for the purpose.
Copyright 2005 Association for Computing Machinery. ACM acknowl-
edges that this contribution was authored or co-authored by a contractor or
affiliate of the U.S. Government. As such, the Government retains a nonex-
clusive, royalty-free right to publish or reproduce this article, or to allow
others to do so, for Government purposes only.
MIR’06, October 26–27, 2006, Santa Barbara, California, USA.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-495-2/06/0010 ...$5.00.
General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Performance, Experimentation
Keywords
Evaluation, Benchmarking, Video Retrieval
1. INTRODUCTION
Evaluation campaigns which benchmark IR tasks have be-
come very popular in recent years for a variety of reasons.
They are attractive to researchers because they allow com-
parison of their work with others in an open, metrics-based
environment. They provide shared data, common evaluation
metrics and often also offer collaboration and sharing of re-
sources. They are also attractive to funding agencies and
outsiders because they can act as a showcase for research
results.
Analysis, indexing and retrieval of video shots takes place
each year within the TRECVid evaluation campaign and
this paper presents an overview of TRECVid and its ac-
tivities. We begin, in section 2, with an introduction to
evaluation in IR, covering both user evaluation and system
evaluation. In section 3 we present a catalog of evaluation
campaigns in the general area of IR and video analysis. Sec-
tions 4 and 5 give a retrospective overview of the TRECVid
campaign with attention to the evolution of the evaluation
and participating systems, open issues, etc. In section 6
we discuss whether evaluation benchmarking campaigns like
TRECVid, Text Retrieval Conferences (TREC) and others
are good or bad. We present a series of arguments for each
case and leave the reader to conclude that on balance they
have had a positive impact on research progress.
2. USER EVALUATION AND SYSTEM
EVALUATION OF IR
In the early 1960s, the Cranfield College of Aeronautics
wanted to test indexing techniques for text abstracts. They
created test queries on a static document collection of some
hundreds of documents and each document was judged as
either relevant or not relevant to each of a set of user queries.
Based on the combination of documents, user queries and
relevance judgments, the researchers were able to evaluate
different indexing and retrieval strategies using measures
such as precision and recall, which are well-known and still
used now. That experiment was the first experimental IR
evaluation, and the empirical approach to evaluating IR
tasks continues today.
When we build an IR system we build it to serve one part
or function in an overall information seeking task. We use
a search tool, which is what an IR system is, to retrieve
documents or images or video clips in response to a specific,
formulated search request, but that search request is just
one stage of our overall information need. When we use
an IR system, we are engaging in information seeking. It
follows that what we should evaluate are things like user
satisfaction and the goodness of fit of the system we are
using for task completion. But we can’t do this because
it would involve testing with a significant number of real
users every time we want to do such an evaluation. That
is prohibitively expensive to do every time we think we’ve
discovered a new indexing or retrieval algorithm or we want
to modify and evaluate an existing one. Such evaluations
are termed user evaluations, performed from an information
science viewpoint and are not common. Instead what we
do is system evaluation, which is evaluation more from a
computer science viewpoint and that is what is prevalent in
IR research [17]. This is summarized below
System evaluation tests the quality of an IR system; pro-
cesses a high volume of queries; has no user involvement
and simulates an end-user; is cheap and very popular and is
a highly controlled environment. User evaluation tests the
quality of IR system and its interface; (usually) processes
a low volume of queries; has direct user involvement in the
evaluation and is an artificial test;
The development of empirical IR research continues to
use test collections of documents, queries and relevance as-
sessments and has been based on system rather than user
evaluation, though a small amount of the latter is carried
out. As digital document collections (including texts, web
pages, images, videos, music, and others) for personal and
for work-related use have exploded in size, IR research came
under increasing pressure to make IR evaluations realistic.
The approach of manual judgments of relevance carried out
in individual laboratories or by individual researchers meant
that evaluations on collections of the order of thousands of
documents was simply not credible as people started to use
collections of millions and then billions of documents. The
sheer effort, and cost, of creating a dataset which could be
used for evaluation and which was credible remains beyond
the resources of almost all research groups and so over the
last several years we have seen the emergence of benchmark-
ing evaluation campaigns which we discuss in the next sec-
tion.
3. BENCHMARKING EVALUATION
CAMPAIGNS
Following the realization that benchmarking IR tasks needed
to scale up in size in order to be realistic, the Text Retrieval
Conference (TREC) initiative began in 1991 as a reaction
to small collection sizes and the need for a more coordi-
nated evaluation among researchers. This was run by NIST
and funded by the Disruptive Technology Office (DTO). It
set out initially to benchmark the ad hoc search and re-
trieval operation on text documents and over the intervening
decade and a half spawned over a dozen IR-related tasks in-
cluding cross-language, filtering, web data, interactive, high
accuracy, blog data, novelty detection, video data, enter-
prise data, genomic data, legal data, spam data, question-
answering and others. 2005 was the 14th TREC workshop
and 117 research groups participated. One of the evalua-
tion campaigns which started as a track within TREC but
spawned off as an independent activity after 2 years is the
video data track, known as TRECVid and we shall give fur-
ther details on TRECVid in the next section of this paper.
The operation of TREC and all its tracks was established
from the start and has followed the same formula, basically
• Acquire data and distribute it to participants;
• Formulate a set of search topics and release these to
participants en bloc;
• Allow about 4 weeks before accepting submissions of
the top-1000 ranked documents per search topic;
• Pool submissions to eliminate duplicates and use man-
ual assessors to make binary relevance judgments;
• Calculate Precision, Recall and other derived measures
for submitted runs and distribute results;
• Host workshop in NIST in November;
• Make plans, and repeat the process . . . for the next 16
years !
The approach in TREC has always been metrics-based —
focusing on evaluation of search performance — with mea-
surement typically being some variants of Precision and Re-
call. Following the success of TREC and its many tracks,
many similar evaluation campaigns have been launched in
the IR domain. In particular in the video/image area there
are evaluation campaigns for basic video/image analysis as
well as for retrieval. In all cases these are not competitions
with “winners” and “losers” but they are more correctly ti-
tled “evaluation campaigns” where interested parties can
benchmark their techniques against others and normally
they culminate in a workshop where results are presented
and discussed. TRECVid is one such evaluation campaign
and we shall see details of that in section 4.
The Cross Lingual Evaluation Forum (CLEF) [12] is in
its 7th iteration in 2006 and has 74 groups participating us-
ing a total of 12 different languages. CLEF tests aspects
of mono- and cross-lingual IR through a variety of 8 differ-
ent tracks including mono-, bi- and multi-lingual document
retrieval on news, mono- and cross-lingual retrieval on struc-
tured scientific data, interactive cross-lingual retrieval and
question-answering, cross-lingual image retrieval, and so on.
CLEF is funded by the EU through the DELOS network.
NTCIR [9] is like CLEF, except it addresses Asian lan-
guages (Chinese, Korean and Japanese), and it is not as big.
2005 was the 6th running of NTCIR and it follows the TREC
model quite faithfully. It covers multi-lingual, bi-lingual and
single language retrieval on three Asian languages as well as
question-answering.
INEX [6] is the Initiative for the Evaluation of XML Re-
trieval and 2006 is the 5th running of the cycle with 80
participating groups. INEX addresses IR which exploits
available structural information (XML elements) to yield
more focused retrieval and may retrieve a mixture of para-
graphs, sections, etc. The collection used in 2006 is 659,300
Wikipedia articles from 113,483 categories with an average
of 161 XML nodes each. Unlike the other evaluation cam-
paigns, and to keep costs down, participants in INEX must
create candidate topics in order to gain access to the docu-
ment collection. The main task in INEX is ad hoc retrieval
plus tasks in natural language queries, heterogeneous docu-
ments, interactive, document mining and Multimedia [15].
Video Analysis and Content Extraction (VACE) is a US
DTO funding program not restricted to US groups which
just concluded Phase II with 14 funded participants and be-
gan Phase III. VACE addresses the lack of tools to assist
human analysts monitor and annotate video for indexing.
The video data used in VACE is broadcast TV news, surveil-
lance, UAV, meetings, and ground reconnaissance and the
tasks are detection and/or tracking of people, faces, vehicles
and text in that data. VACE includes open evaluations with
international participation in order to increase progress in
problem-solving.
ETISEO [4] is an evaluation campaign that started in
2005, funded by the French government, with 23 partici-
pants. The aim to evaluate vision techniques for event de-
tection in video surveillance applications. The video data
used is single and multi-view surveillance of areas like air-
ports, car parks, corridors and subways. The ground truth
is annotations and classifications of persons, vehicles and
groups and the tasks are detection, localization, classifica-
tion and tracking of physical objects, and event recognition.
FRGC [5], the Face Recognition Grand Challenge, is an
evaluation whose goal is to improve performance of face
recognition algorithmns by an order of magnitude over the
best results in the 2002 Face Recognition Vendor Test. The
FRGC has provided data (50,000 recordings), including still
and three-dimensional images, as well as computational in-
frastructure for work on two shared challenge problems and
six predefined experiments. Nineteen groups submitted re-
sults for the 2005 evaluation.
PETS (Performance Evaluation of Tracking & Surveil-
lance) [10] is in its 7th year in 2006 and is funded by the
European Union through the FP6 project ISCAPS. PETS
evaluates object detection and tracking for video surveil-
lance, and its evaluation is also metrics based. Data in
PETS is multi-view/multi-camera surveillance video using
up to 4 cameras and the task is event detection for events
such as luggage being left in public places.
The AMI (Augmented Multi-Party Interaction) project
[1], funded by the EU, provides a test collection from instru-
mented meeting rooms, where the instrumentation includes
video footage from multiple cameras, and is planning a series
of evaluation campaigns. The tasks include 2D multi-person
tracking, head tracking, head pose estimation and an esti-
mation of the focus-of-attention (FoA) in meetings as being
either a table, documents, a screen, or other people in the
meeting. This is based on video analysis of people in the
meeting and what is the focus of their gaze.
ImagEval [13] is a new evaluation campaign just launched
this year, funded by the French government and now open
to other Europeans. There are over a dozen participating
groups and the tasks are related to content based image re-
trieval including recognition of image transformations like
rotation, projection, etc., image retrieval based on combin-
ing text and image, detection and extraction of text regions
from images, detection of certain types of objects in images
such as cars, planes, flowers, cats, churches, the Eiffel tower,
table, PC or TV, US flag, etc., and (semantic) feature de-
tection - indoor, outdoor, people, night, day, etc.
ARGOS [2] is another evaluation campaign for video con-
tent analysis sponsored by the French government and has
10 French participating groups. The set of evaluation tasks
have a lot of overlap with TRECVid and includes shot bound-
ary detection, camera motion detection, person identifica-
tion, video OCR and story boundary detection. The corpus
of video used by ARGOS includes broadcast TV news, sci-
entific documentaries and surveillance video.
Finally, we should mention two activities which bring to-
gether evaluation activities of others and they are Benchathlon
[11] and CLEAR [3]. Benchathlon is a clearinghouse for
data, annotations, evaluation measures, tools and architec-
tures for content based image retrieval while CLEAR is
a cross-campaign collaboration between VACE and CHIL
(Computers in the Human Interaction Loop) concerned with
getting consensus and crossover on the evaluation of event
classification evaluation from video.
Although these evaluation campaigns span multiple do-
mains and multiple applications, some of which are IR, they
have several things in common including the following:
• they are all very metrics-based with agreed evaluation
procedures and data formats;
• they are all primarily system evaluations rather than
user evaluations;
• they are all are open in terms of participation and
make their results, and some also their data, available
to others;
• they are all have manual self-annotation of ground
truth or centralized assessment of pooled results;
• they all coordinate large volunteer efforts, many with
little sponsorship funding;
• they all have growing participation;
• they all have contributed to raising the profile of their
application and of evaluation campaigns in general;
We will now look at one specific benchmarking evaluation
campaign, TRECVid.
4. THE TRECVID BENCHMARKING
EVALUATION CAMPAIGN
The TREC Video Retrieval Evaluations began on a small
scale in 2001 as one of the many variations on standard text
IR evaluations hatched within the larger TREC effort. The
motivation was an interest at NIST in expanding the notion
of “information” in IR beyond text and the observation that
it was difficult to compare research results in video retrieval
because there was no common basis (data, tasks, measures)
for scientific comparison. TRECVid’s two goals reflected
the relatively young nature of the field - promotion of re-
search and progress in video retrieval and in how to usefully
benchmark performance. In both areas TRECVid has often
opted for freedom for participants in the search for effective
approaches over control aimed at finality of results. This
is believed appropriate given the difficulty of the research
problems addressed and the current maturity of systems.
TRECVid can be compared with more constrained eval-
uations using larger-scale testing such as the FRGC. In the
context of benchmarking evaluation campaigns it is inter-
esting to compare those in IR and image/video process-
ing mentioned above, with such a “grand challenge”. The
FRGC is built on the conclusion that there exist “three main
contenders for improvements in face recognition” and on
the definition of 5 specific conjectures to be tested. The
FRGC shares with TRECVid an emphasis on large data
sets, shared tasks (experiments) so results are comparable,
and shared input/output formats. But the FRGC differs
from TRECVid in that the FRGC works with much more
data and tests (complete ground truth is given by process
of capturing data), more controlled data, focus on a single
task, and evaluation only in terms of verification and false
accept rates. This makes it quite different to TRECVid.
The annual TRECVid cycle begins more than a year be-
fore the target November workshop as NIST works with the
sponsors to secure the video to be used and outlines asso-
ciated tasks and measures. These are presented for discus-
sion at the November workshop a year before they are to
be used. They need to reflect interests of the sponsors as
well as enough researchers to attract a critical mass of par-
ticipants. With input from participants and sponsors, a set
of guidelines is created and a call for participation is sent
out by early February. The various sorts of data required
are prepared for distribution in the spring and early sum-
mer. Researchers develop their systems, run them on the
test data, and submit the output for manual and automatic
evaluation at NIST starting in August. Results of the eval-
uations are returned to the participants in September and
October. Participants then write up their work and discuss
it at the workshop in mid-November – what worked, what
didn’t work, and why. The emphasis in this is on learning
by exploring. Final analysis and description of the work is
completed in the months following the workshop and often
include results of new or corrected experiments and discus-
sion at the workshop.
5. TRECVID RETROSPECTIVE
TRECVid 2006 marks the end of 5 years of evaluation,
the last 4 of which have worked with TV news. It’s appro-
priate to take a look at what has changed and what has not,
in preparation for charting a future course. Here we con-
sider the core elements of the evaluation: tasks, data, and
measurements as well as a review of approaches and results.
While the acquisition of data and the support of TRECVid
at NIST is funded by DTO and NIST, only two or three par-
ticipating groups are funded by DTO for their TRECVid
research. All other groups find their own funding and par-
ticipate because the TRECVid tasks fit the group’s research
agenda and promises sufficient return for their investment.
Significant numbers of peer-reviewed publications based on
TRECVid research (2002:10, 2003:17, 2004:46, 2005:39) re-
flect many independent community judgments of the impor-
tance and quality of the research particpants are doing – on
the foundation provided by TRECVid.
5.1 Tasks
TRECVid is a laboratory, not a user or operational, evalu-
ation of systems but the tasks aim to be abstractions of real
user tasks. This link is important to ensure we addresse
problems with implications outside the laboratory and be-
cause it helps in designing well-motivated rules for the eval-
uation. Component tasks are also evaluated as part of a
“divide and conquer” strategy. The shot boundary deter-
mination and search tasks have been evaluated every year.
They illustrate two levels of evaluation, each with its own
advantages and disadvantages. In between is the high-level
feature extraction task. Other tasks have been evaluated
where truth data already existed or as pilot projects.
5.1.1 Shot boundary determination
Shots are automatically identifiable basic semantic units
that are important in higher level video analysis such as
search, browsing, and summarization. Even if TRECVid
has demonstrated that the detection of abrupt boundaries
(cuts) is largely solved for news video, the shot boundary
task continues to provide an opportunity for new partici-
pants to overcome basic system and organizational problems
before moving on to more complicated TRECVid tasks. It
is an important component of higher level tasks.
Shot definition has also come to play an essential role in
the TRECVid evaluation infrastructure. The first TRECVid
search evaluation used no shared definition of the units of
retrieval. This made judging inefficient and comparison of
search results fuzzy because each system could retrieve a
unique set of segments - many of which nevertheless shared
many frames with segments retrieved by other systems. From
2002 onward, a single definition of shots was provided for the
development and test data by one of the participants. These
“master shots” then serve as the common units of retrieval
for the search task and of analysis for the feature detection
task added later.
In the shot boundary task we focus the evaluation micro-
scope down onto an important but very narrow problem set
- relatively distant from any real user task. In the search
task, we zoom out to evaluate a task we can easily imag-
ine as part of a real work context. In zooming in, we can
say more about a smaller problem space, but have a hard
time generalizing to a real application context. In zooming
out we make it easier to draw conclusions about a real task
but can say less, because the uncontrolled problem space is
much larger. Both sorts of evaluations are needed.
5.1.2 Search
In the search task, the system (with or without a human
in the loop) is presented with an as yet unseen multime-
dia statement of need for video containing certain named
or generic objects, people, events, locations, etc. Follow-
ing practice in TREC, such a statement is called a topic.
The topic always contains a short textual description of the
need as well as possibly image, video, and audio examples of
what is desired. The topics may model an understanding of
the need at the beginning of a search, after some successful
searching, or as a standing profile.
The system’s goal is then to return a ranked list of master
shots from the test collection containing video of the sort
desired. Ranking was initially foreign to some participants
who saw the task as binary classification. But the volumes
of data to be processed and the fuzzy nature of the queries
mean modern search systems, whether as components or end
user applications, must be able to provide information about
relative confidence in their results.
Search system builders must find or develop various com-
ponents and also integrate them. This complexity, especially
when a user is included in the loop, requires good experimen-
tal designs if one is to draw conclusions about what works
and what doesn’t in the presence of so many interacting
factors.
5.1.3 High-level feature extraction
A third task, important in its own right and a promising
basis for search, was added at the urging of participants
in 2003: high-level feature extraction. The features tested
have ranged over objects, people, and events with varying
degrees of complexity that make some features very similar
to topic text descriptions. Unlike topics, feature definitions
are known in advance of testing and contain only a short text
description. Participants have manually annotated training
data for the feature task.
The TRECVid standard for correctness in annotation of
feature training data and judging of system output is that
of a human - so that examples which are very difficult for
systems due to small size, occlusion, etc., are included in
the training data and systems that can detect these exam-
ples get credit for them - as should be the case in a real
system. This differs from some evaluations (e.g. FRGC) in
which only a subset of examples that meet specified criteria
are considered in the test. We want the TRECVid test col-
lections to be useful long after the workshop in which they
are created and even if systems improve dramatically.
Since in video there is no visual correlate of the word as
an easily recognizable, reusable semantic feature, one of the
primary hypotheses being examined in TRECVid is the idea
that, given enough reusable feature detectors, such features
might play something like the role words do in text IR. Of
course, many additional problems - such as how to decide
(automatically) which features to use in executing a given
query - remain to be solved [14].
5.1.4 Additional evaluated tasks
TRECVid has addressed additional tasks against news
video such as story boundary determination, specialized fea-
ture detection and camera motion analysis. Details of these
tasks and how systems performed are available in the pub-
lications section of the TRECVid website [20].
5.2 Data
Data is the element of the evaluation with the fewest de-
grees of freedom. While one can ruminate about ideal test
collections, in practice one more often takes what one can get
– if it can at all be useful – and acquisition of video data from
content providers has always been difficult in TRECVid.
TRECVid has formally evaluated systems only against pro-
duced video but in 2005 and 2006 has explored tasks against
unproduced, raw video as well.
5.2.1 Produced video
¿From the 11 hours of video about NIST used for a fea-
sibility test in 2001, TRECVid moved in 2002 to 73 hours
of vintage video mainly from the Internet Archive [7] – a
real collection still needing a search engine to find video for
re-use. Participants downloaded the data themselves.
Then in 2003 TRECVid began working on broadcast news
video from a narrow time interval - a new genre, much more
consistent in its production values than the earlier data and
larger in size. Data set sizes made it necessary to ship the
video on hard drives - a method that has worked well with
the exception of one year in which groups with back-levels
of Windows could not access drives of the size used.
Another important change was the shift to two-year cy-
cles. Within the same genre enough data was secured so that
training and test data could be provided in the first year,
with the training data annotated and reused in the second
year during which only new test data would be provided.
This reduced the overhead of system builders adapting to
new video, reduced the overhead of training data annotation
and maximized its use, and removed a “new genre” factor
from influencing results in the second year. TRECVid 2006
will complete the second such two-year cycle. data amounts
(training/test in hours) have grown as follows: 2003 (66/67),
2004 (70/0), 2005 (85/85), 2006 (158/0). The video in 2003-
2004 was from English-speaking sources. In 2005 and 2006
Chinese- and Arabic-speaking sources were added to the
mix. Automatic machine translation was used to get En-
glish text from Chinese and Arabic speech.
We have learned that broadcast news video has special
characteristics with consequences for the evaluation and sys-
tems. It is highly produced, dominated by talking heads,
contains lots of duplicate or near duplicate material. Highly
produced news video exhibits production conventions that
systems will learn but with negative consequences when de-
tectors learned on one news source are applied on another
with different production conventions. This a real problem
systems need to confront and makes it important that the
training data come from multiple sources. There are 8 differ-
ent sources and 11 different programs in the 2006 test data.
A significant number of test data sources did not occur in
the training data.
Much of broadcast news footage is visually uninformative
- the main information is contained in the reporter’s or an-
chorperson’s speech. This makes the TRECVid search task
more difficult because the topics ask for video of objects,
people, events, etc. not information about them. Video of
a reporter talking about person X does not by itself satisfy
a topic asking for video of person X. The search task is de-
signed this way because it models one of two work situations.
One is an intelligence analyst looking at open source video,
interested in objects, people, events, etc that are visible but
not the subject the speech track, in the unintended visual
information content about people, infrastructure, etc. The
other is a video producer looking for clips to “re-purpose”.
The original intent often reflected in the speech track is ir-
relevant. Of course, the speech track (or text from speech)
can be very helpful in finding the right neighborhood for
browsing and finding the video requested by some topics.
But even when speech about X is accompanied by video of
X they tend to be offset in time.
Highly produced news video also exhibits lots of duplicate
or near duplicate segments - due to repeated commercials,
stock footage, previews of coming segments, standard intro
and exit graphics, etc. Measuring the frequency of various
sorts of duplicates or near duplicates is an unresolved re-
search issue, as is assessing the distorting effect they may
have on basic measures such as precision and recall.
5.2.2 Unproduced video - rushes
During 2005 and 2006 TRECVid participants have ex-
plored unproduced video - so called “rushes”. By its na-
ture this sort of video provides significant new challenges.
Rushes are the raw material (extra video, B-rolls footage)
used to produce a video. 20 to 40 times as much mate-
rial may be shot as actually becomes part of the finished
product. Rushes usually have only natural sound. Actors
are only sometimes present so very little if any information
is encoded in speech. Rushes contain many frames or se-
quences of frames that are highly repetitive, e.g., many takes
of the same scene redone due to errors (e.g. an actor gets
his lines wrong, a plane flies overhead introducing extrane-
ous noise, etc.), long segments in which the camera is fixed
on a given scene or barely moving, etc. A significant part of
the material might qualify as stock footage - reusable shots
of people, objects, events, locations, etc. Rushes may share
some characteristics with “ground reconnaissance” video.
It is not clear what doable tasks should be set for systems
against this unstructured data so in both 2005 and 2006
participants were asked to develop and demonstrate some
basic system capabilities to help a person unfamiliar with a
large collection of rushes get an idea of what kinds of shots of
what sorts of objects, persons, events, locations, etc could be
found. The minimal required goals for 2006 are development
of a toolkit with the ability to remove/hide redundancy of as
many kinds as possible (i.e., summarize at one or more lev-
els) and organize/present non-redundant material according
to at least 6 features. The features should be well-motivated
from the point of view of some user/task context and cannot
all be of one type (e.g. not all cinematographic or camera
setting). Groups may add additional functionality as they
are able.
Evaluation of such functionality is known to be difficult.
So part of the exploration will involve participants design-
ing and performing their own evaluation and presenting the
results. No standard keyframes or shot boundaries are pro-
vided.
5.3 Measurements
The TRECVid community has not spent significant amounts
of time debating the pros and cons of various similar mea-
sures. They have profited by battles fought long ago in the
text IR community. While choice of a single number (av-
erage precision) to describe generalized system performance
is as useful (e.g., for optimization, results graphs) as it is
restrictive, TRECVid continues the TREC tradition of pro-
viding various additional views of system effectiveness for
their diagnostic value and better fit for specific applications
and analyses.
In its first year TRECVid adopted a large set of shot
boundary determination measurements from previous work
[21] but soon adopted precision and recall with low threshold
for overlap as the main measures. It added frame-precision
and frame-recall to gauge separately the degree of overlap in
the matches. For search and feature extraction TRECVid
adopted the family of precision- and recall-based measures
for system effectiveness that have become standard within
the TREC retrieval community. Additional measures of
user characteristics, behavior, and satisfaction developed by
the TREC interactive search track over several years were
adopted for use by interactive video search systems.
5.4 Approaches and Results
In what follows we look at approaches and results for the
two most difficult, ongoing TRECVid tasks: high-level fea-
ture extraction and search.
5.4.1 High-level features
Most TRECVid systems have treated feature detection
Figure 1: Average precision for top 3 runs by feature
as a supervised pattern classification task based on one key
frame for each shot and have converged on generic rather
than handcrafted detectors. This is the because of a desire
to increase the set of features to many hundreds [8], in which
case scalability of learning becomes critical. The TRECVid
2006 feature task recognizes this by requiring submissions
for 39 features of which 10 will be evaluated.
Naphade and Smith [19] surveyed successful approaches
for detection of semantic features used in TRECVid sys-
tems and abstracted a common processing pipeline includ-
ing feature extraction, feature-based modeling (using e.g.,
Gaussien mixture models, support vector machines, hidden
Markov models, and fuzzy K-nearest neighbors), feature-
specific aggregation, cross-feature and cross-media aggre-
gation, cross-concept aggregation, and rule-based filtering.
This pipeline may accommodate automatic feature-specific
variations [23]. They documented over two dozen different
algorithms used in the various processing stages and note
a correlation between number of positive training examples
and best precision at 100.
Beyond the above generalizations, conclusions about rel-
ative effectiveness of various combinations of techniques are
generally possible only in the context of a particular group’s
experiments as described in their site reports on the TRECVid
website. In 2005 groups found evidence for the value of lo-
cal over global fusion, multilingual over monolingual runs,
multiple over singe text sources (Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity), parts-based object representation (Columbia Univer-
sity), various fusion techniques across features and learning
approaches (IBM), automatically learned feature-specific com-
binations of content, style, and context analysis, a larger
(101) feature set (University of Amsterdam).
Even though the top 3 runs for each feature are very close
to each other in performance as measured by average pre-
cision (see Figure 5.4.1, there are significant differences in
the top results — even in runs from the same group. If one
sorts all the runs by mean average precision and takes the
runs from the top until one has representatives from 10 sites
there are 33 runs. A partial randomization test [18] on the
difference in the mean average precision scores shows sig-
nificant (p < .01) differences between runs. Here is a list of
how many runs (from the 33) each run is significantly better
than. See the publications section of the TRECVid website
[20] for details about the algorithms used:
24 A_IBM.TJW_SVMFD_7 1 A_UWAV3_4
22 A_IBM.TJW_ABOA_4 1 B_FD_PCA_LR_2
21 A_IBM.TJW_ABOF_1 1 B_FD_PCA_BC_1
18 A_IBM.TJW_A1SV_3 1 A_nuspris_1
18 A_IBM.TJW_SVM_5 1 A_UWAV2_2
18 A_IBM.TJW_A1SA_2 1 A_UWV1_3
17 A_IBM.TJW_M2SW_6 1 A_UWV3_6
17 A_CU.DCON4_4 1 A_UWV2_5
13 A_CU.DCON3_3 0 A_PicSOM_1
12 A_CU.DCON1_1 0 A_JOAMaxER_5
11 A_CU.DCON5_5 0 A_nuspris_4
8 A_CU.DCON2_2 0 A_tsinghua_6
4 A_CU.DCON6_6 0 B_FD_LPP_BC_3
3 A_CU.DCON7_7 0 A_CMUsloth_4
3 A_CMUgluttony_2 0 A_CMUwrath_5
2 A_UWAV1_1 0 A_CMUavarice_3
0 A_ICL_NPDE_2
Many questions about detection of high-level features re-
main for researchers and for evaluation designers but several
large ones deserve mention here.
• What are the most useful features for use in modeling
a given video genre for a given purpose, e.g., broadcast
news for intelligence analysts to search or filter?
• Are there opportunities for improved feature extrac-
tion using more than just one keyframe per shot?
• What are the limits on the generalizability of detec-
tors, i.e., how reusable are the detectors, and how can
we measure this in an affordable way? Changing data
sets is expensive.
• Is it time to settle on an agreed (baseline) architecture
and set of components in order to reduce the number
of factors affecting results and thus to get more solid
evidence for a few important causal relationships?
• Should TRECVID encourage or require groups to work
with more than one keyframe per shot?
• How do we assess progress across multiple years and
data sets?
5.4.2 Search
Hauptmann and Christel [16] discuss successful approaches
to search. They note that, as one might expect for a genre
full of talking heads, speech is an important and robust
source of evidence in broadcast news and successful systems,
used in the form of text. This is true for many topics but
not all. Recall that the user being modeled is interested
in objects, people, locations and events that were probably
not intended as the focus of the original video and so are
not being talked about. Successful video seeking in an in-
teractive system may begin with text search or one based on
image similarity or concepts but then continues by means of
advanced browsing in the temporal domain, via image sim-
ilarity (including near duplicates), using story boundaries,
Figure 3: Top 10 interactive search runs
and filtering with features at various levels. Experiments
have demonstrated humans’ considerable abilities to quickly
skim, scan, locate the desired material and weed out the
undesired. TRECVid interactive searches also make use of
positive and negative relevance feedback. For every system,
performance varies greatly by topic, as shown in Figure 2.
Systems must provide a variety of tools, and users must avail
themselves of them in an adaptive way.
The top 10 fully interactive runs clearly outperform their
manual and automatic counterparts, as illustrated in Figures
3,4,5. Given the difficulty of the search task, the fact that
the top 10 automatic runs in 2005 performed as well as most
of the top 10 manually-assisted runs continues to astound.
(Shallow precision scores for manual runs suggest the results
could in fact be useful so we shouldn’t conclude from the
overlap of manual and automatic runs that the manual ones
were just worse than we thought.)
Beyond these generalizations, drawing conclusions about
what techniques work is difficult outside the context of a
particular system. Effectiveness varies greatly with topic,
collection, and user. Text from the speech remains a strong
source of evidence for many topics, but in 2005, working with
errorful, misaligned text from machine translation, some
groups (e.g. IBM and MediaMill) found their visual-only
search performed better than their text-only. In 2005 groups
found value in query typing (Carnegie Mellon University),
near-duplicate detection (Columbia University), multimodal
over text-only search (Helsinki Univ. of Technology), cluster-
temporal browsing (Oulu University), enhanced visualiza-
tions (FX Palo Alto). More details are available from indi-
vidual site reports on the TRECVid publications page [20].
There are many open issues for evaluation design and sys-
tem building. We note some major ones here:
• Can humans decide which concepts will help in exe-
cuting a query?
• How can we compare interactive systems across sites?
• How do we encourage use of more than one keyframe
per shot? Should we require it?
• How many near duplicate sequences are present in the
TV news video and what effect does this have on sys-
tems, machine learning, and performance measures?
Figure 2: Mean average precision by topic
Figure 4: Top 10 manual search runs
Figure 5: Top 10 automatic search runs
• Should the TRECVid search task be redesigned with
fewer degrees of freedom for researchers and more focus
on validating a small number of specific hypotheses?
• How do we assess progress across multiple years, data
sets, and possibly users ?
6. BENCHMARKING EVALUATION
CAMPAIGNS: PROS AND CONS
There are many good things about benchmarking eval-
uation campaigns, and there are some bad things. Let us
examine these in turn, starting with the good things.
• The first, and most obvious good thing about evalua-
tion campaigns is that they can secure, prepare, and
distribute data, which is difficult to get. The partic-
ipants can then use the same data, the same agreed
metrics for evaluation and the same ground truth for
measurement and this should allow direct comparisons
across and within groups. Sometimes, where there
are real users involved in the evaluation such as in
the TRECVid interactive search task, the human sub-
jects are a variable which cannot be controlled but
for the most part comparisons across sites can be di-
rect. Within a campaign, participants also complete
the tasks at the same time and this can have benefits
of sharing.
• A second, more indirect benefit of evaluation cam-
paigns is that they can create critical mass and mo-
tivate donations of data and other resources to the
campaign from among the participating groups. Here
is a list of major donations to TRECVid 2005:
– 50 hours of British Broadcasting Corporation rushes
(BBC Archive)
– National Aeronautics and Space Administration
video from the Open-Video Project at University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
– Master shot reference (Fraunhofer Institute, Berlin)
– Keyframes for each master shot (Dublin City Uni-
versity)
– Feature annotation tools (IBM, Carnegie Mellon
University)
– Camera motion annotation tool & output (Joan-
neum Research, Austria)]
– Feature annotation (20+ research groups) for 39
features in 50 hours of video
– Low level feature detection output (Carnegie Mel-
lon University)
– Story segmentation output (Columbia University)
These donations really enrich the evaluation and help
to progress research in the field. The collaborations
and assistance among participants also fosters a com-
munity and allows easier breaking into what is a new
area for many people, and all this helps to improve
overall performance of the tasks being benchmarked.
• By following the known and published guidelines for
evaluation, either within or outside a formal evalua-
tion campaign, a research group can perform direct
comparisons with the work of others and know that
their evaluation methodology is sound and accepted.
Deviations from the campaign guidelines and “do-it-
yourself” evaluations can introduce unforeseen biases
into an experimental methodology.
• Good performance results can be a showcase for fund-
ing agencies, for industry and to help to promote a
research area. When the collective achievement of par-
ticipants in an evaluation campaign show good perfor-
mance figures for a task the outside world can take
notice and this kind of positive dissemination of re-
search work can only be of benefit to all.
• Evaluation campaigns can facilitate research groups
which want to gradually move into a new area of re-
search. For example, in TRECVid groups can take
part in the shot boundary detection task before mov-
ing onto search or feature detection.
• Groups can readily learn from each other since they
are working on the same problems, data, using the
same measures, etc. Approaches that seem to work
in one system can be incorporated into other systems
and tested to see if they still work. Groups just getting
started reach better performance faster.
While these are the positives, there are also some possible
negatives as follows.
• The first negative and the one which is thrown at eval-
uation campaigns most often is that everybody ad-
dresses the same research challenges using the same
measures and so there is no room for diversity, and
no scope for novelty or creativity. Here we disagree
and point to the range of new approaches tried out
each year in shot boundary detection and search tasks.
Novelty and creativity are not stifled but operate within
a shared research challenge. Novelty and creativity
become even easier in an environment with so much
collaboration and data/resource sharing.
• It is true that within evaluation campaigns the evalu-
ation results and papers are usually available publicly
but the original data can come with strings attached.
This is generally because of copyright restrictions and
the cost of purchase from the original owners and this
is the case for most of the TRECVid video data where
post-campaign, users must purchase the original video
data from a supplier.
• There is a belief in some quarters that the agencies
who fund evaluation campaigns have a stranglehold
on the research directions of those evaluation cam-
paigns and that they can overly-influence the research
agenda. This is no more true than saying the same
funding agencies have a stranglehold on research di-
rection through the projects that they fund. Funding
agencies throughout the world almost always publish
their research priorities and strategic objectives and
researchers react to these by shaping their research
interests into the priorities of the funding agencies.
Within the evaluation campaigns it is the participants
who finally decide on the tasks to be benchmarked,
the metrics to be used, albeit constrained by what is
available and achievable by the coordinators. In prac-
tice it is the community more than the funders who
have the stranglehold and it is the funders who set the
restrictions on what their budget can afford.
• A valid criticism of evaluation campaigns is that the
data set can both define and restrict the problems to
be evaluated. Examples of data defining the tasks are
story bound detection and anchorperson detection in
TRECVid which were topical because the data over
some of the latter years was broadcast TV news video
where these tasks were quite important. An exam-
ple of data restricting problems addressed is the over-
use by many groups on keyframes as shot representa-
tives. In TRECVid the organizers provide standard
shot boundaries and standard keyframes so that inter-
active search systems used the same keyframes in their
storyboarding and browsing interfaces, the motivation
being to reduce the impact of yet another variable on
the evaluation results. Yet this is an example of both
good (it lowers the entry barrier to participation, and
allows better system comparability) and bad (creates
a path of least resistance and diverts attention from
approaches that work with more of the moving video)
[22] so as with many of these issues there is a trade-off.
• A final negative is that the set of problems we could
address in future work is constrained by the dataset,
that this is true, and that there is nothing we can
do about it. But at least as a result of evaluation
campaigns and the showcasing of results achieved, data
owners and data providers may be more amenable to
making their data available to the research community.
7. CONCLUSIONS
Many factors affect the design of evaluation campaigns
and they require many choices among competing alterna-
tives. The realization of such designs seldom goes entirely
as planned and the evaluations have complex effects on the
researchers and their work. No one evaluation type can an-
swer all the questions. A research community needs a variety
of well-designed evaluations focused on high-level and low-
level tasks, executable automatically many times or based
on human judging carried out at the end of longer develop-
ment cycles of months against approaches that have already
shown real promise.
There is a life-cycle: have a new idea or discover some-
thing novel; reason about how to implement it, would it
work, does it scale; try it out in-house on some local data;
if it appears to work try it out on some data allowing com-
parison to others - i.e., an evaluation campaign — take part
or use its data; if it appears to work then license it, publish
it, showcase it. Evaluation campaigns are one stage in the
lifecycle of idea-to-product. There is not always an available
or appropriate benchmarking and nobody is forced into it,
either as part of the annual iterations or to use the archived
data afterwards
System-oriented evaluation campaigns like TRECVid have
proved to be a fruitful way to concentrate the research ef-
forts of a global community. The quality and importance of
the work TRECVid has enabled is reflected in the number
peer-reviewed publications and independent funding sources
supporting the research. Yet, such campaigns by neccessity
put restrictions on possible avenues that are explored and
can affect the overall flow of research funds. Is the net effect
on research progress positive ?
We think that there are strong indications that this is the
case and have cited some of these. Still, this balance has to
be evaluated regularly. TRECVid tries to carefully adapt
its tasks, data sets, and measures over the years, maintain-
ing a mix of healthy conservatism (recurring tasks, 2 year
schedule) and pilot tasks. Also, the TRECVid program is
to a large extent influenced by suggestions (e.g., the high-
level feature task) from the participating community, which
is open to all and continues to grow.
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Alan Smeaton acknowledges support from Science Founda-
tion Ireland under grant number 03/IN.3/I361 and Wes-
sel Kraaij would like to acknowledge support from the EU
project AMI (IST-2002-506811).
9. REFERENCES
[1] AMI: Augmented Multi-Person Interaction.
URL:www.amiproject.org/, Last checked 21 June
2006.
[2] ARGOS: Evaluation Campaign for Surveillance Tools
of Video Content.
URL:www.irit.fr/recherches/SAMOVA/MEMBERS/-
JOLY/argos/, Last checked 21 June
2006.
[3] CLEAR’06 Evaluation Campaign and Workshop -
Classification of Events, Activities and Relationships.
URL:www.clear-evaluation.org/, Last checked 21 June
2006.
[4] ETISEO: Video Understanding Evaluation.
URL:www.silogic.fr/etiseo/, June 2006.
[5] Face Recognition Grand Challenge.
URL:www.frvt.org/FRGC, 2006.
[6] INEX: INitiative for the Evaluation of XML Retrieval.
URL:inex.is.informatik.uni-duisburg.de/, Last checked
21 June 2006.
[7] The Internet Archive Movie Archive home page.
URL:www.archive.org/movies, 2006.
[8] Lscom lexicon definitions and annotations.
URL:www.ee.columbia.edu/dvmm/lscom, 2006.
[9] NTCIR: NII Test Collection for IR Systems Project.
URL:research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/, Last checked June 2006.
[10] PETS 2006: Ninth IEEE International Workshop on
Performance Evaluation of Tracking and Surveillance.
URL:www.pets2006.net/, Last checked 21 June 2006.
[11] The Benchathlon Network: Home of CBIR
Benchmarking. URL:www.benchathlon.net/, Last
checked 21 June 2006.
[12] The Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (CLEF).
URL:clef.isti.cnr.it/, Last checked 21 June 2006.
[13] The IMAG-EVAL Evaluation Campaign.
URL:www.imageval.org/, Last checked 21 June 2006.
[14] M. G. Christel and A. G. Hauptmann. The Use and
Utility of High-Level Semantic Features in Video
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Video Retrieval, pages 134–144,
Singapore, 20-22 July 2005.
[15] N. Fuhr and M. Lalmas. Introduction to the Special
Issue on INEX. Information Retrieval, 8(4):515–519,
2005.
[16] A. G. Hauptmann and M. G. Christel. Successful
Approaches in the TREC Video Retrieval Evaluations.
In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, pages 668—675, New
York, NY, USA, 10-16 October 2004.
[17] P. Ingwersen and K. Järvelin. The Turn: Integration
of Information Seeking and Retrieval in Context.
Springer: the Kluwer International Series on
Information Retrieval, 2005.
[18] B. F. J. Manly. Randomization, Bootstrap, and Monte
Carlo Methods in Biology. Chapman & Hall, London,
UK, 2nd edition, 1997.
[19] M. R. Naphade and J. R. Smith. On the Detection of
Semantic Concepts at TRECVID. In Proceedings of
the 12th ACM International Conference on
Multimedia, pages 660—667, New York, NY, USA,
10-16 October 2004.
[20] NIST. TREC Video Retrieval Evaluation
Publications. URL:www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/
tvpubs/tv.pubs.org.html, 2006.
[21] R. Ruiloba, P. Joly, S. Marchand-Maillet, and
G. Quénot. Towards a Standard Protocol for the
Evaluation of Video-to-Shots Segmentation
Algorithms. In European Workshop on Content Based
Multimedia Indexing, Toulouse, France, October 1999.
[22] C. G. Snoek, M. Worring, J.-M. Geusebroek, D. C.
Koelma, and F. J. Seinstra. On the surplus value of
semantic video analysis beyond the key frame. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia & Expo (ICME), July 2005.
[23] C. G. Snoek, M. Worring, J.-M. Geusebroek, D. C.
Koelma, F. J. Seinstra, and A. Smeulders. The
semantic pathfinder: Using an authoring metaphor for
generic multimedia indexing. IEEE Transactions,
PAMI, in press, 2006.

