Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval
Vol. 2, No 1-2 (2008) 1–135
c© 2008 Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. This is a pre-publication version; there
are formatting and potentially small wording differences from the final
version.
DOI: xxxxxx
Opinion mining and sentiment analysis
Bo Pang1 and Lillian Lee2
1 Yahoo! Research, 701 First Ave. Sunnyvale, CA 94089, U.S.A., bopang@yahoo-inc.com
2 Computer Science Department, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, U.S.A., llee@cs.cornell.edu
Abstract
An important part of our information-gathering behavior has always been to find out what other people
think. With the growing availability and popularity of opinion-rich resources such as online review sites and
personal blogs, new opportunities and challenges arise as people now can, and do, actively use information
technologies to seek out and understand the opinions of others. The sudden eruption of activity in the area of
opinion mining and sentiment analysis, which deals with the computational treatment of opinion, sentiment,
and subjectivity in text, has thus occurred at least in part as a direct response to the surge of interest in new
systems that deal directly with opinions as a first-class object.
This survey covers techniques and approaches that promise to directly enable opinion-oriented information-
seeking systems. Our focus is on methods that seek to address the new challenges raised by sentiment-
aware applications, as compared to those that are already present in more traditional fact-based analysis. We
include material on summarization of evaluative text and on broader issues regarding privacy, manipulation,
and economic impact that the development of opinion-oriented information-access services gives rise to. To
facilitate future work, a discussion of available resources, benchmark datasets, and evaluation campaigns is
also provided.
Contents
Table of Contents i
1 Introduction 1
1.1 The demand for information on opinions and sentiment 1
1.2 What might be involved? An example examination of the construction of an opinion/review
search engine 3
1.3 Our charge and approach 4
1.4 Early history 4
1.5 A note on terminology: Opinion mining, sentiment analysis, subjectivity, and all that 5
2 Applications 7
2.1 Applications to review-related websites 7
2.2 Applications as a sub-component technology 7
2.3 Applications in business and government intelligence 8
2.4 Applications across different domains 9
3 General challenges 10
3.1 Contrasts with standard fact-based textual analysis 10
3.2 Factors that make opinion mining difficult 11
4 Classification and extraction 15
Part One: Fundamentals 16
4.1 Problem formulations and key concepts 16
4.1.1 Sentiment polarity and degrees of positivity 16
4.1.2 Subjectivity detection and opinion identification 18
i
4.1.3 Joint topic-sentiment analysis 19
4.1.4 Viewpoints and perspectives 19
4.1.5 Other non-factual information in text 20
4.2 Features 20
4.2.1 Term presence vs. frequency 21
4.2.2 Term-based features beyond term unigrams 21
4.2.3 Parts of speech 21
4.2.4 Syntax 22
4.2.5 Negation 22
4.2.6 Topic-oriented features 23
Part Two: Approaches 23
4.3 The impact of labeled data 24
4.4 Domain adaptation and topic-sentiment interaction 25
4.4.1 Domain considerations 25
4.4.2 Topic (and sub-topic or feature) considerations 26
4.5 Unsupervised approaches 27
4.5.1 Unsupervised lexicon induction 27
4.5.2 Other unsupervised approaches 28
4.6 Classification based on relationship information 29
4.6.1 Relationships between sentences and between documents 29
4.6.2 Relationships between discourse participants 29
4.6.3 Relationships between product features 30
4.6.4 Relationships between classes 31
4.7 Incorporating discourse structure 32
4.8 Language models 32
4.9 Special considerations for extraction 33
4.9.1 Identifying product features and opinions in reviews 35
4.9.2 Problems involving opinion holders 35
5 Summarization 37
5.1 Single-document opinion-oriented summarization 37
5.2 Multi-document opinion-oriented summarization 38
5.2.1 Some problem considerations 39
5.2.2 Textual summaries 41
5.2.3 Non-textual summaries 43
5.2.4 Review(er) quality 49
6 Broader implications 55
6.1 Economic impact of reviews 56
6.1.1 Surveys summarizing relevant economic literature 58
6.1.2 Economic-impact studies employing automated text analysis 58
6.1.3 Interactions with word of mouth (WOM) 59
ii
6.2 Implications for manipulation 59
7 Publicly available resources 61
7.1 Datasets 61
7.1.1 Acquiring labels for data 61
7.1.2 An annotated list of datasets 62
7.2 Evaluation campaigns 65
7.2.1 TREC opinion-related competitions 65
7.2.2 NTCIR opinion-related competitions 66
7.3 Lexical resources 66
7.4 Tutorials, bibliographies, and other references 67
8 Concluding remarks 69
References 71
iii
1
Introduction
Romance should never begin with sentiment. It should begin with science and end with a
settlement. — Oscar Wilde, An Ideal Husband
1.1 The demand for information on opinions and sentiment
“What other people think” has always been an important piece of information for most of us during the
decision-making process. Long before awareness of the World Wide Web became widespread, many of us
asked our friends to recommend an auto mechanic or to explain who they were planning to vote for in
local elections, requested reference letters regarding job applicants from colleagues, or consulted Consumer
Reports to decide what dishwasher to buy. But the Internet and the Web have now (among other things) made
it possible to find out about the opinions and experiences of those in the vast pool of people that are neither
our personal acquaintances nor well-known professional critics — that is, people we have never heard of.
And conversely, more and more people are making their opinions available to strangers via the Internet.
Indeed, according to two surveys of more than 2000 American adults each [63, 127],
• 81% of Internet users (or 60% of Americans) have done online research on a product at least
once;
• 20% (15% of all Americans) do so on a typical day;
• among readers of online reviews of restaurants, hotels, and various services (e.g., travel agen-
cies or doctors), between 73% and 87% report that reviews had a significant influence on their
purchase;1
• consumers report being willing to pay from 20% to 99% more for a 5-star-rated item than a
4-star-rated item (the variance stems from what type of item or service is considered);
• 32% have provided a rating on a product, service, or person via an online ratings system, and 30%
(including 18% of online senior citizens) have posted an online comment or review regarding a
product or service .2
1Section 6.1 discusses quantitative analyses of actual economic impact, as opposed to consumer perception.
2Interestingly, Hitlin and Rainie [123] report that “Individuals who have rated something online are also more skeptical of the information that is
1
We hasten to point out that consumption of goods and services is not the only motivation behind people’s
seeking out or expressing opinions online. A need for political information is another important factor.
For example, in a survey of over 2500 American adults, Rainie and Horrigan [249] studied the 31% of
Americans — over 60 million people — that were 2006 campaign internet users, defined as those who
gathered information about the 2006 elections online and exchanged views via email. Of these,
• 28% said that a major reason for these online activities was to get perspectives from within
their community, and 34% said that a major reason was to get perspectives from outside their
community;
• 27% had looked online for the endorsements or ratings of external organizations;
• 28% say that most of the sites they use share their point of view, but 29% said that most of the
sites they use challenge their point of view, indicating that many people are not simply looking
for validations of their pre-existing opinions; and
• 8% posted their own political commentary online.
The user hunger for and reliance upon online advice and recommendations that the data above reveals
is merely one reason behind the surge of interest in new systems that deal directly with opinions as a first-
class object. But, Horrigan [127] reports that while a majority of American internet users report positive
experiences during online product research, at the same time, 58% also report that online information was
missing, impossible to find, confusing, and/or overwhelming. Thus, there is a clear need to aid consumers of
products and of information by building better information-access systems than are currently in existence.
The interest that individual users show in online opinions about products and services, and the potential
influence such opinions wield, is something that vendors of these items are paying more and more attention
to [124]. The following excerpt from a whitepaper is illustrative of the envisioned possibilities, or at the least
the rhetoric surrounding the possibilities:
With the explosion of Web 2.0 platforms such as blogs, discussion forums, peer-to-peer net-
works, and various other types of social media ... consumers have at their disposal a soapbox
of unprecedented reach and power by which to share their brand experiences and opinions,
positive or negative, regarding any product or service. As major companies are increas-
ingly coming to realize, these consumer voices can wield enormous influence in shaping
the opinions of other consumers — and, ultimately, their brand loyalties, their purchase de-
cisions, and their own brand advocacy. ... companies can respond to the consumer insights
they generate through social media monitoring and analysis by modifying their marketing
messages, brand positioning, product development, and other activities accordingly. [328]
But industry analysts note that the leveraging of new media for the purpose of tracking product image
requires new technologies; here is a representative snippet describing their concerns:
Marketers have always needed to monitor media for information related to their brands —
whether it’s for public relations activities, fraud violations3, or competitive intelligence.
But fragmenting media and changing consumer behavior have crippled traditional monitor-
ing methods. Technorati estimates that 75,000 new blogs are created daily, along with 1.2
available on the Web”.
3Presumably, the author means “the detection or prevention of fraud violations”, as opposed to the commission thereof.
2
million new posts each day, many discussing consumer opinions on products and services.
Tactics [of the traditional sort] such as clipping services, field agents, and ad hoc research
simply can’t keep pace. [154]
Thus, aside from individuals, an additional audience for systems capable of automatically analyzing con-
sumer sentiment, as expressed in no small part in online venues, are companies anxious to understand how
their products and services are perceived.
1.2 What might be involved? An example examination of the construction of an
opinion/review search engine
Creating systems that can process subjective information effectively requires overcoming a number of novel
challenges. To illustrate some of these challenges, let us consider the concrete example of what building an
opinion- or review-search application could involve. As we have discussed, such an application would fill an
important and prevalent information need, whether one restricts attention to blog search [213] or considers
the more general types of search that have been described above.
The development of a complete review- or opinion-search application might involve attacking each of
the following problems.
(1) If the application is integrated into a general-purpose search engine, then one would need to
determine whether the user is in fact looking for subjective material. This may or may not be a
difficult problem in and of itself: perhaps queries of this type will tend to contain indicator terms
like “review”, “reviews”, or “opinions”, or perhaps the application would provide a “checkbox” to
the user so that he or she could indicate directly that reviews are what is desired; but in general,
query classification is a difficult problem — indeed, it was the subject of the 2005 KDD Cup
challenge [185].
(2) Besides the still-open problem of determining which documents are topically relevant to an
opinion-oriented query, an additional challenge we face in our new setting is simultaneously
or subsequently determining which documents or portions of documents contain review-like
or opinionated material. Sometimes this is relatively easy, as in texts fetched from review-
aggregation sites in which review-oriented information is presented in relatively stereotyped for-
mat: examples include Epinions.com and Amazon.com. However, blogs also notoriously contain
quite a bit of subjective content and thus are another obvious place to look (and are more rele-
vant than shopping sites for queries that concern politics, people, or other non-products), but the
desired material within blogs can vary quite widely in content, style, presentation, and even level
of grammaticality.
(3) Once one has target documents in hand, one is still faced with the problem of identifying the
overall sentiment expressed by these documents and/or the specific opinions regarding particular
features or aspects of the items or topics in question, as necessary. Again, while some sites make
this kind of extraction easier — for instance, user reviews posted to Yahoo! Movies must specify
grades for pre-defined sets of characteristics of films — more free-form text can be much harder
for computers to analyze, and indeed can pose additional challenges; for example, if quotations
are included in a newspaper article, care must be taken to attribute the views expressed in each
quotation to the correct entity.
(4) Finally, the system needs to present the sentiment information it has garnered in some reasonable
3
summary fashion. This can involve some or all of the following actions:
(a) aggregation of “votes” that may be registered on different scales (e.g., one reviewer uses
a star system, but another uses letter grades)
(b) selective highlighting of some opinions
(c) representation of points of disagreement and points of consensus
(d) identification of communities of opinion holders
(e) accounting for different levels of authority among opinion holders
Note that it might be more appropriate to produce a visualization of sentiment data rather than a
textual summary of it, whereas textual summaries are what is usually created in standard topic-
based multi-document summarization.
1.3 Our charge and approach
Challenges (2), (3), and (4) in the above list are very active areas of research, and the bulk of this survey is
devoted to reviewing work in these three sub-fields. However, due to space limitations and the focus of the
journal series in which this survey appears, we do not and cannot aim to be completely comprehensive.
In particular, when we began to write this survey, we were directly charged to focus on information-
access applications, as opposed to work of more purely linguistic interest. We stress that the importance of
work in the latter vein is absolutely not in question.
Given our mandate, the reader will not be surprised that we describe the applications that sentiment-
analysis systems can facilitate and review many kinds of approaches to a variety of opinion-oriented classi-
fication problems. We have also chosen to attempt to draw attention to single- and multi-document summa-
rization of evaluative text, especially since interesting considerations regarding graphical visualization arise.
Finally, we move beyond just the technical issues, devoting significant attention to the broader implications
that the development of opinion-oriented information-access services have: we look at questions of privacy,
manipulation, and whether or not reviews can have measurable economic impact.
1.4 Early history
Although the area of sentiment analysis and opinion mining has recently enjoyed a huge burst of research
activity, there has been a steady undercurrent of interest for quite a while. One could count early projects
on beliefs as forerunners of the area [48, 318]. Later work focused mostly on interpretation of metaphor,
narrative, point of view, affect, evidentiality in text, and related areas [121, 133, 149, 263, 308, 311, 312,
313, 314].
The year 2001 or so seems to mark the beginning of widespread awareness of the research problems and
opportunities that sentiment analysis and opinion mining raise [51, 66, 69, 79, 192, 215, 221, 235, 292, 297,
299, 307, 327, inter alia], and subsequently there have been literally hundreds of papers published on the
subject.
Factors behind this “land rush” include:
• the rise of machine learning methods in natural language processing and information retrieval;
• the availability of datasets for machine learning algorithms to be trained on, due to the blossoming
of the World Wide Web and, specifically, the development of review-aggregation web-sites; and,
of course
4
• realization of the fascinating intellectual challenges and commercial and intelligence applications
that the area offers.
1.5 A note on terminology: Opinion mining, sentiment analysis, subjectivity, and
all that
‘The beginning of wisdom is the definition of terms,’ wrote Socrates. The aphorism is highly
applicable when it comes to the world of social media monitoring and analysis, where any
semblance of universal agreement on terminology is altogether lacking.
Today, vendors, practitioners, and the media alike call this still-nascent arena everything
from ‘brand monitoring,’ ‘buzz monitoring’ and ‘online anthropology,’ to ‘market influence
analytics,’ ‘conversation mining’ and ‘online consumer intelligence’. ... In the end, the term
‘social media monitoring and analysis’ is itself a verbal crutch. It is placeholder [sic], to be
used until something better (and shorter) takes hold in the English language to describe the
topic of this report. [328]
The above quotation highlights the problems that have arisen in trying to name a new area. The quotation
is particularly apt in the context of this survey because the field of “social media monitoring and analysis” (or
however one chooses to refer to it) is precisely one that the body of work we review is very relevant to. And
indeed, there has been to date no uniform terminology established for the relatively young field we discuss
in this survey. In this section, we simply mention some of the terms that are currently in vogue, and attempt
to indicate what these terms tend to mean in research papers that the interested reader may encounter.
The body of work we review is that which deals with the computational treatment of (in alphabetical
order) opinion, sentiment, and subjectivity in text. Such work has come to be known as opinion mining,
sentiment analysis. and/or subjectivity analysis. The phrases review mining and appraisal extraction have
been used, too, and there are some connections to affective computing, where the goals include enabling
computers to recognize and express emotions [239]. This proliferation of terms reflects differences in the
connotations that these terms carry, both in their original general-discourse usages4 and in the usages that
have evolved in the technical literature of several communities.
In 1994, Wiebe [312], influenced by the writings of the literary theorist Banfield [26], centered the idea of
subjectivity around that of private states, defined by Quirk et al. [246] as states that are not open to objective
observation or verification. Opinions, evaluations, emotions, and speculations all fall into this category; but
a canonical example of research typically described as a type of subjectivity analysis is the recognition of
opinion-oriented language in order to distinguish it from objective language. While there has been some
4 To see that the distinctions in common usage can be subtle, consider how interrelated the following set of definitions given in Merriam-Webster’s
Online Dictionary are:
Synonyms: opinion, view, belief, conviction, persuasion, sentiment mean a judgment one holds as true.
• opinion implies a conclusion thought out yet open to dispute 〈each expert seemed to have a different opinion〉.
• view suggests a subjective opinion 〈very assertive in stating his views〉.
• belief implies often deliberate acceptance and intellectual assent 〈a firm belief in her party’s platform〉.
• conviction applies to a firmly and seriously held belief 〈the conviction that animal life is as sacred as human〉.
• persuasion suggests a belief grounded on assurance (as by evidence) of its truth 〈was of the persuasion that
everything changes〉.
• sentiment suggests a settled opinion reflective of one’s feelings 〈her feminist sentiments are well-known〉.
5
research self-identified as subjectivity analysis on the particular application area of determining the value
judgments (e.g., “four stars” or “C+”) expressed in the evaluative opinions that are found, this application
has not tended to be a major focus of such work.
The term opinion mining appears in a paper by Dave et al. [69] that was published in the proceedings
of the 2003 WWW conference; the publication venue may explain the popularity of the term within com-
munities strongly associated with Web search or information retrieval. According to Dave et al. [69], the
ideal opinion-mining tool would “process a set of search results for a given item, generating a list of product
attributes (quality, features, etc.) and aggregating opinions about each of them (poor, mixed, good)”. Much
of the subsequent research self-identified as opinion mining fits this description in its emphasis on extract-
ing and analyzing judgments on various aspects of given items. However, the term has recently also been
interpreted more broadly to include many different types of analysis of evaluative text [190].
The history of the phrase sentiment analysis parallels that of “opinion mining” in certain respects. The
term “sentiment” used in reference to the automatic analysis of evaluative text and tracking of the predictive
judgments therein appears in 2001 papers by Das and Chen [66] and Tong [297], due to these authors’
interest in analyzing market sentiment. It subsequently occurred within 2002 papers by Turney [299] and
Pang et al. [235], which were published in the proceedings of the annual meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) and the annual conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP). Moreover, Nasukawa and Yi [221] entitled their 2003 paper, “Sentiment analysis:
Capturing favorability using natural language processing”, and a paper in the same year by Yi et al. [324] was
named “Sentiment Analyzer: Extracting sentiments about a given topic using natural language processing
techniques”. These events together may explain the popularity of “sentiment analysis” among communities
self-identified as focused on NLP. A sizeable number of papers mentioning “sentiment analysis” focus on
the specific application of classifying reviews as to their polarity (either positive or negative), a fact that
appears to have caused some authors to suggest that the phrase refers specifically to this narrowly defined
task. However, nowadays many construe the term more broadly to mean the computational treatment of
opinion, sentiment, and subjectivity in text.
Thus, when broad interpretations are applied, “sentiment analysis” and “opinion mining” denote the
same field of study (which itself can be considered a sub-area of subjectivity analysis). We have attempted
to use these terms more or less interchangeably in this survey. This is in no small part because we view the
field as representing a unified body of work, and would thus like to encourage researchers in the area to
share terminology regardless of the publication venues at which their papers might appear.
6
2
Applications
Sentiment without action is the ruin of the soul. — Edward Abbey
We used one application of opinion mining and sentiment analysis as a motivating example in the In-
troduction, namely, web search targeted towards reviews. But other applications abound. In this chapter, we
seek to enumerate some of the possibilities.
It is important to mention that because of all the possible applications, there are a good number of com-
panies, large and small, that have opinion mining and sentiment analysis as part of their mission. However,
we have elected not to mention these companies individually, due to the fact that the industrial landscape
tends to change quite rapidly, so that lists of companies risk falling out of date rather quickly.
2.1 Applications to review-related websites
Clearly, the same capabilities that a review-oriented search engine would have could also serve very well as
the basis for the creation and automated upkeep of review- and opinion-aggregation websites. That is, as an
alternative to sites like Epinions that solicit feedback and reviews, one could imagine sites that proactively
gather such information. Topics need not be restricted to product reviews, but could include opinions about
candidates running for office, political issues, and so forth.
There are also applications of the technologies we discuss to more traditional review-solicitation sites,
as well. Summarizing user reviews is an important problem. One could also imagine that errors in user
ratings could be fixed: there are cases where users have clearly accidentally selected a low rating when their
review indicates a positive evaluation [47]. Moreover, as discussed later in this survey (see Section 5.2.4,
for example), there is some evidence that user ratings can be biased or otherwise in need of correction, and
automated classifiers could provide such updates.
2.2 Applications as a sub-component technology
Sentiment-analysis and opinion-mining systems also have an important potential role as enabling technolo-
gies for other systems.
7
One possibility is as an augmentation to recommendation systems [293, 294], since it might behoove
such a system not to recommend items that receive a lot of negative feedback.
Detection of “flames” (overly-heated or antagonistic language) in email or other types of communication
[277] is another possible use of subjectivity detection and classification.
In online systems that display ads as sidebars, it is helpful to detect webpages that contain sensitive
content inappropriate for ads placement [137]; for more sophisticated systems, it could be useful to bring up
product ads when relevant positive sentiments are detected, and perhaps more importantly, nix the ads when
relevant negative statements are discovered.
It has also been argued that information extraction can be improved by discarding information found in
subjective sentences [257].
Question answering is another area where sentiment analysis can prove useful [189, 275, 285]. For
example, opinion-oriented questions may require different treatment. Alternatively, Lita et al. [189] suggest
that for definitional questions, providing an answer that includes more information about how an entity is
viewed may better inform the user.
Summarization may also benefit from accounting for multiple viewpoints [266].
Additionally, there are potentially relations to citation analysis, where, for example, one might wish to
determine whether an author is citing a piece of work as supporting evidence or as research that he or she
dismisses [238]. Similarly, one effort seeks to use semantic orientation to track literary reputation [288].
In general, the computational treatment of affect has been motivated in part by the desire to improve
human-computer interaction [188, 192, 296].
2.3 Applications in business and government intelligence
The field of opinion mining and sentiment analysis is well-suited to various types of intelligence applica-
tions. Indeed, business intelligence seems to be one of the main factors behind corporate interest in the
field.
Consider, for instance, the following scenario (the text of which also appears in Lee [181]). A major
computer manufacturer, disappointed with unexpectedly low sales, finds itself confronted with the question:
“Why aren’t consumers buying our laptop?” While concrete data such as the laptop’s weight or the price
of a competitor’s model are obviously relevant, answering this question requires focusing more on people’s
personal views of such objective characteristics. Moreover, subjective judgments regarding intangible qual-
ities — e.g., “the design is tacky” or “customer service was condescending” — or even misperceptions —
e.g., “updated device drivers aren’t available” when such device drivers do in fact exist — must be taken
into account as well.
Sentiment-analysis technologies for extracting opinions from unstructured human-authored documents
would be excellent tools for handling many business-intelligence tasks related to the one just described.
Continuing with our example scenario: it would be difficult to try to directly survey laptop purchasers who
haven’t bought the company’s product. Rather, we could employ a system that (a) finds reviews or other
expressions of opinion on the Web — newsgroups, individual blogs, and aggregation sites such as Epinions
are likely to be productive sources — and then (b) creates condensed versions of individual reviews or a
digest of overall consensus points. This would save an analyst from having to read potentially dozens or
even hundreds of versions of the same complaints. Note that Internet sources can vary wildly in form, tenor,
and even grammaticality; this fact underscores the need for robust techniques even when only one language
(e.g., English) is considered.
8
Besides reputation management and public relations, one might perhaps hope that by tracking public
viewpoints, one could perform trend prediction in sales or other relevant data [214]. (See our discussion of
Broader Implications (Section 6) for more discussion of potential economic impact.)
Government intelligence is another application that has been considered. For example, it has been sug-
gested that one could monitor sources for increases in hostile or negative communications [1].
2.4 Applications across different domains
One exciting turn of events has been the confluence of interest in opinions and sentiment within computer
science with interest in opinions and sentiment in other fields.
As is well known, opinions matter a great deal in politics. Some work has focused on understanding what
voters are thinking [83, 110, 126, 178, 218], whereas other projects have as a long term goal the clarification
of politicians’ positions, such as what public figures support or oppose, to enhance the quality of information
that voters have access to [27, 111, 295].
Sentiment analysis has specifically been proposed as a key enabling technology in eRulemaking, allow-
ing the automatic analysis of the opinions that people submit about pending policy or government-regulation
proposals [50, 175, 272].
On a related note, there has been investigation into opinion mining in weblogs devoted to legal matters,
sometimes known as “blawgs” [64].
Interactions with sociology promise to be extremely fruitful. For instance, the issue of how ideas and
innovations diffuse [259] involves the question of who is positively or negatively disposed towards whom,
and hence who would be more or less receptive to new information transmission from a given source. To take
just one other example: structural balance theory is centrally concerned with the polarity of “ties” between
people [54] and how this relates to group cohesion. These ideas have begun to be applied to online media
analysis [58, 144, inter alia].
9
3
General challenges
3.1 Contrasts with standard fact-based textual analysis
The increasing interest in opinion mining and sentiment analysis is partly due to its potential applications,
which we have just discussed. Equally important are the new intellectual challenges that the field presents to
the research community. So what makes the treatment of evaluative text different from “classic” text mining
and fact-based analysis?
Take text categorization, for example. Traditionally, text categorization seeks to classify documents by
topic. There can be many possible categories, the definitions of which might be user- and application-
dependent; and for a given task, we might be dealing with as few as two classes (binary classification)
or as many as thousands of classes (e.g., classifying documents with respect to a complex taxonomy). In
contrast, with sentiment classification (see Section 4.1 for more details on precise definitions), we often
have relatively few classes (e.g., “positive” or “3 stars”) that generalize across many domains and users. In
addition, while the different classes in topic-based categorization can be completely unrelated, the sentiment
labels that are widely considered in previous work typically represent opposing (if the task is binary clas-
sification) or ordinal/numerical categories (if classification is according to a multi-point scale). In fact, the
regression-like nature of strength of feeling, degree of positivity, and so on seems rather unique to senti-
ment categorization (although one could argue that the same phenomenon exists with respect to topic-based
relevance).
There are also many characteristics of answers to opinion-oriented questions that differ from those
for fact-based questions [285]. As a result, opinion-oriented information extraction, as a way to approach
opinion-oriented question answering, naturally differs from traditional information extraction (IE) [49]. In-
terestingly, in a manner that is similar to the situation for the classes in sentiment-based classification, the
templates for opinion-oriented IE also often generalize well across different domains, since we are inter-
ested in roughly the same set of fields for each opinion expression (e.g., holder, type, strength) regardless of
the topic. In contrast, traditional IE templates can differ greatly from one domain to another — the typical
template for recording information relevant to a natural disaster is very different from a typical template for
storing bibliographic information.
10
These distinctions might make our problems appear deceptively simpler than their counterparts in fact-
based analysis, but this is far from the truth. In the next section, we sample a few examples to show what
makes these problems difficult compared to traditional fact-based text analysis.
3.2 Factors that make opinion mining difficult
Let us begin with a sentiment polarity text-classification example. Suppose we wish to classify an opinion-
ated text as either positive or negative, according to the overall sentiment expressed by the author within it.
Is this a difficult task?
To answer this question, first consider the following example, consisting of only one sentence (by Mark
Twain): “Jane Austen’s books madden me so that I can’t conceal my frenzy from the reader”. Just as the
topic of this text segment can be identified by the phrase “Jane Austen”, the presence of words like “madden”
and “frenzy” suggests negative sentiment. So one might think this is an easy task, and hypothesize that the
polarity of opinions can generally be identified by a set of keywords.
But, the results of an early study by Pang et al. [235] on movie reviews suggest that coming up with the
right set of keywords might be less trivial than one might initially think. The purpose of Pang et al.’s pilot
study was to better understand the difficulty of the document-level sentiment-polarity classification problem.
Two human subjects were asked to pick keywords that they would consider to be good indicators of positive
and negative sentiment. As shown in Figure 3.1, the use of the subjects’ lists of keywords achieves about
60% accuracy when employed within a straightforward classification policy. In contrast, word lists of the
same size but chosen based on examination of the corpus’ statistics achieves almost 70% accuracy — even
though some of the terms, such as “still”, might not look that intuitive at first.
Proposed word lists Accuracy Ties
Human 1 positive: dazzling, brilliant, phenomenal, excellent, fantastic 58% 75%
negative: suck, terrible, awful, unwatchable, hideous
Human 2 positive: gripping, mesmerizing, riveting, spectacular, cool, 64% 39%
awesome, thrilling, badass, excellent, moving, exciting
negative: bad, cliched, sucks, boring, stupid, slow
Statistics- positive: love, wonderful, best, great, superb, still, beautiful 69% 16%
based negative: bad, worst, stupid, waste, boring, ?, !
Fig. 3.1 Sentiment classification using keyword lists created by human subjects (“Human 1” and “Human 2”), with corresponding results using
keywords selected via examination of simple statistics of the test data (“Statistics-based”). Adapted from Figures 1 and 2 in Pang et al. [235].
However, the fact that it may be non-trivial for humans to come up with the best set of keywords does not
in itself imply that the problem is harder than topic-based categorization. While the feature “still” might not
be likely for any human to propose from introspection, given training data, its correlation with the positive
class can be discovered via a data-driven approach, and its utility (at least in the movie review domain)
does make sense in retrospect. Indeed, applying machine learning techniques based on unigram models
can achieve over 80% in accuracy [235], which is much better than the performance based on hand-picked
keywords reported above. However, this level of accuracy is not quite on par with the performance one
would expect in typical topic-based binary classification.
Why does this problem appear harder than the traditional task when the two classes we are considering
here are so different from each other? Our discussion of algorithms for classification and extraction (Chapter
4) will provide a more in-depth answer to this question, but the following are a few examples (from among
11
the many we know) showing that the upper bound on problem difficulty, from the viewpoint of machines, is
very high. Note that not all of the issues these examples raise have been fully addressed in the existing body
of work in this area.
Compared to topic, sentiment can often be expressed in a more subtle manner, making it difficult to be
identified by any of a sentence or document’s terms when considered in isolation. Consider the following
examples:
• “If you are reading this because it is your darling fragrance, please wear it at home exclusively,
and tape the windows shut.” (review by Luca Turin and Tania Sanchez of the Givenchy perfume
Amarige, in Perfumes: The Guide, Viking 2008.) No ostensibly negative words occur.
• “She runs the gamut of emotions from A to B.” (Dorothy Parker, speaking about Katharine Hep-
burn.) No ostensibly negative words occur.
In fact, the example that opens this section, which was taken from the following quote from Mark Twain,
is also followed by a sentence with no ostensibly negative words:
Jane Austen’s books madden me so that I can’t conceal my frenzy from the reader. Every-
time I read ‘Pride and Prejudice’ I want to dig her up and beat her over the skull with her
own shin-bone.
A related observation is that although the second sentence indicates an extremely strong opinion, it is
difficult to associate the presence of this strong opinion with specific keywords or phrases in this sentence.
Indeed, subjectivity detection can be a difficult task in itself. Consider the following quote from Charlotte
Brontë, in a letter to George Lewes:
You say I must familiarise my mind with the fact that “Miss Austen is not a poetess, has
no ‘sentiment’ ” (you scornfully enclose the word in inverted commas), “has no eloquence,
none of the ravishing enthusiasm of poetry”; and then you add, I must “learn to acknowl-
edge her as one of the greatest artists, of the greatest painters of human character, and one
of the writers with the nicest sense of means to an end that ever lived”.
Note the fine line between facts and opinions: while “Miss Austen is not a poetess” can be considered
to be a fact, “none of the ravishing enthusiasm of poetry” should probably be considered as an opinion,
even though the two phrases (arguably) convey similar information. 1 Thus, not only can we not easily
identify simple keywords for subjectivity, but we also find that patterns like “the fact that” do not necessarily
guarantee the objective truth of what follows them — and bigrams like “no sentiment” apparently do not
guarantee the absence of opinions, either. We can also get a glimpse of how opinion-oriented information
1One can challenge our analysis of the “poetess” clause, as an anonymous reviewer indeed did — which disagreement perhaps supports our greater
point about the difficulties that can sometimes present themselves.
Different researchers express different opinions about whether distinguishing between subjective and objective language is difficult for humans in
the general case. For example, Kim and Hovy [159] note that in a pilot study sponsored by NIST, “human annotators often disagreed on whether a
belief statement was or was not an opinion”. However, other researchers have found inter-annotator agreement rates in various types of subjectivity-
classification tasks to be satisfactory [45, 274, 275, 310]; a summary provided by one of the anonymous referees is that “[although] there is variation
from study to study, on average, about 85% of annotations are not marked as uncertain by either annotator, and for these cases, inter-coder agreement
is very high (kappa values over 80)”. As in other settings, more careful definitions of the distinctions to be made tend to lead to better agreement
rates.
In any event, the points we are exploring in the Brontë quote may be made more clear by replacing “Jane Austen is not a poetess” with something
like “Jane Austen does not write poetry for a living, but is also no poet in the broader sense”.
12
Fig. 3.2 Example of movie reviews produced by web users: a (slightly reformatted) screenshot of user reviews for The Nightmare Before Christmas.
extraction can be difficult. For instance, it is non-trivial to recognize opinion holders. In the example quoted
above, the opinion is not that of the author, but the opinion of “You”, which refers to George Lewes in this
particular letter. Also, observe that given the context (“you scornfully enclose the word in inverted commas”,
together with the reported endorsement of Austen as a great artist), it is clear that “has no sentiment” is not
meant to be a show-stopping criticism of Austen from Lewes, and Brontë’s disagreement with him on this
subject is also subtly revealed.
In general, sentiment and subjectivity are quite context-sensitive, and, at a coarser granularity, quite
domain dependent (in spite of the fact that the general notion of positive and negative opinions is fairly
consistent across different domains). Note that although domain dependency is in part a consequence of
changes in vocabulary, even the exact same expression can indicate different sentiment in different domains.
For example, “go read the book” most likely indicates positive sentiment for book reviews, but negative
sentiment for movie reviews. (This example was furnished to us by Bob Bland.) We will discuss topic-
sentiment interaction in more detail in Section 4.4.
It does not take a seasoned writer or a professional journalist to produce texts that are difficult for
machines to analyze. The writings of Web users can be just as challenging, if not as subtle, in their own
way — see Figure 3.2 for an example. In the case of Figure 3.2, it should be pointed out that it might be
more useful to learn to recognize the quality of a review (see Section 5.2 for more detailed discussions on
that subject). Still, it is interesting to observe the importance of modeling discourse structure. While the
overall topic of a document should be what the majority of the content is focusing on regardless of the order
in which potentially different subjects are presented, for opinions, the order in which different opinions are
presented can result in a completely opposite overall sentiment polarity.
In fact, somewhat in contrast with topic-based text categorization, order effects can completely over-
whelm frequency effects. Consider the following excerpt, again from a movie review:
This film should be brilliant. It sounds like a great plot, the actors are first grade, and the
supporting cast is good as well, and Stallone is attempting to deliver a good performance.
However, it can’t hold up.
As indicated by the (inserted) emphasis, words that are positive in orientation dominate this excerpt,2 and yet
the overall sentiment is negative because of the crucial last sentence; whereas in traditional text classification,
if a document mentions “cars” relatively frequently, then the document is most likely at least somewhat
2One could argue about whether in the context of movie reviews the word “Stallone” has a semantic orientation.
13
related to cars.
Order dependence also manifests itself at more fine-grained levels of analysis: “A is better than B”
conveys the exact opposite opinion from “B is better than A”3. In general, modeling sequential information
and discourse structure seems more crucial in sentiment analysis (further discussion appears in Section 4.7).
As noted earlier, not all of the issues we have just discussed have been fully addressed in the literature.
This is perhaps part of the charm of this emerging area. In the following chapters, we aim to give an overview
of a selection of past heroic efforts to address some of these issues, and march through the positives and the
negatives, charged with unbiased feeling, armed with hard facts.
Fasten your seat belts. It’s going to be a bumpy night!
— Bette Davis, All About Eve, screenplay by Joseph Mankiewicz
3Note that this is not unique to opinion expressions; “A killed B” and “B killed A” also convey different factual information.
14
4
Classification and extraction
“The Bucket List,” which was written by Justin Zackham and directed by Rob Reiner, seems
to have been created by applying algorithms to sentiment. — David Denby movie review,
The New Yorker, January 7, 2007
A fundamental technology in many current opinion-mining and sentiment-analysis applications is clas-
sification — note that in this survey, we generally construe the term “classification” broadly, so that it
encompasses regression and ranking. The reason that classification is so important is that many problems
of interest can be formulated as applying classification/regression/ranking to given textual units; examples
include making a decision for a particular phrase or document (“how positive is it?”), ordering a set of
texts (“rank these reviews by how positive they are”), giving a single label to an entire document collection
(“where on the scale between liberal and conservative do the writings of this author lie?”), and categorizing
the relationship between two entities based on textual evidence (“does A approve of B’s actions?”). This
chapter is centered on approaches to these kinds of problems.
Part One (pg. 16 ff.) covers fundamental background. Specifically, Section 4.1 provides a discussion of
key concepts involved in common formulations of classification problems in sentiment analysis and opinion
mining. Features that have been explored for sentiment analysis tasks are discussed in Section 4.2.
Part Two (pg. 23 ff.) is devoted to an in-depth discussion of different types of approaches to classification,
regression, and ranking problems. The beginning of Part Two should be consulted for a detailed outline, but
it is appropriate here to indicate how we cover extraction, since it plays a key role in many sentiment-oriented
applications and so some readers may be particularly interested in it.
First, extraction problems (e.g., retrieving opinions on various features of a laptop) are often solved by
casting many sub-problems as classification problems (e.g., given a text span, determine whether it expresses
any opinion at all). Therefore, rather than have a separate section devoted completely to the entirety of the
extraction task, we have integrated discussion of extraction-oriented classification sub-problems into the
appropriate places in our discussion of different types of approaches to classification in general (Sections
4.3 - 4.8). Section 4.9 covers those remaining aspects of extraction that can be thought of as distinct from
classification.
15
Second, extraction is often a means to the further goal of providing effective summaries of the extracted
information to users. Details on how to combine information mined from multiple subjective text segments
into a suitable summary can be found in Chapter 5.
Part One: Fundamentals
4.1 Problem formulations and key concepts
Motivated by different real-world applications, researchers have considered a wide range of problems over
a variety of different types of corpora. We now examine the key concepts involved in these problems. This
discussion also serves as a loose grouping of the major problems, where each group consists of problems
that are suitable for similar treatment as learning tasks.
4.1.1 Sentiment polarity and degrees of positivity
One set of problems share the following general character: given an opinionated piece of text, wherein it
is assumed that the overall opinion in it is about one single issue or item, classify the opinion as falling
under one of two opposing sentiment polarities, or locate its position on the continuum between these two
polarities. A large portion of work in sentiment-related classification/regression/ranking falls within this
category. Eguchi and Lavrenko [84] point out that the polarity or positivity labels so assigned may be used
simply for summarizing the content of opinionated text units on a topic, whether they be positive or negative,
or for only retrieving items of a given sentiment orientation (say, positive).
The binary classification task of labeling an opinionated document as expressing either an overall positive
or an overall negative opinion is called sentiment polarity classification or polarity classification. Although
this binary decision task has also been termed sentiment classification in the literature, as mentioned above,
in this survey we will use “sentiment classification” to refer broadly to binary categorization, multi-class
categorization, regression, and/or ranking.
Much work on sentiment polarity classification has been conducted in the context of reviews (e.g.,
“thumbs up” or “thumbs down” for movie reviews). While in this context “positive” and “negative” opinions
are often evaluative (e.g., “like” vs. “dislike”), there are other problems where the interpretation of “positive”
and “negative” is subtly different. One example is determining whether a political speech is in support of or
opposition to the issue under debate [27, 295]; a related task is classifying predictive opinions in election
forums into “likely to win” and “unlikely to win” [160]. Since these problems are all concerned with two
opposing subjective classes, as machine learning tasks they are often amenable to similar techniques. Note
that a number of other aspects of politically-oriented text, such as whether liberal or conservative views are
expressed, have been explored; since the labels used in those problems can usually be considered properties
of a set of documents representing authors’ attitudes over multiple issues rather than positive or negative sen-
timent with respect to a single issue, we discuss them under a different heading further below (“viewpoints
and perspectives”, Section 4.1.4).
The input to a sentiment classifier is not necessarily always strictly opinionated. Classifying a news
article into good or bad news has been considered a sentiment classification task in the literature [168]. But
a piece of news can be good or bad news without being subjective (i.e., without being expressive of the
private states of the author): for instance, “the stock price rose” is objective information that is generally
16
considered to be good news in appropriate contexts. It is not our main intent to provide a clean-cut definition
for what should be considered “sentiment polarity classification” problems,1 but it is perhaps useful to point
out that (a) in determining the sentiment polarity of opinionated texts where the authors do explicitly express
their sentiment through statements like “this laptop is great”, (arguably) objective information such as “long
battery life”2 is often used to help determine the overall sentiment; (b) the task of determining whether a
piece of objective information is good or bad is still not quite the same as classifying it into one of several
topic-based classes, and hence inherits the challenges involved in sentiment analysis; and (c) as we will
discuss in more detail later, the distinction between subjective and objective information can be subtle. Is
“long battery life” objective? Also consider the difference between “the battery lasts 2 hours” vs “the battery
only lasts 2 hours”.
Related categories An alternative way of summarizing reviews is to extract information on why the re-
viewers liked or disliked the product. Kim and Hovy [158] note that such “pro and con” expressions can
differ from positive and negative opinion expressions, although the two concepts — opinion (“I think this
laptop is terrific”) and reason for opinion (“This laptop only costs $399”) — are for the purposes of analyz-
ing evaluative text strongly related. In addition to potentially forming the basis for the production of more
informative sentiment-oriented summaries, identifying pro and con reasons can potentially be used to help
decide the helpfulness of individual reviews: evaluative judgments that are supported by reasons are likely
to be more trustworthy.
Another type of categorization related to degrees of positivity is considered by Niu et al. [226], who seek
to determine the polarity of outcomes (improvement vs. death, say) described in medical texts.
Additional problems related to the determination of degree of positivity surround the analysis of com-
parative sentences [139]. The main idea is that sentences such as “The new model is more expensive than
the old one” or “I prefer the new model to the old model” are important sources of information regarding
the author’s evaluations.
Rating inference (ordinal regression) The more general problem of rating inference, where one must
determine the author’s evaluation with respect to a multi-point scale (e.g., one to five “stars” for a review)
can be viewed as a multi-class text categorization problem. Predicting degree of positivity provides more
fine-grained rating information; at the same time, it is an interesting learning problem in itself.
But in contrast to many topic-based multi-class classification problems, sentiment-related multi-class
classification can also be naturally formulated as a regression problem because ratings are ordinal. It can be
argued to constitute a special type of (ordinal) regression problem because the semantics of each class may
not simply directly correspond to a point on a scale. More specifically, each class may have its own distinct
vocabulary. For instance, if we are classifying an author’s evaluation into one of the positive, neutral, and
negative classes, an overall neutral opinion could be a mixture of positive and negative language, or it could
be identified with signature words such as “mediocre”. This presents us with interesting opportunities to
explore the relationships between classes.
Note the difference between rating inference and predicting strength of opinion (discussed in Section
4.1.2); for instance, it is possible to feel quite strongly (high on the “strength” scale) that something is
1 While it is of utter importance that the problem itself should be well-defined, it is of less, if any, importance to decide which tasks should be
labeled as “polarity classification” problems.
2Whether this should be considered as an objective statement may be up for debate: one can imagine another reviewer retorting, “you call that long
battery life?”
17
mediocre (middling on the “evaluation” scale).
Also, note that the label “neutral” is sometimes used as a label for the objective class (“lack of opinion”)
in the literature. In this survey, we use neutral only in the aforementioned sense of a sentiment that lies
between positive and negative.
Interestingly, Cabral and Hortaçsu [47] observe that neutral comments in feedback systems are not nec-
essarily perceived by users as lying at the exact mid-point between positive and negative comments; rather,
“the information contained in a neutral rating is perceived by users to be much closer to negative feedback
than positive”. On the other hand, they also note that in their data, “sellers were less likely to retaliate against
neutral comments, as opposed to negatives: ... a buyer leaving a negative comment has a 40% chance of be-
ing hit back, while a buyer leaving a neutral comment only has a 10% chance of being retaliated upon by
the seller”.
Agreement The opposing nature of polarity classes also gives rise to exploration of agreement detection,
e.g., given a pair of texts, deciding whether they should receive the same or differing sentiment-related
labels based on the relationship between the elements of the pair. This is often not defined as a standalone
problem but considered as a sub-task whose result is used to improve the labeling of the opinions held
by different parties or over different aspects involved [273, 295]. A different type of agreement task has
also been considered in the context of perspectives, where, for example, a label of “conservative” tends to
indicate agreement with particular positions on a wide variety of issues.
4.1.2 Subjectivity detection and opinion identification
Work in polarity classification often assumes the incoming documents to be opinionated. For many applica-
tions, though, we may need to decide whether a given document contains subjective information or not, or
identify which portions of the document are subjective. Indeed, this problem was the focus of the 2006 Blog
track at TREC [227]. At least one opinion-tracking system rates subjectivity and sentiment separately [108].
Mihalcea et al. [209] summarize the evidence of several projects on subsentential analysis [12, 90, 290, 320]
as follows: “the problem of distinguishing subjective versus objective instances has often proved to be more
difficult than subsequent polarity classification, so improvements in subjectivity classification promise to
positively impact sentiment classification”.
Early work by Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe [120] examined the effects of adjective orientation and grad-
ability on sentence subjectivity. The goal was to tell whether a given sentence is subjective or not judging
from the adjectives appearing in that sentence. A number of projects address sentence-level or sub-sentence-
level subjectivity detection in different domains [33, 156, 232, 256, 309, 316, 320, 327]. Wiebe et al. [317]
present a comprehensive survey of subjectivity recognition using different clues and features.
Wilson et al. [321] address the problem of determining clause-level opinion strength (e.g., “how mad are
you?”). Note that the problem of determining opinion strength is different from rating inference. Classifying
a piece of text as expressing a neutral opinion (giving it a mid-point score) for rating inference does not equal
classifying that piece of text as objective (lack of opinion): one can have a strong opinion that something is
“mediocre” or “so-so”.
Recent work also considers relations between word sense disambiguation and subjectivity [305].
Subjectivity detection or ranking at the document level can be thought of as having its roots in stud-
ies in genre classification (see Section 4.1.5 for more detail). For instance, Yu and Hatzivassiloglou [327]
achieve high accuracy (97%) with a Naive Bayes classifier on a particular corpus consisting of Wall Street
18
Journal articles, where the task is to distinguish articles under News and Business (facts) from articles under
Editorial and Letter to the Editor (opinions). (This task was suggested earlier by Wiebe et al. [316], and a
similar corpus was explored in previous work [309, 317].) Work in this direction is not limited to the binary
distinction between subjective and objective labels. Recent work includes the research by participants in the
2006 TREC Blog track [227] and others [69, 97, 222, 223, 234, 280, 317, 327].
4.1.3 Joint topic-sentiment analysis
One simplifying assumption sometimes made by work on document-level sentiment classification is that
each document under consideration is focused on the subject matter we are interested in. This is in part
because one can often assume that the document set was created by first collecting only on-topic documents
(e.g., by first running a topic-based query through a standard search engine). However, it is possible that there
are interactions between topic and opinion that make it desirable to consider the two simultaneously; for
example, Riloff et al. [257] find that “topic-based text filtering and subjectivity filtering are complementary”
in the context of experiments in information extraction.
Also, even a relevant opinion-bearing document may contain off-topic passages that the user may not be
interested in, and so one may wish to discard such passages.
Another interesting case is when a document contains material on multiple subjects that may be of
interest to the user. In such a setting, it is useful to identify the topics and separate the opinions associated
with each of them. Two examples of the types of documents for which this kind of analysis is appropriate are
(1) comparative studies of related products and (2) texts that discuss various features, aspects, or attributes.3
4.1.4 Viewpoints and perspectives
Much work on analyzing sentiment and opinions in politically-oriented text focuses on general attitudes
expressed through texts that are not necessarily targeted at a particular issue or narrow subject. For instance,
Grefenstette et al. [112] experimented with determining the political orientation of websites essentially by
classifying the concatenation of all the documents found on that site. We group this type of work under the
heading of “viewpoints and perspectives”, and include under this rubric work on classifying texts as liberal,
conservative, libertarian, etc. [218], placing texts along an ideological scale [178, 202], or representing
Israeli versus Palestinian viewpoints [186, 187].
Although binary or n-ary classification may be used, here, the classes typically correspond not to opin-
ions on a single, narrowly defined topic, but to a collection of bundled attitudes and beliefs. This could
potentially enable different approaches from polarity classification. On the other hand, if we treat the set of
documents as a meta-document, and the different issues being discussed as meta-features, then this problem
still shares some common ground with polarity classification or its multi-class, regression, and ranking vari-
ants. Indeed, some of the approaches explored in the literature for these two problems individually could
very well be adapted to work for either one of them.
The other point of departure from the polarity classification problem is that the labels being considered
are more about attitudes that do not naturally correspond with degree of positivity. While assigning simple
labels remains a classification problem, if we move farther away and aim at serving more expressive and
open-ended opinions to the user, we need to solve extraction problems. For instance, one may be interested in
obtaining descriptions of opinions of a greater complexity than simple labels drawn from a very small set, i.e.
3When the context is clear, we often use the term “feature” to refer to “feature, aspect, or attribute” in this survey.
19
one might be seeking something more like “achieving world peace is difficult” than like “mildly positive”.
In fact, much of the prior work on perspectives and viewpoints seeks to extract more perspective-related
information (e.g., opinion holders). The motivation was to enable multi-perspective question answering,
where the user could ask questions such as “what is Miss America’s perspective on world peace?”, rather
than a fact-based question (e.g., “who is the new Miss America?”). Naturally, such work is often framed in
the context of extraction problems, the particular characteristics of which are covered in Section 4.9.
4.1.5 Other non-factual information in text
Researchers have considered various affect types, such as the six “universal” emotions [86]: anger, disgust,
fear, happiness, sadness, and surprise [9, 192, 286]. An interesting application is in human-computer inter-
action: if a system determines that a user is upset or annoyed, for instance, it could switch to a different
mode of interaction [188].
Other related areas of research include computational approaches for humor recognition and generation
[210]. Many interesting affectual aspects of text like “happiness” or “mood” are also being explored in the
context of informal text resources such as weblogs [224]. Potential applications include monitoring levels
of hateful or violent rhetoric, perhaps in multilingual settings [1].
In addition to classification based on affect and emotion, another related area of research that addresses
non-topic-based categorization is that of determining the genre of texts [97, 98, 150, 153, 182, 278]. Since
subjective genres, such as “editorial”, are often one of the possible categories, such work can be viewed as
closely related to subjectivity detection. Indeed, this relation has been observed in work focused on learning
subjective language [317].
There has also been research that concentrates on classifying documents according to their source or
source style, with statistically-detected stylistic variation [38] serving as an important cue. Authorship iden-
tification is perhaps the most salient example — Mosteller and Wallace’s [216] classic Bayesian study of
the authorship of the Federalist Papers is one well-known instance. Argamon-Engelson et al. [18] consider
the related problem of identifying not the particular author of a text, but its publisher (e.g. the New York
Times vs. The Daily News); the work of Kessler et al. [153] on determining a document’s “brow” (e.g., high-
brow vs. “popular”, or low-brow) has similar goals. Several recent workshops have been dedicated to style
analysis in text [15, 16, 17]. Determining stylistic characteristics can be useful in multi-faceted search [10].
Another problem that has been considered in intelligence and security settings is the detection of decep-
tive language [46, 117, 331].
4.2 Features
Converting a piece of text into a feature vector or other representation that makes its most salient and
important features available is an important part of data-driven approaches to text processing. There is an
extensive body of work that addresses feature selection for machine learning approaches in general, as well
as for learning approaches tailored to the specific problems of classic text categorization and information
extraction [101, 264]. A comprehensive discussion of such work is beyond the scope of this survey. In this
section, we focus on findings in feature engineering that are specific to sentiment analysis.
20
4.2.1 Term presence vs. frequency
It is traditional in information retrieval to represent a piece of text as a feature vector wherein the entries
correspond to individual terms. One influential finding in the sentiment-analysis area is as follows. Term
frequencies have traditionally been important in standard IR, as the popularity of tf-idf weighting shows;
but in contrast, Pang et al. [235] obtained better performance using presence rather than frequency. That
is, binary-valued feature vectors in which the entries merely indicate whether a term occurs (value 1) or
not (value 0) formed a more effective basis for review polarity classification than did real-valued feature
vectors in which entry values increase with the occurrence frequency of the corresponding term. This finding
may be indicative of an interesting difference between typical topic-based text categorization and polarity
classification: While a topic is more likely to be emphasized by frequent occurrences of certain keywords,
overall sentiment may not usually be highlighted through repeated use of the same terms. (We discussed this
point previously in Section 3.2 on factors that make opinion mining difficult.)
On a related note, hapax legomena, or words that appear a single time in a given corpus, have been found
to be high-precision indicators of subjectivity [317]. Yang et al. [323] look at rare terms that aren’t listed in
a pre-existing dictionary, on the premise that novel versions of words, such as “bugfested”, might correlate
with emphasis and hence subjectivity in blogs.
4.2.2 Term-based features beyond term unigrams
Position information finds its way into features from time to time. The position of a token within a textual
unit (e.g., in the middle vs. near the end of a document) can potentially have important effects on how much
that token affects the overall sentiment or subjectivity status of the enclosing textual unit. Thus, position
information is sometimes encoded into the feature vectors that are employed [158, 235].
Whether higher-order n-grams are useful features appears to be a matter of some debate. For example,
Pang et al. [235] report that unigrams outperform bigrams when classifying movie reviews by sentiment
polarity, but Dave et al. [69] find that in some settings, bigrams and trigrams yield better product-review
polarity classification.
Riloff et al. [255] explore the use of a subsumption hierarchy to formally define different types of lexical
features and the relationships between them in order to identify useful complex features for opinion analysis.
Airoldi et al. [5] apply a Markov Blanket Classifier to this problem together with a meta-heuristic search
strategy called Tabu search to arrive at a dependency structure encoding a parsimonious vocabulary for the
positive and negative polarity classes.
The “contrastive distance” between terms — an example of a high-contrast pair of words in terms of the
implicit evaluation polarity they express is “delicious” and “dirty” — was used as an automatically computed
feature by Snyder and Barzilay [273] as part of a rating-inference system.
4.2.3 Parts of speech
Part-of-speech (POS) information is commonly exploited in sentiment analysis and opinion mining. One
simple reason holds for general textual analysis, not just opinion mining: part-of-speech tagging can be
considered to be a crude form of word sense disambiguation [319].
Adjectives have been employed as features by a number of researchers [217, 304]. One of the earliest
proposals for the data-driven prediction of the semantic orientation of words was developed for adjectives
[119]. Subsequent work on subjectivity detection revealed a high correlation between the presence of adjec-
21
tives and sentence subjectivity [120]. This finding has often been taken as evidence that (certain) adjectives
are good indicators of sentiment, and sometimes has been used to guide feature selection for sentiment
classification, in that a number of approaches focus on the presence or polarity of adjectives when trying
to decide the subjectivity or polarity status of textual units, especially in the unsupervised setting. Rather
than focusing on isolated adjectives, Turney [299] proposed to detect document sentiment based on selected
phrases, where the phrases are chosen via a number of pre-specified part-of-speech patterns, most including
an adjective or an adverb.
The fact that adjectives are good predictors of a sentence being subjective does not, however, imply that
other parts of speech do not contribute to expressions of opinion or sentiment. In fact, in a study by Pang
et al. [235] on movie-review polarity classification, using only adjectives as features was found to perform
much worse than using the same number of most frequent unigrams. The researchers point out that nouns
(e.g., “gem”) and verbs (e.g., “love”) can be strong indicators for sentiment. Riloff et al. [258] specifically
studied extraction of subjective nouns (e.g., “concern”, “hope”) via bootstrapping. There have been several
targeted comparisons of the effectiveness of adjectives, verbs, and adverbs, where further subcategorization
often plays a role [34, 221, 317].
4.2.4 Syntax
There have also been attempts at incorporating syntactic relations within feature sets. Such deeper linguistic
analysis seems particularly relevant with short pieces of text. For instance, Kudo and Matsumoto [173] report
that for two sentence-level classification tasks, sentiment polarity classification and modality identification
(“opinion”, “assertion” or “description”), a subtree-based boosting algorithm using dependency-tree-based
features outperformed the bag-of-words baseline (although there were no significant differences with re-
spect to using n-gram-based features). Nonetheless, the use of higher-order n-grams and dependency or
constituent-based features has also been considered for document-level classification; Dave et al. [69] on the
one hand and Gamon [103], Matsumoto et al. [204], and Ng et al. [222] on the other hand come to opposite
conclusions regarding the effectiveness of dependency information. Parsing the text can also serve as a basis
for modeling valence shifters such as negation, intensifiers, and diminishers [152]. Collocations and more
complex syntactic patterns have also been found to be useful for subjectivity detection [256, 317].
4.2.5 Negation
Handling negation can be an important concern in opinion- and sentiment-related analysis. While the bag-
of-words representations of “I like this book” and “I don’t like this book” are considered to be very similar
by most commonly-used similarity measures, the only differing token, the negation term, forces the two
sentences into opposite classes. There does not really exist a parallel situation in classic IR where a single
negation term can play such an instrumental role in classification (except in cases like “this document is
about cars” vs. “this document is not about cars”).
It is possible to deal with negations indirectly as a second-order feature of a text segment, that is, where
an initial representation, such as a feature vector, essentially ignores negation, but that representation is then
converted into a different representation that is negation-aware. Alternatively, as was done in previous work,
negation can be encoded directly into the definitions of the initial features. For example, Das and Chen [66]
propose attaching “NOT” to words occurring close to negation terms such as “no” or “don’t”, so that in the
sentence “I don’t like deadlines”, the token “like” is converted into the new token “like-NOT”.
22
However, not all appearances of explicit negation terms reverse the polarity of the enclosing sentence.
For instance, it is incorrect to attach “NOT” to “best” in “No wonder this is considered one of the best”. Na
et al. [220] attempt to model negation more accurately. They look for specific part-of-speech tag patterns
(where these patterns differ for different negation words), and tag the complete phrase as a negation phrase.
For their dataset of electronics reviews, they observe about 3% improvement in accuracy resulting from
their modeling of negations. Further improvement probably needs deeper (syntactic) analysis of the sentence
[152].
Another difficulty with modeling negation is that negation can often be expressed in rather subtle ways.
Sarcasm and irony can be quite difficult to detect, but even in the absence of such sophisticated rhetorical
devices, we still see examples such as “[it] avoids all clichés and predictability found in Hollywood movies”
(internet review by “Margie24”) — the word “avoid” here is an arguably unexpected “polarity reverser”.
Wilson et al. [320] discuss other complex negation effects.
4.2.6 Topic-oriented features
Interactions between topic and sentiment play an important role in opinion mining. For example, in a hy-
pothetical article on Wal-mart, the sentences “Wal-mart reports that profits rose” and “Target reports that
profits rose” could indicate completely different types of news (good vs. bad) regarding the subject of the
document, Wal-mart [116]. To some extent, topic information can be incorporated into features.
Mullen and Collier [217] examine the effectiveness of various features based on topic (e.g., they take
into account whether a phrase follows a reference to the topic under discussion) under the experimental
condition that topic references are manually tagged. Thus, for example, in a review of a particular work of
art or music, references to the item receive a “THIS WORK” tag.
For the analysis of predictive opinions (e.g., whether a message M with respect to party P predicts P to
win), Kim and Hovy [160] propose to employ feature generalization. Specifically, for each sentence in M ,
each party name and candidate name is replaced by PARTY (i.e., P ) or OTHER (not P ). Patterns such as
“PARTY will win”, “go PARTY again”, and “OTHER will win” are then extracted as n-gram features. This
scheme outperforms using simple n-gram features by about 10% in accuracy when classifying which party
a given message predicts to win.
Topic-sentiment interaction has also been modeled through parse tree features, especially in opinion
extraction tasks. Relationships between candidate opinion phrases and the given subject in a dependency
tree can be useful in such settings [244].
Part Two: Approaches
The approaches we will now discuss all share the common theme of mapping a given piece of text, such as
a document, paragraph, or sentence, to a label drawn from a pre-specified finite set or to a real number. 4 As
discussed in Section 4.1, opinion-oriented classification can range from sentiment-polarity categorization
in reviews to determining the strength of opinions in news articles to identifying perspectives in political
debates to analyzing mood in blogs. Part of what is particularly interesting about these problems is the new
challenges and opportunities that they present to us. In the remainder of this chapter, we examine different
4However, unlike classification and regression, ranking doesn’t require such a mapping for each individual document.
23
solutions proposed in the literature to these problems, loosely organized around different aspects of machine
learning approaches. Although these aspects may seem to be general themes underlying most machine learn-
ing problems, we attempt to highlight what is unique for sentiment analysis and opinion mining tasks. For
instance, some unsupervised learning approaches follow a sentiment-specific paradigm for how labels for
words and phrases are obtained. Also, supervised and semi-supervised learning approaches for opinion min-
ing and sentiment analysis differ from standard approaches to classification tasks in part due to the different
features involved; but we also see a great variety of attempts at modeling various kinds of relationships
between items, classes, or sub-document units. Some of these relationships are unique to our tasks; some
become more imperative to model due to the subtleties of the problems we address.
The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. Section 4.3 covers the impact that the increased avail-
ability of labeled data has had, including the rise of supervised learning. Section 4.4 considers issues sur-
rounding topic and domain dependencies. Section 4.5 describes unsupervised approaches. We next consider
incorporating relationships between various types of entities (Section 4.6). This is followed by a section on
incorporating discourse structure (4.7). Section 4.8 is concerned with the use of language models. Finally,
Section 4.9 investigates certain issues in extraction that are somewhat particular to it, and thus are not other-
wise discussed in the sections that precede it. One such issue is the identification of features and expressions
of opinions in reviews. Another set of issues arise when opinion-holder identification needs to be applied.
4.3 The impact of labeled data
Work up to the early 1990s on sentiment-related tasks, such as determination of point of view and
other types of complex recognition problems, generally assumed the existence of sub-systems for some-
times rather sophisticated NLP tasks, ranging from parsing to the resolution of pragmatic ambiguities
[121, 263, 311, 312, 314]. Given the state of the art of NLP at the time and, just as importantly, the lack of
sufficient amounts of appropriate labeled data, the research described in these early papers necessarily con-
sidered only proposals for systems or prototype systems without large-scale empirical evaluation; typically,
no learning component was involved (an interesting exception is Wiebe and Bruce [308], who proposed but
did not evaluate the use of decomposable graphical models). Operational systems were focused on simpler
classification tasks, relatively speaking (e.g., categorization according to affect), and relied instead on rel-
atively shallow analysis based on manually constructed discriminant-word lexicons [133, 297], since with
such a lexicon in hand, one can classify a text unit by considering which indicator terms or phrases from the
lexicon appear in the given text.
The rise of the widespread availablity to researchers of organized collections of opinionated documents
(two examples: financial-news discussion boards and review aggregation sites such as Epinions) and of other
corpora of more general texts (e.g., newswire) and of other resources (e.g., WordNet) was a major contributor
to a large shift in direction towards data-driven approaches. To begin with, the availability of the raw texts
themselves made it possible to learn opinion-relevant lexicons in an unsupervised fashion, as is discussed
in more detail in Section 4.5.1, rather than create them manually. But the increase in the amount of labeled
sentiment-relevant data, in particular — where the labels are derived either through explicit researcher-
initiated manual annotation efforts or by other means (see Section 7.1.1) — was a major contributing factor
to activity in both supervised and unsupervised learning. In the unsupervised case, described in Section
4.5, it facilitated research by making it possible to evaluate proposed algorithms in a large-scale fashion.
Unsupervised (and supervised) learning also benefitted from the improvements to sub-component systems
for tagging, parsing, and so on that occurred due to the application of data-driven techniques in those areas.
24
And, of course, the importance to supervised learning of having access to labeled data is paramount.
One very active line of work can be roughly glossed as the application of standard text-categorization
algorithms, surveyed by Sebastiani [264], to opinion-oriented classification problems. For example, Pang
et al. [235] compare Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines, and maximum-entropy-based classification on
the sentiment-polarity classification problem for movie reviews. More extensive comparisons of the perfor-
mance of standard machine learning techniques with other types of features or feature selection schemes
have been engaged in in later work [5, 69, 103, 204, 217]; see Section 4.2 for more detail. We note that there
has been some research that explicitly considers regression or ordinal-regression formulations of opinion-
mining problems [109, 201, 233, 321]: example questions include, “how positive is this text?” and “how
strongly held is this opinion?”.
Another role that labeled data can play is in lexicon induction, although, as detailed in Section 4.5.1,
the use of the unsupervised paradigm is more common. Morinaga et al. [215] and Bethard et al. [37] create
an opinion-indicator lexicon by looking for terms that tend to be associated more highly with subjective-
genre newswire, such as editorials, than with objective-genre newswire. Das and Chen [66, 67] start with
a manually created lexicon specific to the finance domain (example terms: “bull”, “bear”), but then assign
discrimination weights to the items in the lexicon based on their cooccurrence with positively-labeled vs.
negatively-labeled documents.
Other topics related to supervised learning are discussed in some of the more specific sections that follow.
4.4 Domain adaptation and topic-sentiment interaction
4.4.1 Domain considerations
The accuracy of sentiment classification can be influenced by the domain of the items to which it is applied
[21, 40, 88, 250, 299]. One reason is that the same phrase can indicate different sentiment in different
domains: recall the Bob Bland example mentioned earlier, where “go read the book” most likely indicates
positive sentiment for book reviews, but negative sentiment for movie reviews; or consider Turney’s [299]
observation that “unpredictable” is a positive description for a movie plot but a negative description for a
car’s steering abilities. Difference in vocabularies across different domains also adds to the difficulty when
applying classifiers trained on labeled data in one domain to test data in another.
Several studies show concrete performance differences from domain to domain. In an experiment aux-
iliary to their main work, Dave et al. [69] apply a classifier trained on a pre-assembled dataset of reviews
of a certain type to product reviews of a different type. But they do not investigate the effect of training-test
mis-match in detail. Engström [88] studies how the accuracy of sentiment classification can be influenced
by topic. Read [250] finds standard machine learning techniques for opinion analysis to be both domain-
dependent (with domains ranging from movie reviews to newswire articles) and temporally-dependent
(based on datasets spanning different ranges of time periods but written at least one year apart). Owsley
et al. [229] also show the importance of building a domain-specific classifier.
Aue and Gamon [21] explore different approaches to customizing a sentiment classification system to a
new target domain in the absence of large amounts of labeled data. The different types of data they consider
range from lengthy movie reviews to short, phrase-level user feedback from web surveys. Due to significant
differences in these domains along several dimensions, simply applying the classifier learned on data from
one domain barely outperforms the baseline for another domain. In fact, with 100 or 200 labeled items in
the target domain, an EM algorithm that utilizes in-domain unlabeled data and ignores out-of-domain data
altogether outperforms the method based exclusively on (both in- and out-of-domain) labeled data.
25
Yang et al. [322] take the following simple approach to domain transfer: they find features that are good
subjectivity indicators in both of two different domains (in their case, movie reviews versus product reviews),
and consider these features to be good domain-independent features.
Blitzer et al. [40] explicitly address the domain transfer problem for sentiment polarity classification
by extending the structural correspondence learning algorithm (SCL) [11], achieving an average of 46%
improvement over a supervised baseline for sentiment polarity classification of 5 different types of product
reviews mined from Amazon.com. The success of SCL depends on the choice of pivot features in both
domains, based on which the algorithm learns a projection matrix that maps features in the target domain
into the feature space of the source domain. Unlike previous work that applied SCL for tagging, where
frequent words in both domains happened to be good predictors for the target labels (part-of-speech tags),
and were therefore good candidates for pivots, here the pivots are chosen from those with highest mutual
information with the source label. The projection is able to capture correspondences (in terms of expressed
sentiment polarity) between “predictable” for book reviews and “poorly designed” for kitchen appliance
reviews. Furthermore, they also show that a measure of domain similarity can correlate well with the ease
of adaptation from one domain to another, thereby enabling better scheduling of annotation efforts.
Cross-lingual adaptation Much of the literature on sentiment analysis has focused on text written in
English. As a result, most of the resources developed, such as lexica with sentiment labels, are in English.
Adapting such resources to other languages is related to domain adaptation: the former aims at adapting
from the source language to the target language in order to utilize existing resources in the source language;
whereas the latter seeks to adapt from one domain to another in order to utilize the labeled data available
in the source domain. Not surprisingly, we observe parallel techniques: instead of projecting unseen tokens
from the new domain into the old one via co-occurrence information in the corpus [40], expressions in the
new language can be aligned with expressions in the language with existing resources. For instance, one
can determine cross-lingual projections through bilingual dictionaries [209], or parallel corpora [159, 209].
Alternatively, one can simply apply machine translation as a sentiment-analysis pre-processing step [32]
4.4.2 Topic (and sub-topic or feature) considerations
Even when one is handling documents in the same domain, there is still an important and related source
of variation: document topic. It is true that sometimes the topic is pre-determined, such as in the case of
free-form responses to survey questions. However, in many sentiment analysis applications, topic is another
important consideration; for instance, one may be searching the blogosphere just for opinionated comments
about Cornell University.
One approach to integrating sentiment and topic when one is looking for opinionated documents on a
particular user-specified topic is to simply first perform one analysis pass, say for topic, and then analyze the
results with respect to sentiment [134]. (See Sebastiani [264] for a survey of machine learning approaches to
topic-based text categorization.) Such a two-pass approach was taken by a number of systems at the TREC
Blog track in 2006, according to Ounis et al. [227], and others [234]. Alternatively, one may jointly model
topic and sentiment simultaneously [84, 206], or treat one as a prior for the other [85].
But even in the case where one is working with documents known to be on-topic, not all the sentences
within these documents need be on-topic. Hurst and Nigam [134, 225] propose a two-pass process similar
to that mentioned above, where each sentence in the document is first labeled as on-topic or off-topic,
and sentiment analysis is conducted only for those that are found to be on-topic. Their work relies on a
26
collocation assumption that if a sentence is found to be topical and to exhibit a sentiment polarity, then the
polarity is expressed with respect to the topic in question. This assumption is also used by Nasukawa and Yi
[221] and Gamon [103].
A related issue is that it is also possible for a document to contain multiple topics. For instance, a review
can be a comparison of two products. Or, even when a single item is discussed in a document, one can
consider features or aspects of the product to represent multiple (sub-)topics. If all but the main topic can
be disregarded, then one possibility is as follows: simply consider the overall sentiment detected within the
document — regardless of the fact that it may be formed from a mixture of opinions on different topics —
to be associated with the primary topic, leaving the sentiment towards other topics undetermined (indeed,
these other topics may never be identified). But it is more common to try to identify the topics and then
determine the opinions regarding each of these topics separately. In some work, the important topics are
pre-defined, making this task easier [324]. In other work in extraction, this is not the case; the problem of
the identification of product features is addressed in Section 4.9, and Section 4.6.3 discusses techniques that
incorporate relationships between different features.
4.5 Unsupervised approaches
4.5.1 Unsupervised lexicon induction
Quite a number of unsupervised learning approaches take the tack of first creating a sentiment lexicon in an
unsupervised manner, and then determining the degree of positivity (or subjectivity) of a text unit via some
function based on the positive and negative (or simply subjective) indicators, as determined by the lexicon,
within it. Early examples of such an approach include Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe [120], Turney [299] and
Yu and Hatzivassiloglou [327]. Some interesting variants of this general technique are to use the polarity of
the previous sentence as a tie-breaker when the scoring function does not indicate a definitive classification
of a given sentence [131], or to incorporate information drawn from some labeled data as well [33].
A crucial component to applying this type of technique is, of course, the creation of the lexicon via
the unsupervised labeling of words or phrases with their sentiment polarity (also referred to as semantic
orientation in the literature) or subjectivity status [12, 45, 89, 90, 91, 92, 119, 131, 143, 146, 258, 287, 289,
290, 291, 300, 304, 306].
In early work, Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown [119] present an approach based on linguistic heuristics.5
Their technique is built on the fact that in the case of polarity classification, the two classes of interest
represent opposites, and we can utilize “opposition constraints” to help make labeling decisions. Specifically,
constraints between pairs of adjectives are induced from a large corpus by looking at whether the two words
are linked by conjunctions such as “but” (evidence for opposing orientations: “elegant but over-priced”) or
“and” (evidence for the same orientation: “clever and informative”). The task is then cast as a clustering or
binary-partitioning problem where the inferred constraints are to be obeyed.
Once the clustering has been completed, the labels of “positive orientation” and “negative orientation”
need to be assigned; rather than use external information to make this decision, Hatzivassiloglou and McKe-
own [119] simply give the “positive orientation” label to the class whose members have the highest average
frequency. But in other work, seed words for which the polarity is already known are assumed to be supplied,
in which case labels can be determined by propagating the labels of the seed words to terms that co-occur
with them in general text or in dictionary glosses, or to synonyms, words that co-occur with them in other
5For the purposes of the current discussion, we ignore the supervised aspects of their work.
27
WordNet-defined relations, or other related words (and, along the same lines, opposite labels can be given
based on similar information) [12, 20, 89, 90, 131, 146, 148, 155, 289, 299, 300]. The joint use of mutual
information and cooccurrence in a general corpus with a small set of seed words, a technique employed
by a number of researchers, was suggested by Turney [299]; his idea was to essentially compare whether
a phrase has a greater tendency to co-occur within certain context windows with the word “poor” or with
the word “excellent”, taking care to account for the frequencies with which “poor” and “excellent” occur,
where the data on which such computations are to be made come from the results of particular types of Web
search-engine queries.
Much of the work cited above focuses on identifying the prior polarity of terms or phrases, to use the
terminology of Wilson et al. [320], or what we might by extension call terms’ and phrases’ prior subjectivity
status, meaning the semantic orientation that these items might be said to generally bear when taken out of
context. Such prior information is meant, of course, to serve towards further identifying contextual polarity
or subjectivity [242, 320].
Lexicons for generation It is worth noting that Higashinaka et al. [122] focus on a lexicon-induction task
that facilitates natural language generation. They consider the problem of learning a dictionary that maps
semantic representations to verbalizations, where the data comes from reviews. Although reviews aren’t
explicitly marked up with respect to their semantics, they do contain explicit rating and aspect indicators.
For example, from such data, they learn that one way to express the concept “atmosphere rating:5” is “nice
and comfortable”.
4.5.2 Other unsupervised approaches
Bootstrapping is another approach. The idea is to use the output of an available initial classifier to create la-
beled data, to which a supervised learning algorithm may be applied. Riloff and Wiebe [256] use this method
in conjunction with an initial high-precision classifier to learn extraction patterns for subjective expressions.
(An interesting, if simple, pattern discovered: the noun “fact”, as in “The fact is ...”, exhibits high correlation
with subjectivity.) Kaji and Kitsuregawa [142] use a similar method to automatically construct a corpus of
HTML documents with polarity labels. Similar work involving self-training is described in Wiebe and Riloff
[315] and Riloff et al. [258].
Pang and Lee [234] experiment with a different type of unsupervised approach. The problem they con-
sider is to rank search results for review-seeking queries so that documents that contain evaluative text are
placed ahead of those that do not. They propose a simple “blank slate” method based on the rarity of words
within the search results that are retrieved (as opposed to within a training corpus). The intuition is that
words that appear frequently within the set of documents returned for a narrow topic (the search set) are
more likely to describe objective information, since objective information should tend to be repeated within
the search set; in contrast, it would seem that people’s opinions and how they express them may differ.
Counterintuitively, though, Pang and Lee find that when the vocabulary to be considered is restricted to the
most frequent words in the search set (as a noise-reduction measure), the subjective documents tend to be
those that contain a higher percentage of words that are less rare, perhaps due to the fact that most reviews
cover the main features or aspects of the object being reviewed. (This echoes our previous observation that
understanding the objective information in a document can be critical for understanding the opinions and
sentiment it expresses.) The performance of this simple method is on par with that of a method based on a
state-of-the-art subjectivity detection system, OpinionFinder [256, 315].
28
A comparison of supervised and unsupervised methods can be found in Chaovalit and Zhou [55].
4.6 Classification based on relationship information
4.6.1 Relationships between sentences and between documents
One interesting characteristic of document-level sentiment analysis is the fact that a document can consist of
sub-document units (paragraphs or sentences) with different, sometimes opposing labels, where the overall
sentiment label for the document is a function of the set or sequence of labels at the sub-document level. As
an alternative to treating a document as a bag of features, then, there have been various attempts to model
the structure of a document via analysis of sub-document units, and to explicitly utilize the relationships
between these units, in order to achieve a more accurate global labeling. Modeling the relationships between
these sub-document units may lead to better sub-document labeling as well.
An opinionated piece of text can often consist of evaluative portions (those that contribute to the overall
sentiment of the document, e.g., “this is a great movie”) and non-evaluative portions (e.g., “the Powerpuff
girls learned that with great power comes great responsibility”). The overlap between the vocabulary used
for evaluative portions and non-evaluative portions makes it particularly important to model the context in
which these text segments occur. Pang and Lee [232] propose a two-step procedure for polarity classification
for movie reviews, wherein they first detect the objective portions of a document (e.g., plot descriptions) and
then apply polarity classification to the remainder of the document after the removal of these presumably
uninformative portions. Importantly, instead of making the subjective-objective decision for each sentence
individually, they postulate that there might be a certain degree of continuity in subjectivity labels (an author
usually does not switch too frequently between being subjective and being objective), and incorporate this
intuition by assigning preferences for pairs of nearby sentences to receive similar labels. All the sentences
in the document are then labeled as being either subjective or objective through a collective classification
process, where this process employs a reformulation of the task as one of finding a minimum s-t cut in
the appropriate graph [165]. Two key properties of this approach are (1) it affords the finding of an exact
solution to the underlying optimization problem via an algorithm that is efficient both in theory and in
practice, and (2) it makes it easy to integrate a wide variety of knowledge sources both about individual
preferences that items may have for one or the other class and about the pair-wise preferences that items
may have for being placed in the same class regardless of which particular class that is. Follow-up work has
used alternate techniques to determine edge weights within a minimum-cut framework for various types of
sentiment-related binary classification problems at the document level [3, 27, 111, 295]. (The more general
rating-inference problem can also, in special cases, be solved using a minimum-cut formulation [233].)
Others have considered more sophisticated graph-based techniques [109].
4.6.2 Relationships between discourse participants
An interesting setting for opinion mining is when the texts to be analyzed form part of a running discussion,
such as in the case of individual turns in political debates, posts to online discussion boards, and comments
on blog posts. One fascinating aspect of this kind of setting is the rich information source that references
between such texts represent, since such information can be exploited for better collective labeling of the
set of documents. Utilizing such relationships can be particularly helpful because many documents in the
settings we have described can be quite terse (or complicated), and hence difficult to classify on their own,
but we can easily categorize a difficult document if we find within it indications of agreement with a clearly,
29
say, positive text.
Based on manual examination of 100 responses in newsgroups devoted to three distinct controversial
topics (abortion, gun control and immigration), Agrawal et al. [4] observe that the relationship between
two individuals in the “responded-to” network is more likely to be antagonistic — overall, 74% of the
responses examined were found to be antagonistic, whereas only 7% were found to be reinforcing. By then
assuming that “respond-to” links imply disagreement, they effectively classify users into opposite camps via
graph partitioning, outperforming methods that depend solely on the textual information within a particular
document.
Similarly, Mullen and Malouf [219] examine “quoting” behavior among users of the politics.com discus-
sion site — a user can refer to another post by quoting part of it or by addressing the other user by name or
user ID — who have been classified as either liberal or conservative. The researchers find that a significant
fraction of the posts of interest to them contain quoted material, and that, in contrast to inter-blog linking
patterns discussed in Adamic and Glance [2], where liberal and conservative blog sites were found to tend
to link to sites of similar political orientations, and in accordance with the Agrawal et al. [4] findings cited
above, politics.com posters tend to quote users at the opposite end of the political spectrum. To perform the
final political-orientation classification, users are clustered so that those who tend to quote the same entities
are placed in the same cluster. (Efron [83] similarly uses co-citation analysis for the same problem.)
Rather than assume that quoting always indicates agreement or disagreement regardless of the con-
text, Thomas et al. [295] build an agreement detector for the task of analyzing transcripts of congressional
floor-debates, where the classifier categorizes certain explicit references to other speakers as representing
agreement (e.g., “I heartily support Mr. Smith’s views!”) or disagreement. They then encode evidence of a
high likelihood of agreement between two speakers as a relationship constraint between the utterances made
by the speakers, and collectively classify the individual speeches as to whether they support or oppose the
legislation under discussion, using a minimum-cut formulation of the classification problem, as described
above. Follow-up work attempts to make more refined use of disagreement information [27].
4.6.3 Relationships between product features
Popescu and Etzioni [244] treat the labeling of opinion words regarding product features as a collective
labeling process. They propose an iterative algorithm wherein the polarity assignments for individual words
are collectively adjusted through a relaxation-labeling process. Starting from “global” word labels computed
over a large text collection that reflect the sentiment orientation for each particular word in general settings,
Popescu and Etzioni gradually re-define the label from one that is generic to one that is specific to a review
corpus to one that is specific to a given product feature to, finally, one that is specific to the particular context
in which the word occurs. They make sure to respect sentence-level local constraints that opinions connected
by connectives such as “but” or “and” should receive opposite or the same polarities.
The idea of utilizing discourse information to help with the inference of relationships between product
attributes can also be found in the work of Snyder and Barzilay [273], who utilize agreement information
in a task where one must predict ratings for multiple aspects of the same item (e.g., food and ambiance for
a restaurant). Their approach is to construct a linear classifier to predict whether all aspects of a product
are given the same rating, and combine this prediction with that of individual-aspect classifiers so as to
minimize a certain loss function (which they term the “grief”). Interestingly, Snyder and Barzilay [273]
give an example where a collection of independent aspect-rating predictors cannot assign a correct set of
aspect ratings, but augmentation with their agreement classification allows perfect rating assignment; in
30
their specific example, the agreement classifier is able to use the presence of the phrase “but not” to predict
a contrasting rating between two aspects. An important observation that Snyder and Barzilay [273] make
about their formulation is that having the piece of information that all aspect ratings agree cuts down the
space of possible rating tuples to a far greater degree than having the information that not all the aspect
ratings are the same.
Note that the considerations discussed here relate to the topic-specific nature of opinions that we dis-
cussed in the context of domain adaptation in Section 4.4.
4.6.4 Relationships between classes
Regression formulations (where we include ordinal regression under this umbrella term) are quite well-
suited to the rating reference problem of predicting the degree of positivity in opinionated documents such
as product reviews, and to similar problems such as determining the strength with which an opinion is held.
In a sense, regression implicitly models similarity relationships between classes that correspond to points on
a scale, such as the number of “stars” given by a reviewer. In contrast, standard multi-class categorization
focuses on capturing the distinct features present in each class, and ignores the fact that “5 stars” is much
more like “4 stars” than “2 stars”. On a movie review dataset, Pang and Lee [233] observe that a one-
vs-all multi-class categorization scheme can outperform regression for a three-class classification problem
(positive, neutral, and negative), perhaps due to each class exhibiting a sufficiently distinct vocabulary, but
for more fine-grained classification, regression emerges as the better of the two.
Furthermore, while regression-based models implicitly encode the intuition that similar items should
receive similar labels, Pang and Lee [233] formulate rating inference as a metric labeling problem [164],
so that a natural notion of distance between classes (“2 stars” and “3 stars” are more similar to each other
than “1 star” and “4 stars” are) is captured explicitly. More specifically, an optimal labeling is computed that
balances the output of a classifier that considers items in isolation with the importance of assigning similar
labels to similar items.
Koppel and Schler [167] consider a similar version of this problem, but where one of the classes, corre-
sponding to “objective”, does not lie on the positive-to-negative continuum. Goldberg and Zhu [109] present
a graph-based algorithm that addresses the rating inference problem in the semi-supervised learning setting,
where a closed-form solution to the underlying optimization problem is found through computation on a ma-
trix induced by a graph representing inter-document similarity relationships, and the loss function encodes
the desire for similar items to receive similar labels. Mao and Lebanon [201] (Mao and Lebanon [200] is
a shorter version) propose to use isotonic conditional random fields to capture the ordinal labels of local
(sentence-level) sentiments. Given words that are strongly associated with positive and negative sentiment,
they formulate constraints on the parameters to reflect the intuition that adding a positive (negative) word
should affect the local sentiment label positively (negatively).
Wilson et al. [321] treat intensity classification (e.g., classifying an opinion according to its strength) as
an ordinal regression task.
McDonald et al. [205] leverage relationships between labels assigned at different classification stages,
such as the word level or sentence level, finding that a “fine-to-coarse” categorization procedure is an effec-
tive strategy.
31
4.7 Incorporating discourse structure
Compared to the case for traditional topic-based information access tasks, discourse structure (e.g., twists
and turns in documents) tends to have more effect on overall sentiment labels. For instance, Pang et al. [235]
observe that some form of discourse structure modeling can help extract the correct label in the following
example:
I hate the Spice Girls. ... [3 things the author hates about them] ... Why I saw this movie is
a really, really, really long story, but I did, and one would think I’d despise every minute of
it. But... Okay, I’m really ashamed of it, but I enjoyed it. I mean, I admit it’s a really awful
movie, ... [they] act wacky as hell...the ninth floor of hell...a cheap [beep] movie...The plot
is such a mess that it’s terrible. But I loved it.
In spite of the predominant number of negative sentences, the overall sentiment towards the movie under
discussion is positive, largely due to the order in which these sentences are presented. Needless to say, such
information is lost in a bag-of-words representation.
Early work attempts to partially address this problem via incorporating location information in the fea-
ture set [235]. Specifically, the position at which a token appears can be appended to the token itself to form
position-tagged features, so that the same unigram appearing in, say, the first quarter and the last quarter of
the document are treated as two different features; but the performance of this simple scheme does not differ
greatly from that which results from using unigrams alone.
On a related note, it has been observed that position matters in the context of summarizing sentiment
in a document. In particular, in contrast to topic-based text summarization, where the beginnings of articles
usually serve as strong baselines in terms of summarizing the objective information in them, the last n
sentences of a review have been shown to serve as a much better summary of the overall sentiment of the
document than the first n sentences, and to be almost as good as using the n (automatically-computed) most
subjective sentences, in terms of how accurately they represent the overall sentiment of the document [232].
Theories of lexical cohesion motivate the representation used by Devitt and Ahmad [73] for sentiment
polarity classification of financial news.
Another way of capturing discourse structure information in documents is to model the global sentiment
of a document as a trajectory of local sentiments. For example, Mao and Lebanon [200] propose using
sentiment flow as a sequential model to represent an opinionated document. More specifically, each sentence
in the document receives a local sentiment score from an isotonic-conditional-random-field-based sentence
level predictor. The sentiment flow is defined as a function h : [0, 1) 7→ O(the ordinal set), where the
interval [(t − 1)/n, t/n) is mapped to the label of the t-th sentence in a document with n sentences. The
flow is then smoothed out through convolution with a smoothing kernel. Finally, the distances between two
flows (e.g., Lp distance between the two smoothed, continuous functions) should reflect, to some degree,
the distances between global sentiments. On a small dataset, Mao and Lebanon observe that the sentiment
flow representation (especially when objective sentences are excluded) outperforms a plain bag of words
representation in predicting global sentiment with a nearest neighbor classifier.
4.8 Language models
The rise of the use of language models in information retrieval has been an interesting recent development
[65, 177, 179, 243]. They have been applied to various opinion-mining and sentiment-analysis tasks, and in
32
fact the subjectivity-extraction work of Pang and Lee [232] is a demo application for the heavily language-
modeling-oriented LingPipe system.6
One characteristic of language modeling approaches that differentiates them somewhat from other
classification-oriented data-driven techniques we have discussed so far is that language models are often
constructed using labeled data, but, given that they are mechanisms for assigning probabilities to text rather
than labels drawn from a finite set, they cannot, strictly speaking, be defined as either supervised or unsuper-
vised classifiers. On the other hand, there are various ways to convert their output to labels when necesary.
An example of work in the language-modeling vein is that of Eguchi and Lavrenko [84], who rank sen-
tences by both sentiment relevancy and topic relevancy, based on previous work on relevance language mod-
els [179]. They propose a generative model that jointly models sentiment words, topic words, and sentiment
polarity in a sentence as a triple. Lin and Hauptmann [186] consider the problem of examining whether two
collections of texts represent different perspectives. In their study, employing Reuters data, two examples
of different perspectives are the Palestinian viewpoint vs. the Israeli viewpoint in written text and Bush vs.
Kerry in presidential debates. They base their notion of difference in perspective upon the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between posterior distributions induced from document collection pairs, and discover that
the KL divergence between different aspects is an order of magnitude smaller than that between different
topics. This perhaps provides yet another reason that opinion-oriented classification has been found to be
more difficult than topic-based classification.
Research employing probabilistic latent semantic analysis (PLSA) [125] or latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) [39] can also be cast as language-modeling work [41, 194, 206]. The basic idea is to infer language
models that correspond to unobserved “factors” in the data, with the hope that the factors that are learned
represent topics or sentiment categories.
4.9 Special considerations for extraction
Opinion-oriented extraction Many applications, such as summarization or question answering, require
working with pieces of information that need to be pulled from one or more textual units. For example, a
multi-perspective question-answering (MPQA) system might need to respond to opinion-oriented questions
such as “Was the most recent presidential election in Zimbabwe regarded as a fair election?” [51]; the answer
may be encoded in a particular sentence of a particular document, or may need to be stitched together from
pieces of evidence found in multiple documents. Information extraction (IE) is precisely the field of natural
language processing devoted to this type of task [49]. Hence, it is not surprising that the application of
information-extraction techniques to opinion mining and sentiment analysis has been proposed [51, 79].
In this survey, we use the term opinion-oriented information extraction (opinion-oriented IE) to refer to
information extraction problems particular to sentiment analysis and opinion mining. (We sometimes shorten
the phrase to opinion extraction, which shouldn’t be construed narrowly as focusing on the extraction of
opinion expressions; for instance, determining product features is included under the umbrella of this term.)
Past research in this area has been dominated by work on two types of texts:
• Opinion-oriented information extraction from reviews has, as noted above, attracted a great deal
of interest in recent years. In fact, the term “opinion mining”, when construed in its narrow sense,
has often been used to describe work in this context. Reviews, while typically (but not always)
devoted to a single item, such as a product, service, or event, generally comment on multiple
6http://alias-i.com/lingpipe/demos/tutorial/sentiment/read-me.html
33
aspects, facets, or features of that item, and all such commentary may be important. Extracting
and analyzing opinions associated with each individual aspect can help provide more informative
summarizations or enable more fine-grained opinion-oriented retrieval.
• Other work has focused on newswire. Unlike reviews, a news article is relatively likely to contain
descriptions of opinions that do not belong to the article’s author; an example is a quotation from
a political figure. This property of journalistic text makes the identification of opinion holders
(also known as opinion sources) and the correct association of opinion holders with opinions
important tasks, whereas for reviews, all expressed opinions are typically those of the author,
so opinion-holder identification is a less salient problem. Thus, when newswire articles are the
focus, the emphasis has tended to be on identifying expressions of opinions, the agent expressing
each opinion, and/or the type and strength of each opinion. Early work in this direction first care-
fully developed and evaluated a low-level opinion annotation scheme [45, 284, 310, 313], which
facilitated the study of sub-tasks such as identifying opinion holders and analyzing opinions at
the phrase level [37, 42, 43, 51, 60, 61, 157, 321].
It is important to understand the similarities and differences between opinion-oriented IE and standard
fact-oriented IE. They share some sub-tasks in common, such as entity recognition; for example, as men-
tioned above, determination of opinion holders is an active line of research [37, 42, 61, 158]. What truly
sets the problem apart from standard or classic IE is the specific types of entities and relations that are
considered important. For instance, although identification of product features is in some sense a standard
entity recognition problem, an opinion extraction system would be mostly interested in features for which
associated opinions exist; similarly, an opinion holder is not just any named entity in a news article, but one
that expresses opinions. Examples of the types of relations particularly pertinent to opinion mining are those
centered around comparisons — consider, for example, the relations encoded by such sentences as “The new
model is more expensive than the old one” or “I prefer product A over product B” [139, 191, longer version
of the latter available as Jindal and Liu [138]] — or between agents and reported beliefs, as described in
Section 4.9.2. Note that the relations of interest can form a complex hierarchical structure, as in the case
where an opinion is attributed to one party by another, so that it is unclear whether the first party truly holds
the opinion in question [42].
It is also important to understand which aspects of opinion-oriented extraction are mentioned in this sec-
tion as opposed to the previous sections. As discussed earlier, many sub-problems of opinion extraction are
in fact classification problems for relatively small textual units. Examples include both determining whether
or not a text span is subjective and classifying a given text span already determined to be subjective by the
strength of the opinion expressed. Thus, many key techniques involved in building an opinion extraction
system are already discussed in previous sections of this chapter. In this section, we instead focus on the
“missing pieces”, describing approaches to problems that are somewhat special to extraction tasks in senti-
ment analysis. While these sub-tasks can be (and often are) cast as classification problems, they do not have
natural counterparts outside of the extraction context. Specifically, Section 4.9.1 is devoted to the identifi-
cation of features and expressions of opinions in reviews. Section 4.9.2 considers techniques that have been
employed when opinion-holder identification is an issue.
Finally, we make the following organizational note. One may often want to present the output of opinion
extraction in summarized form; conversely, some forms of sentiment summarization rely on the output of
opinion extraction. Opinion-oriented summarization is discussed in Chapter 5.
34
4.9.1 Identifying product features and opinions in reviews
In the context of review mining [131, 166, 215, 244, 324, 325], two important extraction-related sub-tasks
are
(1) the identification of product features, and
(2) extraction of opinions associated with these features.
While the key features or aspects are known in some cases, many systems start from problem (1).
As noted above, identification of product features is in some sense a standard information extraction task
with little to distinguish it from other non-sentiment-related problems. After all, the notion of the features
that a given product has seems fairly objective However, Hu and Liu [131] show that one can benefit from
light sentiment analysis even for this sub-task, as described shortly.
Existing work on identifying product features discussed in reviews (task (1)) often relies on the simple
linguistic heuristic that (explicit) features are usually expressed as nouns or noun phrases. This narrows
down the candidate words or phrases to be considered, but obviously not all nouns or noun phrases are
product features. Yi et al. [324] consider three increasingly strict heuristics to select from noun phrases
based on part-of-speech-tag patterns. Hu and Liu [131] follow the intuition that frequent nouns or noun
phrases are likely to be features. They identify frequent features through association mining, and then apply
heuristic-guided pruning aimed at removing (a) multi-word candidates in which the words do not appear
together in a certain order and (b) single-word candidates for which subsuming super-strings have been
collected (the idea is to concentrate on more specific concepts, so that, for example, “life” is discarded in
favor of “battery life”). These techniques by themselves outperform a general-purpose term-extraction and
-indexing system known as FASTR [135]. Furthermore — and here is the observation that is relevant to
sentiment — the F-measure can be further improved (although precision drops slightly) via the following
expansion procedure: adjectives appearing in the same sentence as frequent features are assumed to be
opinion words, and nouns and noun phrases co-occurring with these opinion words in other sentences are
taken to be infrequent features.
In contrast, Popescu and Etzioni [244] consider product features to be concepts forming certain rela-
tionships with the product (for example, for a scanner, its size is one of its properties, whereas its cover is
one of its parts) and seek to identify the features connected with the product name through corresponding
meronymy discriminators. Note that this approach, which does not involve sentiment analysis per se but
simply focuses more on the task of identifying different types of features, achieved better performance than
that yielded by the techniques of Hu and Liu [131].
There has also been work that focuses on extracting attribute-value pairs from textual product descrip-
tions, but not necessarily in the context of opinion mining. Of work in this vein, Ghani et al. [105] directly
compare against the method proposed by Hu and Liu [131].
To identify expressions of opinions associated with features (task (2)), a simple heuristic is to simply
extract adjectives that appear in the same sentence as the features [131]. Deeper analyses can make use
of parse information and manually or semi-automatically developed rules or sentiment-relevant lexicons
[215, 244].
4.9.2 Problems involving opinion holders
In the context of analysis of newswire and related genres, we need to identify text spans corresponding both
to opinion holders and to expressions of the opinions held by them.
35
As is true with other segmentation tasks, identifying opinion holders can be viewed simply as a sequence
labeling problem. Choi et al. [61] experiment with an approach that combines Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs) [176] and extraction patterns. A CRF model is trained on a certain collection of lexical, syntactic,
and semantic features. In particular, extraction patterns are learned to provide semantic tagging as part of
the semantic features. (CRFs have also been used to detect opinion expressions [43].)
Alternatively, given that the status of an opinion holder depends by definition on the expression of an
opinion, the identification of opinion holders can benefit from, or perhaps even require, accounting for
opinion expressions either simultaneously or as a pre-processing step.
One example of simultaneous processing is the work of Bethard et al. [37], who specifically address
the task of identifying both opinions and opinion sources. Their approach is based on semantic parsing
where semantic constituents of sentences (e.g., “agent” or “proposition”) are marked. By utilizing opinion
words automatically learned by a bootstrapping opproach, they further refine the semantic roles to identify
propositional opinions, i.e., opinions that generally function as the sentential complement of a predicate.
This enables them to concentrate on verbs and extract verb-specific information from semantic frames such
as are defined in FrameNet [25] and PropBank [230].
As another example of the simultaneous approach, Choi et al. [60] employ an integer linear programming
approach to handle the joint extraction of entities and relations, drawing on the work of Roth and Yih [261]
on using global inference based on constraints.
As an alternative to the simultaneous approach, a system can start by identifying opinion expressions,
and then proceed to the analysis of the opinions, including the identification of opinion holders. Indeed, Kim
and Hovy [159] define the problem of opinion holder identification as identifying opinion sources given an
opinion expression in a sentence. In particular, structural features from a syntactic parse tree are selected
to model the long-distance, structural relation between a holder and an expression. Kim and Hovy show
that incorporating the patterns of paths between holder and expression outperforms a simple combination of
local features (e.g., the type of the holder node) and other non-structural features (e.g., the distance between
the candidate holder node and the expression node).
One final remark is that the task of determining which mentions of opinion holders are co-referent
(source coreference resolution) differs in practice in interesting ways from typical noun phrase coreference
resolution, due in part to the way in which opinion-oriented datasets may be annotated [283].
36
5
Summarization
So far, we have talked about analyzing and extracting opinion information from individual documents. The
focus of this chapter is on aggregating and representing sentiment information drawn from an individual
document or from a collection of documents. For example, a user might desire an at-a-glance presentation of
the main points made in a single review; creating such single-document sentiment summaries is described in
Section 5.1. Another application considered within this paradigm is the automatic determination of market
sentiment, or the majority “leaning” of an entire body of investors, from the individual remarks of those
investors [66, 67]; this is a type of multi-document opinion-oriented summarization, described in Section
5.2.
5.1 Single-document opinion-oriented summarization
There is clearly a tight connection between extraction of topic-based information from a single document
[49] and topic-based summarization of that document, since the information that is pulled out can serve
as a summary; see Radev et al. [248, Section 2.1] for a brief review. Obviously, this connection between
extraction and summarization holds in the case of sentiment-based summarization, as well.
One way in which this connection is made manifest in single-document opinion-oriented summariza-
tion is as follows: there are approaches that create textual sentiment summaries based on extraction of
sentences or similar text units. For example, Beineke et al. [33] attempt to select a single passage1 that
reflects the opinion of the document’s author(s), mirroring the practice of film advertisements that present
“snippets” from reviews of the movie. Training and test data is acquired from the website Rotten Tomatoes
(www.rottentomatoes.com), which provides a roughly sentence-length snippet for each review. However,
Beineke et al. [33] note that low accuracy can result even for high-quality extraction methods because the
Rotten Tomatoes data includes only a single snippet per review, whereas several sentences might be per-
fectly viable alternatives. In terms of creating longer summaries, Mao and Lebanon [200] suggest that by
tracking the sentiment flow within a document — i.e., how sentiment orientation changes from one sentence
to the next, as discussed in Section 4.7 — one can create sentiment summaries by choosing the sentences at
1Beineke et al. [33] use the term “sentiment summary” to refer to a single passage, but we prefer to not restrict that term’s definition so tightly.
37
local extrema of the flow (plus the first and last sentence). An interesting feature of this approach is that by
incorporating a document’s flow, the technique takes into account the entire document in a holistic way. Both
approaches just mentioned seek to select the absolutely most important sentences to present. Alternatively,
one could simply extract all subjective sentences, as was done by Pang and Lee [232] to create “subjectivity
extracts”. They suggested that these extracts could be used as summaries, although, as mentioned above,
they focused on the use of these extracts as an aid to downstream polarity classification, rather than as sum-
maries per se. Finally, we note that sentences are also used in multi-document sentiment summarization as
well, as described in Section 5.2.
Other sentiment summarization methods can work directly off the output of opinion-oriented
information-extraction systems. Indeed, Cardie et al. [51], speaking about the more restricted type of ex-
traction referred to by the technical term “information extraction”, “propose to view ... summary representa-
tions as information extraction (IE) scenario templates ... [thus] we postulate that methods from information
extraction ... will be adequate for the automatic creation of opinion-based summary representations.” (A
similar observation was made by Dini and Mazzini [79].) Note that these IE templates do not form coherent
text on their own. However, they can be incorporated as is into visual summaries.
Indeed, one interesting aspect of the problem of extracting sentiment information from a single document
(or from multiple documents, as discussed in Section 5.2) is that sometimes graph-based output seems much
more suitable or useful than text-based output. For example, graph-based summaries are very appropriate
when the information that is most important is the set of entities described and the opinions that some of
these entities hold about each other [307]. Figure 5.1 shows an example of a human-generated summary in
the form of a graph depicting various negative opinions expressed during the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.
Note the inclusion of text snippets on the arrows to support the inference of a negative opinion2; in general,
providing some sense of the evidence from which opinions are inferred is likely to be helpful to the user.
While summarization technologies may not be able to achieve the level of sophistication of information
presentation exhibited by Figure 5.1, current research is making progress towards that goal. In Figure 5.2,
we see a proposed summary where opinion holders and the objects of their opinions are connected by edges,
and various annotations derived from IE output are included, such as the strength of various attitudes.
Of course, graphical elements can also be used to represent a single bit, number or grade as a very
succinct summary of a document’s sentiment. Variations of stars, letter grades, and thumbs up/thumbs down
icons are common. More complex visualization schemes applied on a sentence-by-sentence basis have also
been proposed [7].
5.2 Multi-document opinion-oriented summarization
Language is itself the collective art of expression, a summary of thousands upon thou-
sands of individual intuitions. The individual gets lost in the collective creation, but his
personal expression has left some trace in a certain give and flexibility that are inherent in
all collective works of the human spirit. — Edward Sapir, Language and Literature, 1921.
Connection to sentiment analysis pointed out by Das and Chen [67].
2The exceptions are the edges from “news media”and the edges from “people who didn’t evacuate”. It is (perhaps intentionally) ambiguous whether
the lack of supporting quotes is due merely to the lack of sufficiently “juicy” ones, or is meant to indicate that it is utterly obvious that these entities
blame many others. We also note that the hurricane itself is not represented.
38
Fig. 5.1 Graphic by Bill Marsh for The New York Times, October 1, 2005, depicting negative opinions of various entities towards each other in the
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. Relation to opinion summarization pointed out by Eric Breck (Claire Cardie, personal communication).
5.2.1 Some problem considerations
There never was in the world two opinions alike, no more than two hairs, or two grains; the
most universal quality is diversity. — Michel de Montaigne, Essays
Where an opinion is general, it is usually correct. — Jane Austen, Mansfield Park
We briefly discuss here some points to keep in mind in regards to multi-document sentiment summariza-
tion, although to a certain degree, work in sentiment summarization has not yet reached a level where these
problems have come to the fore.
Determining which documents or portions of documents express the same opinion is not always an easy
task; but, clearly it is one that needs to be addressed in the summarization setting, since readers of sentiment
summaries surely are interested in the overall sentiment in the corpus — which means the system must
39
Fig. 5.2 Figure 2 (labeled 3) of Cardie et al. [51]: proposal for a summary representation derived from the output of an information-extraction
system.
determine shared sentiments within the document collection at hand.
This issue can still arise even when labels have been predetermined, if the items that have been pre-
labeled come from different sub-collections. For instance, some documents may have polarity labels,
whereas others may contain ratings on a 1-to-5 scale. And even when the ratings are drawn from the same
set, calibration issues may arise. Consider the following from Rotten Tomatoes’ frequently-asked-questions
page (http://www.rottentomatoes.com/pages/faq#judge):
On the Blade 2 reviews page, you have a negative review from James Berardinelli (2.5/4
stars), and a positive review from Eric Lurio (2.5/5). Why is Berardinelli’s review labeled
Rotten and Lurio’s review labeled Fresh?
You’re seeing this discrepancy because star systems are not consistent between critics. For
critics like Roger Ebert and James Berardinelli, 2.5 stars or lower out of 4 stars is always
negative. For other critics, 2.5 stars can either be positive or negative. Even though Eric
Lurio uses a 5 star system, his grading is very relaxed. So, 2 stars can be positive. Also,
there’s always the possibility of the webmaster or critic putting the wrong rating on a review.
As another example, in reconciling reviews of conference submissions, program-committee members must
often take into account the fact that certain reviewers always tend to assign low scores to papers, while
others have the opposite tendency. Indeed, we believe this calibration issue may be the reason why reviews
of cars on Epinions come not only with a “number of stars” annotation, but also a “thumbs up/thumbs down”
indicator, in order to clarify whether, regardless of the rating assigned, the review author actually intends to
make a positive recommendation or not.
An additional observation to take note of is the fact that when two reviewers agree on a rating, they
may have different reasons for doing so, and it may be important to indicate these reasons in the sum-
mary. A related point is that when a reviewer assigns a middling rating, it may be because he or she
thinks that most aspects of the item under discussion are so-so, but it may also be because he or she sees
both strong positives and strong negatives. Or, reviewers may have the same opinions about individual
item features, but weight these individual factors differently, leading to a different overall sentiment. In-
40
deed, Rotten Tomatoes summarizes a set of reviews both with the Tomatometer — percentage of reviews
judged to be positive — and an average rating on a 1-to-10 scale. The idea, again according to the FAQ
(http://www.rottentomatoes.com/pages/faq#avgvstmeter), is as follows:
The Average Rating measures the overall quality of a product based on an average of in-
dividual critic scores. The Tomatometer simply measures the percentage of critics who
recommend a certain product.
For example, while “Men in Black” scored 90% on the Tomatometer, the average rating
is only 7.5/10. That means that while you’re likely to enjoy MIB, it probably wasn’t a
contender for Best Picture at the Oscars.
In contrast, “Toy Story 2” received a perfect 100% on the Tomatometer with an average
rating of 9.6/10. That means, not only are you certain to enjoy it, you’ll also be impressed
with the direction, story, cinematography, and all the other things that make truly great films
great.
The problem of deciding whether two sentences or text passages have the same semantic content is one
that is faced not just by opinion-oriented multi-document summarizers, but by topic-based multi-document
summarizers as well [248]; this has been one of the motivations behind work on paraphrase recognition [29,
30, 231] and textual entailment [28]. But, as pointed out in Ku et al. [170], while in traditional summarization
redundant information is often discarded, in opinion summarization one wants to track and report the degree
of “redundancy”, since in the opinion-oriented setting the user is typically interested in the (relative) number
of times a given sentiment is expressed in the corpus.
Carenini et al. [52] note that a challenge in sentiment summarization is that the pieces of information to
be summarized — people’s opinions — are often conflicting, which is a bit different from the usual situation
in topic-based summarization, where typically one does not assume there are conflicting sets of facts in the
document set (although there are exceptions [302, 303]).
5.2.2 Textual summaries
In standard topic-based multi-document summarization, creating textual summaries has been a main focus of
effort. Hence, despite the differences in topic- and opinion-based summarization mentioned above, several
researchers have developed systems that create textual summaries of opinion-oriented information.
5.2.2.1 Leveraging existing topic-based technologies
One line of attack is to adapt existing topic-based multi-document summarization algorithms to the sentiment
setting.
Sometimes the adaptation consists simply of modifying the input to these pre-existing algorithms. For
instance, Seki et al. [265] propose that one apply standard multi-document summarization to a sub-collection
of documents that are on the same topic and that are determined to belong to some relevant genre of text,
such as “argumentative”.
In other cases, pre-existing topic-based summarization techniques are modified. For example, Carenini
et al. [52] generate natural-language summaries in the form of an “evaluative argument” using the clas-
sic natural-language generation pipeline of content selection, lexical selection and sentence planning, and
sentence realization [252], assuming the existence of a pre-defined product-feature hierarchy. The system
41
Summary created via a “true natural-language-generation” approach:
Almost all users loved the Canon G3 possibly because some users thought the
physical appearance was very good. Furthermore, several users found the man-
ual features and the special features to be very good. Also, some users liked the
convenience because some users thought the battery was excellent. Finally, some
users found the editing/viewing interface to be good despite the fact that several
customers really disliked the viewfinder . However, there were some negative eval-
uations. Some customers thought the lens was poor even though some customers
found the optical zoom capability to be excellent. Most customers thought the qual-
ity of the images was very good.
Summary created by a modified sentence-extraction system:
Bottom line, well made camera, easy to use, very flexible and powerful features to
include the ability to use external flash and lense /filters choices. It has a beautiful
design, lots of features, very easy to use, very configurable and customizable, and
the battery duration is amazing! Great colors, pictures, and white balance. The
camera is a dream to operate in automode, but also gives tremendous flexibility in
aperture priority, shutter priority, and manual modes. I’d highly recommend this
camera for anyone who is looking for excellent quality pictures and a combination
of ease of use and the flexibility to get advanced with many options to adjust if you
like.
Fig. 5.3 Sample automatically-generated summaries. Adapted from Figure 2 of Carenini et al. [52].
explicitly produces textual descriptions of aggregate information. The system is capable of relaying data
about the average sentiment and signaling, if appropriate, that the distribution of responses is bi-modal
(this allows one to report “split votes”). They compare this system against a modification of an exist-
ing sentence-extraction system, MEAD [247]. The former approach seems more well-suited for general
overviews, whereas the latter seems better at providing more variety in expression and more detail; see Fig-
ure 5.3. Related to the latter approach, sentence extraction methods have also been used to create summaries
for opinion-oriented queries or topics [266, 267].
While we are not aware of the following technique being used in standard topic-based summarization,
we see no reason why it is not applicable to that setting, at least in principle. Ku et al. [170] (short version
available as Ku et al. [169]) propose the following simple scheme to create a textual summary of a set of
documents known in advance to be on the same topic. Sentences considered to be representative of the topic
are collected, and the polarity of each such sentence is computed based on what sentiment-bearing words it
contains, with negation taken into account. Then, to create a summary of the positive documents, the system
simply returns the headline of the document with the most positive on-topic sentences, and similarly for the
negative documents. The authors show the following examples for the positive and the negative summary,
respectively:
• Positive: “Chinese Scientists Suggest Proper Legislation for Clone Technology”
42
• Negative: “UK Government Stops Funding for Sheep Cloning Team”
The cleverness of this method is that headlines are, by construction, good summaries (at least of the arti-
cle they are drawn from), so that fluency and informativeness, although perhaps not appropriateness, are
guaranteed.
Another perhaps unconventional type of multi-document “summary” is the selection of a few documents
of interest from the corpus for presentation to the user. In this vein, Kawai et al. [151] have developed a
news portal site called “Fair News Reader” that attempts to determine the affect characteristics of articles
the user has been reading so far (e.g., “happiness” or “fear”) and then recommends articles that are on the
same topic but have opposite affect characteristics. One could imagine extending this concept to a news
portal that presented to the user opinions opposing his or her pre-conceived ones (Phoebe Sengers, personal
communication). On a related note, Liu [190] mentions that one might desire a summarization system to
present a “representative sample” of opinions, so that both positive and negative points of view are covered,
rather than just the dominant sentiment. As of the time of this writing, Amazon presents the most helpful fa-
vorable review side-by-side with the most helpful critical review if one clicks on the “[x] customer reviews”
link next to the stars indicator. Additionally, one could interpret the opinion-leader identification work of
Song et al. [276] as suggesting that blog posts written by opinion leaders could serve as such an alternative
type of representative sample.
Summarizing online discussions and blogs is an area of related work [129, 301, 330]. The focus of such
work is not on summarizing the opinions per se, although Zhou and Hovy [330] note that one may want to
vary the emphasis on the opinions expressed versus the facts expressed.
5.2.2.2 Textual summarization without topic-based summarization techniques
Other work in the area of textual multi-document sentiment summarization departs from topic-based work.
The main reason seems to be that redundancy elimination is much less of a concern: users may wish to look at
many individual opinions regardless of whether these individual opinions express the same overall sentiment,
and these users may not particularly care whether the textual overview they peruse is coherent. Thus, in
several cases, textual “summaries” are generated simply by listing some or all opinionated sentences. These
are often grouped by feature (sub-topic) and/or polarity, perhaps with some ranking heuristic such as feature
importance applied [130, 170, 325, 333].
5.2.3 Non-textual summaries
In the previous section, we have discussed the creation of textual summaries of the opinion information
expressed within a corpus. But in settings where the polarity or orientation of each individual document
within a collection is summed up in a single bit (e.g., thumbs up/thumbs down), number (e.g., 3.5 stars),
or grade (e.g., B+), an alternative way to obtain a succinct summary of the overall sentiment is to report
summary statistics, such as the number of reviews that are “thumbs up” or the average number of stars or
average grade. Many systems take this approach to summarization.
Summary statistics are often quite suited to graphical representations; we describe some noteworthy
visual aspects of these summaries here (evaluation of the user-interface aspects has not been a focus of
attention in the community to date).
43
Fig. 5.4 Figure 2 of Gamon et al. [104], depicting (automatically determined) topics discussed in reviews of the Volkswagen Golf. The size of each
topic box indicates the number of mentions of that topic. The shading of each topic box, ranging from red to white to green, indicates the average
sentiment, ranging from negative to middling/none to negative, respectively. At the bottom, the sentences most indicative of negative sentiment for
the topic “vw, service” are displayed.
5.2.3.1 “Bounded” summary statistics: averages and relative frequencies
We use the term bounded to refer to summary statistics that lie within a predetermined range. Examples are
the average number of stars (range: 0 to 5 stars, say) or the percentage of positive opinions (range: 0 to 100
percent).
“Thermometer”-type images are one means for displaying such statistics. One example is the
“Tomatometer” on the Rotten Tomatoes website, which is simply a bar broken into two differently-
colored portions; the portion of the bar that is colored red indicates the fraction of positive reviews of a
given movie. This representation extends straightforwardly to n-ary categorization schemes, such as pos-
itive/neutral/negative, via the use of n colors. The thermometer-graphic concept also generalizes in other
ways; for instance, the depiction of a number of stars can be considered to be a variant of this idea.
Instead of using size or extent to depict bounded summary statistics, as is done with thermometer rep-
resentations, one can use color shading. This choice seems particularly appropriate in settings where the
amount of display real-estate that can be devoted to any particular item under evaluation is highly lim-
ited or where size or location is reserved to represent some other information. For instance, Gamon et al.
[104] use color to represent the general assessment of (automatically-determined) product features. In Fig-
44
Fig. 5.5 Figure 4 of Carenini et al. [53], showing a summary of reviews of a particular product. An automatically-generated text summary is on
the left; a visual summary is on the right. The size of each each box in the visual summary indicates the number of mentions of the corresponding
topic, which occupy a pre-defined hierarchy. The shading of each topic box, ranging from red to black to green, indicates the average sentiment,
ranging from negative to neutral/none to negative, respectively. At the bottom is shown the source for the portion of the generated natural-language
summary that has been labeled with the footnote “4”.
ure 5.4 (page 44), we see that each of many features or topics, such as “handling” or “vw, service”, is
represented by a shaded box. The colors for any given box range from red to white to green, indicating
gradations of the average sentiment toward that topic, moving from negative to neutral (or objective) to
positive, respectively. Note that one can quickly glean from such a display what was liked and what was
disliked about the product under discussion, despite the large number of topics under evaluation — people
like driving this car but dislike the service. As shown in Figure 5.5 (page 45), a similar interface (together
with a usability study) is presented in Carenini et al. [53]. Some differences are that natural-language sum-
marization is also employed, so that the summary is both “verbal” and visual; the features are grouped
into a hierarchy, thus leveraging the ability of Treemaps [271] to display hierarchical data via nesting;
and the interface also includes a way (not depicted in the figure) to see an “at-a-glance” summary of the
polarities of the individual sentences commenting on a particular feature. A demo is available online at
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/˜carenini/storage/SEA/demo.html.
5.2.3.2 Unbounded summary statistics
As just described, thermometer graphics and color shading can be used to represent bounded statistics such
as the mean or, in the case of n-color thermometers, relative distributions of ratings across different classes.
But bounded statistics by themselves do not provide other important pieces of information, such as the actual
number of opinions within each class. (We consider raw frequencies to be conceptually unbounded, although
there are practical limits to how many opinions can be accounted for.) Intuitively, the observation that 50%
45
of the reviews of a particular product are negative3 is more of a big deal if that statistic is based on 10,000
reviews than if it based on only two.
Another problem specific to the mean as a summary statistic is that review-aggregation sites seem to
often exhibit highly skewed rating distributions, with a particular bias toward highly positive reviews [59,
74, 128, 132, 240, 254].4 Since there can often be a second mode, or bump, at the extreme low end of the
rating scale, indicating polarization — for example, Hu et al. [132] remark that 54% of the items in a sample
of Amazon book, DVD, and video products with more than 20 reviews fail both statistical normality and
unimodality tests — reporting only the mean rating score may not provide enough information. To put it
another way, divulging the average does not give the user enough information to distinguish between a set
of middling reviews and a set of polarized reviews.
On the other hand, it is worth pointing out that just giving the number of positive and negative reviews,
respectively, on the assumption that the user can always derive the percentages from these counts, may not
suffice. Cabral and Hortaçsu [47] observe that once eBay switched to displaying the percentage of pieces of
feedback on sellers that were negative, as opposed to simply the raw numbers, then negative reviews began
to have a measurable economic impact (see Chapter 6).
Hence, not surprisingly, sentiment summaries tend to include data on the average rating, the distribution
of ratings, and/or the number of ratings.
Visualization of unbounded summary statistics Of the two systems described above that represent the
average polarity of opinions via color, both represent the quantity of the opinions on a given topic via size.
This means that the count data for positive and for negative opinions are not explicitly presented separately.
In other systems, this is not the case; rather, frequencies for different classes are broken out and displayed.
For instance, as of the time of this writing, Amazon displays an average rating as a number of stars with
the number of reviews next to it; mousing over the stars brings up a histogram of reviewer ratings annotated
with counts for the 5-star reviews, 4-star reviews, etc. (Further mousing over the bars of the histogram brings
up the percentage of reviews that each of those counts represent.)
As another example, a sample output of the Opinion Observer system [191] is depicted in Figure 5.6,
where the portion of a bar projecting above the centered “horizon” line represents the number of positive
opinions about a certain product feature, and the portion of the bar below the line represents the number of
negative opinions. (The same idea can be used to represent percentages too, of course.) A nice feature of this
visualization is that because of the use of a horizon line, two separate frequency datapoints — the positive
and negative counts — can be represented by what is visually one object, namely, a solid bar, and one can
easily simultaneously compare negatives against negatives and positives against positives. This simultaneous
comparison is made much more difficult if the bars all have one end “planted” at the same location, as is the
case for standard histograms such as the one depicted in Figure 5.7.
While the data for the features are presented sequentially in Figure 5.6 (first “General”, then “LCD”, and
so forth), an alternative visualization technique called a rose plot is exemplified in Figure 5.8, which depicts a
sample output of the system developed by Gregory et al. [113]. The median and quartiles across a document
sub-collection of the percentage of positive and negative words per document, together with similar data for
other possible affect-classification dimensions, are represented via a variant of box plots. (Adaptation to raw
3We admit to being “glass-half-empty” people.
4On a related note, William Safire’s New York Times May 1, 2005 article “Blurbosphere” quotes Charles McGrath, former editor of the New York
Times Book Review, as asking, “has there ever been a book that wasn’t acclaimed?”.
46
Fig. 5.6 Figure 2 of Liu et al. [191]. Three cellphones are represented, each by a different color. For each feature (“General”, “LCD”, etc.), three
bars are shown, one for each of three cellphones. For a given feature and phone, the portions of the bar above and below the horizontal line represent
the number of reviews that express positive or negative views about that camera’s feature, respectively. (The system can also plot the percentages
of positive or negative opinions, rather than the raw numbers.) The pane on the upper-right displays the positive sentences regarding one of the
products.
Fig. 5.7 A portion of Figure 4 of Yi and Niblack [325], rotated to save space and facilitate comparison with Figure 5.6. Notice that simultaneous
comparison of the negative counts and the positive counts for two different products is not as easy as it is in Figure 5.6.
counts rather than percentages is straightforward.) Mapping this idea to product comparisons in the style
of Opinion Observer, one could associate different features with different “compass directions”, e.g., the
feature “battery life” with “southwest”, as long as the number of features being reported on isn’t too large.
The reason that this representation might prove advantageous in some settings is that in some situations, a
circular arrangement may be more compact than a sequential one, and it may be easier for a user to remember
47
Fig. 5.8 Figure 7 of Gregory et al. [113]. On the right are two rose plots, one for each of two products; on the left is the plot’s legend. In each
rose plot, the upper two “petals” represent positivity and negativity, respectively (of the other six petals, the bottom two are vice and virtue, etc.).
Similarly to box plots, the median value is indicated by a dark arc, and the quartiles by (colored) bands around the median arc. Darker shading
for one of the two petals in a pair (e.g., “positive and negative”) are meant to indicate the negative end of the spectrum for the affect dimension
represented by the given petal pair. The histogram below each rose relates to the number of documents represented.
a feature as being “southwest” than as being “the fifth of eight”. An additional functionality of the system
that is not shown in the figure is the ability to depict how much an individual document’s positive/negative
percentage differs from the average for a given document group to which the document belongs. A similar
circular layout is proposed in Subasic and Huettner [286] for visualizing various dimensions of affect within
a single document.
Morinaga et al. [215] opt to represent degrees of association between products and opinion-indicative
terms of a pre-specified polarity. First, opinions are gathered using the authors’ pre-existing system [292].
Coding-length and probabilistic criteria are used to determine which terms to focus on, and principal com-
ponent analysis is then applied to produce a two-dimensional visualization, such that nearness corresponds
to strength of association, as in the authors’ previous work [184]. Thus, in Figure 5.9 on page 49: we see
that cellphone A is associated with what we recognize as positive terms, whereas cellphone C is associated
with negative terms.
5.2.3.3 Temporal variation and sentiment timelines
So far, the summaries we have considered do not explicitly incorporate any temporal dimension. However,
time is often an important consideration.
First, users may wish to view individual reviews in reverse chronological order, i.e., newest first. Indeed,
48
Fig. 5.9 Figure 5 of Morinaga et al. [215]: principal-components-analysis visualization of associations between products (squares) and
automatically-selected opinion-oriented terms (circles).
at the time of this writing, this is one of the two sorting options that Amazon presents.
Second, in many applications, analysts and other users are interested in tracking changes in sentiment
about a product, political candidate, company, or issue over time. Clearly, one can create a sentiment timeline
simply by plotting the value of a chosen summary statistic at different times; the chosen statistic can reflect
the prevailing polarity [170, 297] or simply the number of mentions, in which case what is being measured is
perhaps not so much public opinion, but rather public awareness [102, 197, 211, 212]. Such work is strongly
related at a conceptual level to topic detection and tracking [8], a review of which is beyond the scope of
this survey.
Mishne and de Rijke [212] also depict the derivative of the summary statistic considered as a function of
time.
5.2.4 Review(er) quality
How do we identify what is good? And how do we censure what is bad? We will argue
that developing a humane reputation system ecology can provide better answers to these two
49
general questions — restraining the baser side of human nature, while liberating the human
spirit to reach for ever higher goals. — “Manifesto for the reputation society”, Masum and
Zhang [203]
When creating summaries of reviews or opinionated text, an important type of information that deserves
careful consideration is whether or not individual reviews are helpful or useful. For example, a system might
want to downweight or even discard unhelpful reviews before creating summaries or computing aggregate
statistics, as in Liu et al. [193]. Alternatively, the system could use all reviews, but provide helpfulness
indicators for individual reviews as a summary of their expected utility. Indeed, non-summarization systems
could use such information, too: for instance, a review-oriented search engine could rank its search results
by helpfulness.
Some websites already gather helpfulness information from human readers. For example, Amazon.com
annotates reviews with comments like “120 of 140 people found the following review helpful”, meaning
that of the 140 people who pressed one of the “yes” or “no” buttons in response to the question “Was this
review helpful to you?” — we deem these 140 people utility evaluators — 120 chose “yes”. Similarly, the
Internet Movie Database (IMDb, www.imdb.com) also annotates user comments with “x out of y people
found the following comment useful”. This similarity is perhaps not surprising due to the fact that Amazon
owns IMDb, although from a research point of view, note that the two populations of users are probably at
least somewhat disjoint, meaning that there might be interesting differences between the sources of data.
Other sites soliciting utility evaluations include Yahoo! Movies and Yahoo! TV, which allow the user to
sort reviews by helpfulness; CitySearch, which solicits utility evaluations from general users and gives more
helpful reviews greater prominence; and Epinions, which only allows registered members to rate reviews and
does not appear to have helpfulness as a sort criterion, at least for non-registered visitors. 5 (We learned about
the solicitation of utility evaluations by IMDb from Zhuang et al. [333] and by Citysearch from Dellarocas
[71].)
Despite the fact that many review-aggregation sites already provide helpfulness information gathered
from human users, there are still at least two reasons why automatic helpfulness classification is a useful
line of work to pursue.
Items that lack utility evaluations Many reviews receive very few utility evaluations. For example, 38%
of a sample of roughly 20,000 Amazon MP3-player reviews, and 31% of those aged at least three months,
received three or fewer utility evaluations [161]. Similarly, Liu et al. [193] confirm one’s prior intuitions
that Amazon reviews that are youngest and reviews that are most lowly ranked (i.e., determined to be least
helpful) by the site receive the fewest utility evaluations.
Perhaps some reviews receive no utility evaluations simply because they are so obviously bad that no-
body bothers to rate them. But this doesn’t imply that reviews without utility evaluations must necessarily be
unhelpful; certainly we can’t assume this of reviews too recently written to have been read by many people.
One important role that automated helpfulness classifiers can play, then, is to provide utility ratings in the
many cases when human evaluations are lacking.
5We note that we were unable to find Amazon’s definition of “helpful”, and conclude that they do not supply one. In contrast, Yahoo! specifies the
following: “Was [a review] informative, well written or amusing — above all was it was helpful to you in learning about the [film or show]? If so,
then you should rate that review as helpful.” It might be interesting to investigate whether these differing policies have implications. There have
in fact been some comments that Amazon should clarify its question (http://www.amazon.com/Was-this-review-helpful-you/
forum/Fx1JS1YLZ490S1O/Tx3QHE2JPEXQ1V7/1?_encoding=UTF8&asin=B000FL7CAU).
50
Skew in utility evaluations Another interesting potential application of automated helpfulness classifica-
tion is to correct for biases in human-generated utility evaluations.
We first consider indirect evidence that such biases exist. It turns out that just as the distribution of ratings
can often be heavily skewed toward the positive end, as discussed in Section 5.2.3.2, the distribution of utility
evaluations can also be heavily skewed toward the helpful end, probably due at least in part to similar reasons
as in the product-ratings case. In a crawl of approximately 4 million unique Amazon reviews for about
670,000 books (excluding alternate editions), the average percentage of “yes” responses among the utility
evaluations is between 74 and 70%, depending on whether reviews with fewer than 10 utility evaluations are
excluded (Gueorgi Kossinets and Cristian Danescu Niculescu-Mizil, personal communication). Similarly,
half of a sample of about 23,000 Amazon digital-camera reviews had helpful/unhelpful vote ratios of over
9 to 1 [193]. As in the ratings distribution case, one’s intuition is that the percentage of reviews that are
truly helpful is not as high as these statistics would seem to indicate. Another type of indirect evidence
of bias is that the number of utility evaluations received by a review appears to decrease exponentially in
helpfulness rank as computed by Amazon [193]. (Certainly there has to be some sort of decrease, since
Amazon’s helpfulness ranking is based in part on the number of utility evaluations a review receives.) Liu
et al. [193] conjecture that reviews that have many utility evaluations will have a disproportionate influence
on readers (and utility evaluators) because they are viewed as more authoritative, but reviews could get
many utility evaluations only because they are more prominently displayed, not because readers actually
compared them against other reviews. (Liu et al. [193] call this tendency for often-evaluated reviews to
quickly accumulate even more utility evaluations as “winner circle” bias; in other literature on power-law
effects, related phenomena are also referred to as “rich-get-richer”.)
As for more direct evidence: Liu et al. [193] conduct an re-annotation study in which the Amazon re-
viewers’ utility evaluations often did not match those of the human re-labelers. However, this latter evidence
should be taken with a grain of salt. First, in some of the experiments in the study, “ground truth” helpfulness
was measured by, among other things, the number of aspects of a product that are discussed by a review.
Second, in all experiments, the test items appear to have consisted of only the text of a single review con-
sidered in isolation. It is not clear that the first point corresponds to the standard that all Amazon reviewers
used, or should be required to use, and clearly, the second point describes an isolated-text setting that is not
the one that real Amazon reviewers work in. To exemplify both these objections: a very short review written
by a reputable critic (e.g., a “top reviewer”) that points out something that other reviews missed can, indeed,
be quite helpful, but would score poorly according to the specification of Liu et al. [193]. Indeed, the sample
provided of a review that should be labeled “bad” starts,
I want to point out that you should never buy a generic battery, like the person from San
Diego who reviewed the S410 on May 15, 2004, was recommending. Yes you’d save money,
but there have been many reports of generic batteries exploding when charged for too long.
We would view this comment, if true, to be quite helpful, despite the fact that it fails the specification.
Another technical issue is that the re-labelers used a four-class categorization scheme, whereas essentially
every possible percentage of positive utility evaluations could form a distinct class for the Amazon labels: it
might have been better to treat reviews with helpfulness percentages of 60% and 61% as equivalent, rather
than saying that Amazon reviewers rated the latter as better than the former.
Nonetheless, given the large predominance of “helpful” among utility evaluations despite the fact that
anecdotal evidence we have gathered indicates that not all reviews deserve to be called “helpful”, and given
the suggestive results of the re-annotation experiment just described, it is likely that some of the human utility
51
evaluations are not strongly related to the quality of the review at hand. Thus, we believe that correction of
these utility evaluations by automatic means is a valid potential application.
A note regarding the effect of utility evaluations It is important to mention one caveat before proceeding
to describe research in this area. Park et al. [236] attempted to determine what the effect of review quality
actually is on purchasing intention, running a study in which subjects engaged in hypothetical buying be-
havior. They found non-uniform effects: “low-involvement [i.e., motivated] consumers are affected by the
quantity rather than the quality of reviews ... high-involvement consumers are affected by review quantity
mainly when the review quality is high...The effect of review quality on high-involvement consumers is more
pronounced with a sizable number of reviews, whereas the effect of review quantity is significant even when
the review quality is low”. (More on the economic impacts of sentiment analysis is described in Chapter 6.)
5.2.4.1 Methods for automatically determining review quality
In a way, one could consider the review-quality determination problem as a type of readability assessment
and apply essay-scoring techniques [19, 99]. However, while some of the systems described below do try to
take into account some readability-related features, they are tailored specifically to product reviews.
Kim et al. [161], Zhang and Varadarajan [329], and Ghose and Ipeirotis [106] attempt to automatically
rank certain sets of reviews on the Amazon.com website according to their helpfulness or utility, using a
regression formulation of the problem. The domains considered are a bit different: MP3 players and digital
cameras in the first case; Canon electronics, engineering books, and PG-13 movies in the second case; and
AV players plus digital cameras in the third case. Liu et al. [193] convert the problem into one of low-quality
review detection (i.e., binary classification), experimenting mostly with manually (re-)annotated reviews of
digital cameras, although CNet editorial ratings were also considered on the assumption that these can be
considered trustworthy. Rubin and Liddy [262] also sketch a proposal to consider whether reviews can be
considered credible.
Kim et al. [161] study which of a multitude of length-based, lexical, POS-count, product-aspect-mention
count, and metadata features are most effective when utilizing SVM regression. The best feature combination
turned out to be review length plus tf-idf scores for lemmatized unigrams in the review plus the number of
“stars” the reviewer assigned to the product. Somewhat disappointingly, the best pair of features among these
was the length of the review and the number of stars. (Using “number of stars” as the only feature yielded
similar results to using just the deviation of the number of stars given by the particular reviewer from the
average number of stars granted by all reviewers for the item.) The effectiveness of using all unigrams
appears to subsume that of using a select subset, such as sentiment-bearing words from the General Inquirer
lexicon [282].
Zhang and Varadarajan [329] use a different feature set. They employ a finer classification of lexical
types, and more sources for subjective terms, but do not include any meta-data information. Interestingly,
they also consider the similarity between the review in question and the product specification, on the premise
that a good review should discuss many aspects of the product; and they include the review’s similarity to
editorial reviews, on the premise that editorial reviews represent high-quality examples of opinion-oriented
text. (David and Pinch [70] observe, however, that editorial reviews for books are paid for and are meant to
induce sales of the book.) However, these latter two original features do not appear to enhance performance.
The features that appear to contribute the most are the class of shallow syntactic features, which, the authors
speculate, seem to characterize style; examples include counts of words, sentences, wh-words, comparatives
52
and superlatives, proper nouns, etc. Review length seems to be very weakly correlated with utility score.
We thus see that Kim et al. [161] find that meta-data and very simple term statistics suffice, whereas
Zhang and Varadarajan [329] observe that more sophisticated cues that appear correlated with linguistic
aspects appear to be most important. Possibly, the difference is a result of the difference in domain choice: we
speculate that book and movie reviews can involve more sophisticated language use than what is exhibited
in reviews of electronics.
Declaring themselves influenced by prior work on creating subjectivity extracts [232], Ghose and Ipeiro-
tis [106] take a different approach. They focus on the relationship between the subjectivity of a review and
its helpfulness. The basis for measuring review subjectivity is as follows: using a classifier that outputs the
probability of a sentence being subjective, one can compute for a given review the average subjectiveness-
probability over all its sentences, or the standard deviation of the subjectivity scores of the sentences within
the review. They found that both the standard deviation of the sentence subjectivity scores and a readability
score (review length in characters divided by number of sentences) have a strongly statistically significant
effect on utility evaluations, and that this is sometimes true of the average subjectiveness-probability as well.
They then suggest on the basis of this and other evidence that it is extreme reviews that are considered to be
most helpful, and develop a helpfulness predictor based on their analysis.
Liu et al. [193] considered features related to review and sentence length; brand, product and product-
aspect mentions, with special consideration for appearances in review titles; sentence subjectivity and polar-
ity; and “paragraph structure”. This latter refers to paragraphs as delimited by automatically-determined
keywords. Interestingly, the technique of taking the 30 most frequent pairs of nouns or noun phrases
that appear at the beginning of a paragraph as keywords yields separator pairs such as “pros”/“cons”,
“strength”/“weakness”, and “the upsides”/“downsides”. (Note that this differs from identifying pro or con
reasons themselves [157], or identifying the polarity of sentences. Note also that other authors have claimed
that different techniques are needed for situations in which pro/con delimiters are mandated by the format
imposed by a review aggregation site but a separate detailed textual description must also be included, as
in Epinions, as opposed to settings where such delimiters need not be present or where all text is placed in
the context of such delimiters [191].) Somewhat unconventionally with respect to other text-categorization
work, the baseline was taken as SVMlight run with three sentence-level statistics as features; that is, the
performance of a classifier trained using bag-of-word features is not reported. Given this unconventional
starting point, the addition of the features that do not reflect subjectivity or sentiment help. Including sub-
jectivity and polarity on top of what has already been mentioned does not yield further improvement, and
use of title-appearance for mentions did not seem to help.
Review- or opinion-spam detection — the identification of deliberately misleading reviews — is a line
of work by Jindal and Liu [141, short version available as Jindal and Liu [140]] in the same vein. One
challenge these researchers faced was the difficulty in obtaining ground truth. Therefore, for experimental
purposes they first re-framed the problem as one of trying to recognize duplicate reviews, since a priori it is
hard to see why posting repeats of reviews is justified. (However, one potential problem with the assump-
tion that repeated reviews constitute some sort of manipulation attempt, at least for the Amazon data that
was considered, is that Amazon itself cross-posts reviews across different products — where “different”
includes different instantiations (e.g., e-book vs. hardcover) or subsequent editions of the same item (Gue-
orgi Kossinets and Cristian Danescu Niculescu-Mizil, personal communication). Specifically, in a sample of
over 1 million Amazon book reviews, about one-third were duplicates, but these were all due to Amazon’s
cross-posting. Human error (e.g., accidentally hitting the “submit” button twice) causes other cases of non-
malicious duplicates.) A second round of experiments attempted to identify “reviews on brands only”, ads,
53
and “other irrelevant reviews containing no opinions” (e.g., questions, answers, and random texts). Some of
the features used were similar to those employed in the studies described above; others included features on
the review author and the utility evaluations themselves. The overall message was that this kind of spam is
relatively easy to detect.
5.2.4.2 Reviewer-identity considerations
In the above, we have discussed determining the quality of individual reviews. An alternate approach is
to look at the quality of the reviewers; doing so can be thought of as a way of classifying all the reviews
authored by the same person at once.
Interestingly, one study has found that there is a real economic effect to be observed when factoring in
reviewer credibility: Gu et al. [114] note that a weighted average of message-board postings in which poster
credibility is factored in has “prediction power over future abnormal returns of the stock”, but if postings are
weighted uniformly, the predictive power disappears.
There has been work in a number of areas in the human-language-technologies community that incor-
porates the authority, trustworthiness, influentialness, or credibility of authors [94, 96, 141, 276]. PageRank
[44, 241] and hubs and authorities (also known as HITS) [163] are very influential examples of work in link
analysis on identifying items of great importance. Trust metrics also appear in other work, such as research
into peer-to-peer and reputation networks and information credibility [71, 115, 147, 174, 253, inter alia].
54
6
Broader implications
Sentiment is the mightiest force in civilization ... – J. Ellen Foster, What America Owes to
Women, 1893
As we have seen, sentiment-analysis technologies have many potential applications. In this section, we
briefly discuss some of the larger implications that the existence of opinion-oriented information-access
services has.
Privacy One point that should be mentioned is that applications that gather data about people’s preferences
can trigger concerns about privacy violations. We suspect that in many people’s minds, having one’s public
blog scanned by a coffee company for positive mentions of its product is one thing; having one’s cell-phone
conversations monitored by the ruling party of one’s own country for negative mentions of government
officials is quite another. It is not our intent to comment further here on privacy issues, these not being issues
on which we are qualified to speak; rather, we simply want to be thorough by reminding the reader that these
issues do exist and are important, and that these concerns apply to all data-mining technologies in general.
Manipulation But even if we restrict attention to the apparently fairly harmless domain of business intel-
ligence, certain questions regarding the potential for manipulation do arise. Companies already participate
in managing online perceptions as part of the normal course of public-relations efforts:
...companies can’t control consumer-generated content. They can, however, pay close at-
tention to it. In many cases, often to a large degree, they can even influence it. In fact, in
a survey conducted by Aberdeen [of “more than 250 enterprises using social media mon-
itoring and analysis solutions in a diverse set of enterprises”], more than twice as many
companies with social media monitoring capabilities actively contribute to consumer con-
versations than remain passive observers (67% versus 33%). Over a third of all companies
(39%) contribute to online conversations on a frequent basis, interacting with consumers in
an effort to sway opinion, correct misinformation, solicit feedback, reward loyalty, test new
ideas, or for any number of other reasons. [328]
55
And it is also the case that some arguably mild forms of manipulation have been suggested. For instance,
one set of authors, in studying the strategic implications for a company of offering online consumer reviews,
notes that “if it is possible for the seller to decide the timing to offer consumer reviews at the individual
product level, it may not always be optimal to offer consumer reviews at a very early stage of new product
introduction, even if such reviews are available” [57, quotation from the July 2004 working-paper version],
and others have worked on a manufacturer-oriented system that ranks reviews “according to their expected
effect on sales”, noting that these might not be the ones that are considered to be most helpful to users [106].
But still, there are concerns that corporations might try to further “game the system” by taking advantage
of knowledge of how ranking systems work in order to suppress negative publicity [124] or engage in other
so-called “black-hat search engine optimization” and related activities. Indeed, there has already been a term
— “sock puppet” — coined to refer to ostensibly distinct online identities created to give the false impression
of external support for a position or opinion; Stone and Richtel [281] list several rather attention-grabbing
examples of well-known writers and CEOs engaging in sock-puppetry. On a related note, Das and Chen [67]
recommend Leinweber and Madhavan [183] as an interesting review of the history of market manipulation
through disinformation.
One reason these potentials for abuse are relevant to this survey is that, as pointed out earlier in the
Introduction, sentiment-analysis technologies allow users to consult many people who are unknown to them;
but this means precisely that it is harder for users to evaluate the trustworthiness of those people (or “people”)
they are consulting. Thus, opinion-mining systems might potentially make it easier for users to be mis-led
by malicious entities, a problem that designers of such systems might wish to prevent. On the flip side, an
information-access system that is (perhaps unfairly) perceived to be vulnerable to manipulation is one that
is unlikely to be widely used; thus, again, builders of such systems might wish to take measures to make it
difficult to “game the system”.
In the remainder of this section, then, we discuss several aspects of the problem of possible manipulation
of reputation. In particular, we look at evidence as to whether reviews have a demonstrable economic im-
pact: if reviews do significantly affect customer purchases, then there is arguably an economic incentive for
companies to engage in untoward measures to manipulate public perception; if reviews do not significantly
affect customer purchases, then there is little reason, from an economic point of view, for entities to try to
artificially change the output of sentiment-analysis systems — or, as Dewally [74] asserts, “the stock market
does not appear to react to these recommendations ... The fears raised by the media about the destabilizing
power of such traders who participate in these discussions are thus groundless”. If such claims are true, then
it would seem that trying to manipulate perceptions conveyed by online review-access systems would offer
little advantages to companies, and so they would not engage in it.
6.1 Economic impact of reviews
As mentioned earlier in the Introduction to this survey, many readers of online reviews say that these reviews
significantly influence their purchasing decisions [63]. However, while these readers may have believed that
they were “significantly influenced”, perception and reality can differ. A key reason to understand the real
economic impact of reviews is that the results of such an analysis have important implications for how much
effort companies might or should want to expend on online reputation monitoring and management.
Given the rise of online commerce, it is not surprising that a body of work centered within the eco-
nomics and marketing literature studies the question of whether the polarity (often referred to as “valence”)
and/or volume of reviews available online have a measurable, significant influence on actual consumer pur-
56
chasing. Ever since the classic “market for lemons” paper [6] demonstrating some problems for makers of
high-quality goods, economists have looked at the value of maintaining a good reputation as a means to
overcome these problems [77, 162, 269, 270], among other strategies. (See the introduction to Dewally and
Ederington [75], from which the above references have been taken, for a brief review.) One way to acquire
a good reputation is, of course, by receiving many positive reviews of oneself as a merchant; another is for
the products one offers to receive many positive reviews. For the purposes of our discussion, we regard ex-
periments wherein the buying is hypothetical as being out of scope; instead, we focus on economic analyses
of the behavior of people engaged in real shopping and spending real money.1
The general form that most studies take is to use some form of hedonic regression [260] to analyze the
value and the significance of different item features to some function, such as a measure of utility to the
customer, using previously recorded data. (Exceptions include Resnick et al. [254], who ran an empirical
experiment creating “new” sellers on eBay, and Jin and Kato [136], who made actual purchases to validate
seller claims.) Specific economic functions that have been examined include revenue (box-office take, sales
rank on Amazon, etc.), revenue growth, stock trading volume, and measures that auction-sites like eBay
make available, such as bid price or probability of a bid or sale being made. The type of product considered
varies (although, understandably, those offered by eBay and Amazon have received more attention): exam-
ples include books, collectible coins, movies, craft beer, stocks, and used cars. It is important to note that
some conclusions drawn from one domain often do not carry over to another; for instance, reviews seem to
be influential for big-ticket items but less so for cheaper items. But there are also conflicting findings within
the same domain. Moreover, different subsegments of the consumer population may react differently: for
example, people who are more highly motivated to purchase may take ratings more seriously. Additionally,
in some studies, positive ratings have an effect but negative ones don’t, and in other studies the opposite
effect is seen; the timing of such feedback and various characteristics of the merchant or of the feedback
itself (e.g., volume) may also be a factor.
Nonetheless, to gloss over many details for the sake of brevity: if one allows any effect — including
correlation even if said correlation is shown to be not predictive — that passes a statistical significance test
at the .05 level to be classed as “significant”, then many studies find that review polarity has a significant
economic effect [13, 14, 23, 31, 35, 47, 59, 62, 68, 72, 75, 76, 81, 82, 128, 136, 145, 180, 194, 196, 198, 207,
208, 214, 237, 251, 254, 279, 298, 332]. But there are a few studies that conclude emphatically that review
positivity or negativity has no significant economic effect [56, 74, 80, 87, 100, 195, 326]. Duan et al. [80]
explicitly relate their findings to the issue of corporate manipulation: “From the managerial perspective,
we show that consumers are rational in inferring movie quality from online user reviews without being
unduly influenced by the rating, thus presenting a challenge to businesses that try to influence sales through
‘planting’ online word-of-mouth”.
With respect to effects that have been found, the literature survey contained in Resnick et al. [254] states
that
At the larger end of effect sizes for positive evaluations, the model in [Livingston [196]]
1Note that researchers in the economics community have a tradition of circulating and revising working papers, sometimes for years, before
producing an archival version. In the references that follow, we have cited the archival version when journal-version publication data has been
available to us, in order to enable the interested reader to access the final, peer-reviewed version of the work. But because of this policy, the reader
who wishes to delve into this literature further should keep in mind the following two points. First, many citations within the literature are to
preliminary working papers. This means that our citations may not precisely match those given in the papers themselves (e.g., there may be title
mismatches). Second, work that was done earlier may be cited with a later publication date; therefore, the dates given in our citations should not
be taken to indicate research precedence.
57
finds that sellers with more than 675 positive comments earned a premium of $45.76, more
than 10% of the mean selling price, as compared to new sellers with no feedback. ... At the
larger end of effect sizes for negatives, [Lucking-Reiley et al. [198]], looking at collectible
coins, finds that a move from 2 to 3 negatives cuts the price by 11%, about $19 from a mean
price of $173.
But in general, the claims of statistically-significant effects that have been made tend to be (a) qualified by
a number of important caveats, and (b) quite small in absolute terms per item, although on the other hand
again, small effects per item can add up when many items are involved. With regard to this discussion, the
following excerpt from Houser and Wooders [128] is perhaps illuminating:
...on average, 3.46 percent of sales is attributable to the seller’s positive reputation stock.
Similarly, our estimates imply that the average cost to sellers stemming from neutral or neg-
ative reputation scores is $2.28, or 0.93 percent of the final sales price. If these percentages
are applied to all of eBay’s auctions ($1.6 billion in the fourth quarter of 2000), this would
imply that sellers’ positive reputations added more than $55 million to the value of sales,
while non-positives reduced sales by about $15 million.
Ignoring for the moment the fact that, as mentioned above, other papers report differing or even opposite
findings, we simply note that the choice of whether to focus on “.93 percent”, “$2.28”, or “$55 million”
(and whether to view the latter amount as seeming particularly large or not) is one we prefer to leave to the
reader.
Let us now mention some particular papers and findings of particular interest.
6.1.1 Surveys summarizing relevant economic literature
Resnick et al. [254] and Bajari and Hortaçsu [24] are good entry points into this body of literature.
They provide very thorough overviews and discussion of the methodological issues underlying the studies
mentioned above. Hankin [118] supplies several visual summaries that are modeled after the literature-
comparison tables in Dellarocas [71], Resnick et al. [254], and Bajari and Hortaçsu [24]. A list of a
number of papers on the general concept of sentiment in behavioral finance can be found at http:
//sentiment.behaviouralfinance.net/.
6.1.2 Economic-impact studies employing automated text analysis
In most of the studies cited above, the orientation of a review was derived from an explicit rating indication
such as number of stars, but a few studies applied manual or automatic sentiment classification to review
text [13, 14, 35, 47, 67, 68, 214, 237].
At least one related set of studies claims that “the text of the reviews contains information that influences
the behavior of the consumers, and that the numeric ratings alone cannot capture the information in the text”
[106] — see also Ghose et al. [107], who additionally attempt to assign a “dollar value” to various adjective-
noun pairs, adverb-verb pairs, or similar lexical configurations. In a related vein, Pavlou and Dimoka [237]
suggest that “the apparent success of feedback mechanisms to facilitate transactions among strangers does
not mainly come from their crude numerical ratings, but rather from their rich feedback text comments.”
Also, Chevalier and Mayzlin [59] interpret their findings on the effect of review length as providing some
evidence that people do read the reviews rather than simply relying on numerical ratings.
58
On the other hand, Cabral and Hortaçsu [47], in an interesting experiment, look at 41 odd cases of
feedback on sellers posted on eBay: what was unusual was that the feedback text was clearly positive,
but the numerical rating was negative (presumably due to user error). Analysis reveals that these reviews
have a strongly significant (“both economically and statistically”) detrimental effect on sales growth rate —
indicating that customers seemed to ignore the text in favor of the incorrect summary information.
In some of these text-based studies, what was analyzed was not sentiment per se but the degree of
polarization (disagreement) among a set of opinionated documents [13, 68] or, inspired in part by Pang
and Lee [233], the average probability of a sentence being subjective within a given review [106]. Ghose
and Ipeirotis [106] also take into account the standard deviation for sentence subjectivity within a review,
in order to examine whether reviews containing a mix of subjective and objective sentences seem to have
different effects from reviews that are mostly purely subjective or purely objective.
Some initially unexpected text effects are occasionally reported. For example, Archak et al. [14] found
that “amazing camera”, “excellent camera”, and related phrases have a negative effect on demand. They
hypothesize that consumers consider such phrases, especially if few details are subsequently furnished in the
review, to indicate hyperbole and hence view the review itself as untrustworthy. Similarly, Archak et al. [14]
and Ghose et al. [107] discover that apparently positive comments like “decent quality” or “good packaging”
also had a negative effect, and hypothesize that the very fact that many reviews contain hyperbolic language
mean that words like “decent” are interpreted as lukewarm.
These findings might seem pertinent to the distinction between the prior polarity and the contextual
polarity of terms and phrases, borrowing the terminology of Wilson et al. [320]. Prior polarity refers to
the sentiment a term evokes in isolation, as opposed to the sentiment the term evokes within a particular
surrounding context; Polanyi and Zaenen [242] point out that identifying prior polarity alone may not suffice.
With respect to this distinction, the status of the observations of Archak et al. [14] just mentioned is not
entirely clear. The superlatives (“amazing”) are clearly intended to convey positive sentiment regardless of
whether the review authors actually managed to convince readers; that is, context is only needed to explain
the economic effect of lowered sales, not the interpretation of the review itself. In the case of words like
“decent”, one could potentially make the case that the prior orientation of such words is in fact neutral rather
than positive; but alternatively, one could argue instead that in a setting where many reviews are highly
enthusiastic, the contextual orientation of “decent” is indeed different from its prior orientation.
6.1.3 Interactions with word of mouth (WOM)
One factor that some studies point out is that the number of reviews, positive or negative, may simply reflect
“word of mouth”, so that in some cases, what is really the underlying correlative (if any) of economic impact
is not the amount of positive feedback per se but merely the amount of feedback in total. This explains why
in some settings (but not all), negative feedback is seen to “increase” sales: the increased “buzz” brings more
attention to the product (or perhaps simply indicates more attention is being paid to the product, in which
case it would not be predictive per se).
6.2 Implications for manipulation
Regarding the incentives for manipulation, it is difficult to draw a conclusion one way or the other from the
studies we have just examined.
One cautious way to read the results summarized in the previous section is as follows. While there may
be some economic benefit in some settings for a corporation to plant positive reviews or otherwise attempt
59
to use untoward means to manufacture an artificially inflated reputation or suppress negative information,
it seems that in general, a great deal of effort and resources would be required to do so for perhaps fairly
marginal returns. More work is clearly required, though; as Bajari and Hortaçsu [24] conclude, “There is
still plenty of work to be done to understand how market participants utilize the information contained in
the feedback forum system”. Surveying the state of the art in this subject is beyond the scope of this survey;
a fairly concise review of issues regarding online reputation systems may be found in Dellarocas [71].
We would like to conclude, though, by pointing out a result that indicates that even if illegitimate re-
views do get through, opinion-mining systems can still be valuable to consumers. Awerbuch and Kleinberg
[22] study the “competitive collaborative learning” setting in which some of the n users are assumed to be
“Byzantine” (malicious, dishonest, coordinated, and able to eavesdrop on communications), and product or
resource quality varies over time. The authors formulate the product selection problem as a type of “multi-
armed bandit” problem. They show the striking result that even if only a constant fraction of users are honest
and (unbeknownst to them) grouped into k market segments such that all members of a block share the same
product preferences — with the implication that the recommendations of an honest user may be useless to
honest users in different market segments — then there is still an algorithm by which, in time polynomial
in k log(n), the average regret per honest user is arbitrarily small (assuming that the number of products or
resources on offer is O(n)). Roughly speaking, the algorithm causes users to tend to raise the probability of
getting recommendations from valuable sources. Thus, even in the face of rather stiff odds and formidable
adversaries, honest users can — at least in theory — still get good advice from sentiment-analysis systems.
60
7
Publicly available resources
7.1 Datasets
7.1.1 Acquiring labels for data
One source of opinion, sentiment, and subjectivity labels is, of course, manual annotation [172, 310, inter
alia].
However, researchers in the field have also managed to find ways to avoid manual annotation by leverag-
ing pre-existing resources. A common technique is to use labels that have been manually assigned, but not
by the experimenters themselves; this explains why researchers in opinion mining and sentiment analysis
have taken advantage of Rotten Tomatoes, Epinions, Amazon, and other sites where users furnish ratings
along with their reviews. Some other noteworthy techniques are as follows.
• Sentiment summaries can be gathered by treating the review snippets that Rotten Tomatoes fur-
nishes as one-sentence summaries [33].
• Subjective vs. non-subjective texts on the same topic can be gathered by selecting editorials
versus non-editorial newswire [309, 327] or by selecting movie reviews versus plot summaries
[222, 232].
• If sentiment-oriented search engines already exist (one example used to be Opinmind), then one
can issue topical queries to such search engines and harvest the results to get sentiment-bearing
sentences more or less guaranteed to be on-topic [206]. (On the other hand, there is something
circular about this approach, since it bootstraps off of someone else’s solution to the opinion-
mining problem.)
• One might be able to derive affect labels from emoticons [250].
• Text polarity may be inferred from correlations with stock-market behavior or other economic
indicators [107, 168].
• Viewpoint labels can be derived from images of party logos that users display. [160]
• Negative opinions can be gathered by assuming that when one newsgroup post cites another, it is
typically done to indicate negative sentiment toward the cited post [4]. A more refined approach
61
takes into account indications of “shouting”, such as text rendered all in capital letters [110].
One point to mention with regards to sites where users rate the contributions of other users — such
as the examples of Amazon and Epinions mentioned above — is a potential bias towards positive scores
[59, 74, 128, 132, 240, 254], as we have mentioned above. In some cases, this comes about because of
sociological effects. For example, Pinch and Athanasiades [240], in a study of a music-oriented site called
ACIDplanet, found that various forces tend to cause users to give high ratings to each other’s music. The
users themselves refer to this phenomenon as “R=R” (review me and I’ll review you), among other, less
polite, names, and the ACIDplanet administrators introduced a form of anonymous reviewing to avoid this
issue in certain scenarios.
Thus, there is the question of whether one can trust the automatically-determined labels that one is
training one’s classifiers upon. (After all, you often get what you pay for, as they say.) Indeed, Liu et al.
[193] essentially re-labeled their review-quality Amazon data due to concerns about bias, as discussed in
Section 5.2.4 above. On the other hand, while this phenomenon implies that reviewers may not always be
sincere, we hypothesize that this phenomenon does not greatly affect the quality of the authors’ meta-data
labels at reflecting the intended sentiment of the review itself. That is, we hypothesize that in many cases
one can still trust the review’s label, even if one does not trust the review.
7.1.2 An annotated list of datasets
The following list is in alphabetical order.
Blog06
[registration and fee required]
The University of Glasgow distributes this 25GB TREC test collection, consisting of blog posts over a range
of topics. Access information is available at http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/test_collections/
access_to_data.html. Included in the data set are “top blogs” that were provided by Nielsen
BuzzMetrics and “supplemented by the University of Amsterdam” [227], and some spam blogs, also
known as “splogs”, that were planted in the corpus in order to simulate a more realistic setting. As-
sessments include relevance judgments and labels as to whether posts contain relevant opinions and
what the polarity of the opinions was (positive, negative, or a mixture of both). Macdonald and Ounis
[199] give more details on the creation of the corpus and the collection’s features, and include some
comparison with another collection of blog postings, the BlogPulse dataset (contact information can be
found on the following agreement form: http://www.blogpulse.com/www2006-workshop/
datashare-agreement.pdf, but it may be out of date).
Congressional floor-debate transcripts
URL: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/llee/data/convote.html
This dataset, first introduced in Thomas et al. [295], includes speeches as individual documents together
with:
• automatically derived labels for whether the speaker supported or opposed the legislation dis-
cussed in the debate the speech appears in, allowing for experiments with this kind of sentiment
analysis;
• indications of which “debate” each speech comes from, allowing for consideration of conversa-
tional structure;
62
• indications of by-name references between speakers, allowing for experiments on agreement
classification if one assigns gold-standard agreement labels from the support/oppose labels as-
signed to the pair of speakers in question; and
• the edge weights and other information derived to create the graphs used in Thomas et al. [295],
facilitating implementation of alternative graph-based methods upon the graphs constructed in
that earlier work.
Cornell movie-review datasets
URL: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data/
These corpora, first introduced in Pang and Lee [232, 233], consist of the following datasets, which include
automatically derived labels.
• Sentiment polarity datasets:
– document-level: polarity dataset v2.0: 1000 positive and 1000 negative processed re-
views. (An earlier version of this dataset (v1.0) was first introduced in Pang et al. [235].)
– sentence-level: sentence polarity dataset v1.0: 5331 positive and 5331 negative processed
sentences / snippets.
• Sentiment-scale datasets: scale dataset v1.0: a collection of documents whose labels come from
a rating scale.
• Subjectivity dataset v1.0: 5000 subjective and 5000 objective processed sentences.
We should point out that the existence of the polarity-based datasets does not indicate that the curators
(i.e., us) believe that reviews with middling ratings are not important to consider in practice (indeed, the
sentiment-scale corpora contain such documents). Rather, the rationale in creating the polarity dataset was
as follows. At the time the corpus creation was begun, the application of machine learning techniques to
sentiment classification was very new, and, as discussed in Chapter 3, it was natural to assume that the
problem could be very challenging to such techniques. Therefore, the polarity corpus was constructed to be
as “easy” for text-categorization techniques as possible: the documents fell into one of two well-separated
and size-balanced categories. The point was, then, to use this corpus as a lens to study the relative difficulty
of sentiment polarity classification as compared to standard topic-based classification, where two-balanced-
class problems with well-separated categories pose very little challenge.
A list of papers that use or report performance on the Cornell movie-review datasets can
be found at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data/
otherexperiments.html.
Customer review datasets
URL: http://www.cs.uic.edu/˜liub/FBS/CustomerReviewData.zip
This dataset, introduced in Hu and Liu [130], consists of reviews of five electronics products downloaded
from Amazon and Cnet. The sentences have been manually labeled as to whether an opinion is expressed,
and if so, what feature from a pre-defined list is being evaluated. An addendum with nine products is also
available (http://www.cs.uic.edu/˜liub/FBS/Reviews-9-products.rar) and has been
utilized in recent work [78]. The curator, Bing Liu, also distributes a comparative-sentence dataset that is
available by request.
63
Economining
URL: http://economining.stern.nyu.edu/datasets.html
This site, hosted by the Stern School at New York University, consists of three sets of data:
• Transactions and price premiums
• Feedback postings for merchants at Amazon.com
• Automatically-derived sentiment scores for frequent evaluation phrases at Amazon.com
These formed the basis for the work reported in Ghose et al. [107], which focuses on interactions between
sentiment, subjectivity, and economic indicators.
French sentences
URL: http://www.psor.ucl.ac.be/personal/yb/Resource.html
This dataset, introduced in Bestgen et al. [36], consists of 702 sentences from a Belgian-French newspaper,
with labels assigned by ten judges as to unpleasant, neutral or pleasant content, using a seven-point scale.
MPQA Corpus
URL: http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/databaserelease/
The MPQA Opinion Corpus contains 535 news articles from a wide variety of news sources, manually an-
notated at the sentential and sub-sentential level for opinions and other private states (i.e., beliefs, emotions,
sentiments, speculations, and so on). Wiebe et al. [310] describes the overall annotation scheme; Wilson
et al. [320] describes the contextual polarity annotations and an agreement study.
Multiple-aspect restaurant reviews
URL: http://people.csail.mit.edu/bsnyder/naacl07
The corpus, introduced in Snyder and Barzilay [273], consists of 4,488 reviews, both in raw-text and in
feature-vector form. Each review gives an explicit 1-to-5 rating for five different aspects — food, ambiance,
service, value, and overall experience — along with the text of the review itself, all provided by the review
author. A rating of 5 was the most common over all aspects, and Snyder and Barzilay [273] report that 30.5%
of the 3,488 reviews in their randomly-selected training set had a rating of 5 for all five aspects, although
no other tuple of ratings was represented by more than 5% of the training set. The code used in Snyder
and Barzilay [273] is also distributed at the aforementioned URL. The original source for the reviews was
http://www.we8there.com/; data from the same website was also used by Higashinaka et al. [122].
Multi-Domain Sentiment Dataset
URL: http://www.cis.upenn.edu/˜mdredze/datasets/sentiment/
This dataset, introduced in Blitzer et al. [40], consists of product reviews from several different product types
taken from Amazon.com, some with 1-to-5 star labels, some unlabeled.
NTCIR multilingual corpus
[registration required]
The corpus for the NTCIR 6 pilot task consists of news articles in Japanese, Chinese, and English and
formed the basis of the Opinion Analysis Task at NTCIR6 [268]. The training data contains annotations
regarding opinion holders, the opinions held by opinion holder, and sentiment polarity, as well as relevance
information for a set of pre-determined topics.
64
The corpus of the NTCIR Multilingual Opinion-Analysis Task (MOAT) is drawn from Japanese, Chi-
nese, and English blogs.
Review-search results sets
URL: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/llee/data/search-subj.html
This corpus, used by Pang and Lee [234], consists of the top 20 results returned by the Yahoo! search
engine in response to each of a set of 69 queries containing the word “review”. The queries were drawn
from the publicly available list of real MSN users’ queries released for the 2005 KDD Cup competi-
tion [185]; the KDD data itself is available at http://www.acm.org/sigs/sigkdd/kdd2005/
Labeled800Queries.zip . The search-engine results in the corpus are annotated as to whether they
are subjective or not. Note that “sales pitches” were marked objective on the premise that they represent
biased reviews that users might wish to avoid seeing.
7.2 Evaluation campaigns
7.2.1 TREC opinion-related competitions
The “TREC-BLOG” wiki, http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/wiki/TREC-BLOG/, is a useful source of
information on the competitions sketched below.
TREC 2006 Blog Track TREC 2006 involved a Blog track, with an opinion retrieval task designed pre-
cisely to focus on the opinionated character that many blogs have: participating systems had to retrieve blog
posts expressing an opinion about a specified topic. Fourteen groups participated; Ounis et al. [227] give an
overview of the results. Some findings are as follows. With respect to performance on opinion detection, the
participating systems seemed to fall into two groups. Opinion-detection ability and relevance-determination
ability seemed to be strongly correlated. While the best systems were about equally good at detecting neg-
ative sentiment as positive sentiment, systems performing at the median seemed to be a bit more effective
at locating documents with negative sentiment. Most participants followed a pipelined approach, where first
topic relevance was tackled, and then opinion detection was applied upon the results. Perhaps the most sur-
prising observation was that the organizers discovered that it was possible to achieve very good relative
performance by omitting the second phase of the pipeline; but we take heart in the fact that the field is still
relatively young and has room to grow and mature.
TREC 2007 Blog Track The TREC 2007 Blog track retained the opinion retrieval task and instituted de-
termining the sentiment status (positive, negative, or mixed) of the retrieved opinions as a subtask. The 2007
and 2006 Blog Track results are analyzed in Ounis et al. [228]. They found that lexicon-based approaches
— either where the discriminativeness of terms was determined on labeled training data or where the terms
were manually compiled — constituted the main effective approaches.
TREC 2008 Blog Track In the TREC 2008 Blog track, the polarity-identification problem was re-posed
as one of ranking of positive-polarity retrieved documents by degree of positivity, and, similarly, ranking of
negative-polarity retrieved documents by degree of negativity. (“Mixed opinionated documents” were not to
be included in these rankings.)
65
7.2.2 NTCIR opinion-related competitions
The National Institute of Informatics (NII) runs annual meetings codenamed NTCIR (NII Test Collection
for Information Retrieval Systems). Opinion analysis was featured at an NTCIR-5 workshop, and served as
a pilot task at NTCIR-6 and a full-blown task at NTCIR-7.
NTCIR-6 opinion analysis pilot task The dataset consists of newswire documents in Chinese, Japanese,
and English; the organizers describe this as “what we believe to be the first multilingual opinion analysis
data set over comparable data” [93]. The four constituent tasks, intentionally designed to be fairly simple so
as to encourage participation from many groups, were as follows:
• Detection of opinionated sentences
• Detection of opinion holders
• (optional) Polarity labeling of opinionated sentences as positive, negative, or neutral
• (optional) Detection of sentences relevant to a given topic
Due to variation in annotator labellings, two evaluation standards were defined. In the strict evaluation, an
answer is considered correct if all three annotators agreed on it. In the lenient evaluation, only a majority
(i.e., two) of the annotators were required to agree with an answer for it to be considered correct.
Seki et al. [268] give an overview and the results of this evaluation exercise, noting that differences
between languages make direct comparison difficult, especially since precision and recall were defined
(slightly) differently across languages. A shortened version of this overview also exists [93].
NTCIR-7 Multilingual opinion analysis task (MOAT), 2008 Subsequent to the NTCIR-6 pilot task, a
new dataset was selected, drawn from blogs in Japanese, traditional and simplified Chinese, and English;
according to the organizers, “We plan to select and balance useful topics for opinion mining researchers,
such as topics concerning product reviews, movie reviews, and so on”. This exercise involves six subtasks:
• Detection of opinionated sentences and opinion fragments within opinionated sentences
• Polarity labeling of opinion fragments as positive, negative or neutral
• (optional) Strength labeling of opinion fragments as very weak, average, or very strong
• (optional) Detection of opinion holders
• (optional) Detection of opinion targets
• (optional) Detection of sentences that are relevant to a given topic
As in the previous competition, both strict and lenient evaluation standards are to be applied.
OpQA Corpus
[available by request]
Stoyanov et al. [284] describes the construction of this corpus, which is a collection of opinion questions
and answers together with 98 documents selected from the MPQA dataset.
7.3 Lexical resources
The following list is in alphabetical order.
66
General Inquirer
URL: http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/˜inquirer/
This site provides entry-points to various resources associated with the General Inquirer [282]. Included are
manually-classified terms labeled with various types of positive or negative semantic orientation, and words
having to do with agreement or disagreement.
NTU Sentiment Dictionary
[registration required]
This sentiment dictionary listing the polarities of many Chinese words was developed by a combination of
automated and manual means [171]. A registration form for acquiring it is available at http://nlg18.
csie.ntu.edu.tw:8080/opinion/userform.jsp.
OpinionFinder’s Subjectivity Lexicon
URL: http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa/
The list of subjectivity clues that is part of OpinionFinder is available for download. These clues were
compiled from several sources, representing several years of effort, and were used in Wilson et al. [320].
SentiWordnet
URL: http://sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it/
SentiWordnet [91] is a lexical resource for opinion mining. Each synset of WordNet [95], a publicly available
thesaurus-like resource, is assigned one of three sentiment scores — positive, negative, or objective — where
these scores were automatically generated using a semi-supervised method described in Esuli and Sebastiani
[90].
Taboada and Grieve’s Turney adjective list
[available through the Yahoo! sentimentAI group]
Reported are the semantic-orientation values according to the method proposed by Turney [299] for 1700
adjectives.
7.4 Tutorials, bibliographies, and other references
Bing Liu has a chapter on opinion mining in his book on Web data mining [190]. Slides for
that chapter are available at http://www.cs.uic.edu/˜liub/teach/cs583-spring-07/
opinion-mining.pdf.
Slides for Janyce Wiebe’s tutorial, “Semantics, opinion, and sentiment in text”, at the EUROLAN 2007
Summmer School are available at
http://www.cs.pitt.edu/˜wiebe/pubs/papers/EUROLAN07/eurolan07wiebe.ppt.
The following are online bibliographies that contain information in BibTeX format:
• http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/llee/opinion-mining-sentiment-analysis-survey.
html, the main website for this survey
• http://liinwww.ira.uka.de/bibliography/Misc/Sentiment.html, main-
tained by Andrea Esuli
• http://research.microsoft.com/˜jtsun/OpinionMiningPaperList.
html, maintained by Jian-Tao Sun
67
• http://www.cs.pitt.edu/˜wiebe/pubs/papers/EUROLAN07/
eurolan07bib.html with actual .bib file at http://www.cs.pitt.edu/˜wiebe/
pubs/papers/EUROLAN07/eurolan07.bib, maintained by Janyce Wiebe
Esuli and Wiebe’s sites have additional search capabilities.
Members of the Yahoo! group “sentimentAI” (http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/
SentimentAI/) have access to the resources that have been contributed there (such as some links to
corpora and papers) and are subscribed to the associated mailing list. Joining is free.
68
8
Concluding remarks
When asked how he knew a piece was finished, he responded, “When the dinner bell rings.”
— apocryphal anecdote about Alexander Calder
Our goal in this survey has been to cover techniques and approaches that promise to directly enable
opinion-oriented information-seeking systems, and to convey to the reader a sense of our excitement about
the intellectual richness and breadth of the area. We very much encourage the reader to take up the many
open challenges that remain, and hope we have provided some resources that will prove helpful in this
regard.
On the topic of resources: we have already indicated above that the bibliographic database used in
this survey is publicly available. In fact, the URL mentioned above, http://www.cs.cornell.
edu/home/llee/opinion-mining-sentiment-analysis-survey.html, is our personally-
maintained homepage for this survey. Any subsequent editions or versions of this survey that may be pro-
duced, or related news, will be announced there.1
Speaking of resources, we have drawn considerably on those of many others during the course of this
work. We thus have a number of sincere acknowledgments to make.
This survey is based upon work supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant no. IIS-
0329064, a Cornell University Provost’s Award for Distinguished Scholarship, a Yahoo! Research Alliance
gift, and an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or official policies, either
expressed or implied, of any sponsoring institutions, the U.S. government, or any other entity.
We would like to wholeheartedly thank the anonymous referees, who provided outstanding feedback
astonishingly quickly. Their insights contributed immensely to the final form of this survey on many levels.
It is hard to describe our level of gratitude to them for their time and their wisdom, except to say this: we
have, in various capacities, seen many examples of reviewing in the community, but this is the best we have
1Indeed, we have vague aspirations to producing a “director’s cut” one day. We certainly have accumulated some number of outtakes: we did not
manage to find a way to work some variant of “Once more, with feeling” into the title, or to find a place for the heading “Sentiment of a woman”,
or to formally prove a potential undecidability result for subjectivity detection (Jon Kleinberg, personal communication) based on reviews of
Brotherhood of the Wolf (“it’s the best darned French werewolf kung-fu movie I’ve ever seen”).
69
ever encountered. We also thank Eric Breck for his careful reading of and commentary on portions of this
survey. All remaining errors and faults are, of course, our own.
We are also very thankful to Fabrizio Sebastiani for all of his editorial guidance and care. We owe him
a great debt. We also greatly appreciate the help we received from Jamie Callan, who, along with Fabrizio,
serves as Editor in Chief of the Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval series, and James Finlay,
of Now Publishers, the publisher of this series.
Finally, a number of unexpected health problems arose in our families during the writing of this survey.
Despite this, it was our families who sustained us with their cheerful and unlimited support (on many levels),
not the other way around. Thus — to end on a sentimental note — this work is dedicated to them.
70
References
[1] Ahmed Abbasi. Affect intensity analysis of dark web forums. In Proceedings of Intelligence and
Security Informatics (ISI), pages 282–288, 2007.
[2] Lada A. Adamic and Natalie Glance. The political blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. election: Divided
they blog. In Proceedings of LinkKDD, 2005.
[3] Alekh Agarwal and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. Sentiment analysis: A new approach for effective use of
linguistic knowledge and exploiting similarities in a set of documents to be classified. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Natural Language Processing (ICON), 2005.
[4] Rakesh Agrawal, Sridhar Rajagopalan, Ramakrishnan Srikant, and Yirong Xu. Mining newsgroups
using networks arising from social behavior. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 529–535, 2003.
[5] Edoardo M. Airoldi, Xue Bai, and Rema Padman. Markov blankets and meta-heuristic search: Senti-
ment extraction from unstructured text. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3932 (Advances in Web
Mining and Web Usage Analysis):167–187, 2006.
[6] George A. Akerlof. The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488–500, 1970.
[7] Shaikh Mostafa Al Masum, Helmut Prendinger, and Mitsuru Ishizuka. SenseNet: A linguistic tool
to visualize numerical-valence based sentiment of textual data. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Natural Language Processing (ICON), pages 147–152, 2007. Poster.
[8] James Allan. Introduction to topic detection and tracking. In James Allan, editor, Topic detection
and tracking: Event-based information organization, pages 1–16, Norwell, MA, USA, 2002. Kluwer
Academic Publishers. ISBN 0-7923-7664-1.
[9] Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Dan Roth, and Richard Sproat. Emotions from text: machine learning for
text-based emotion prediction. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference and
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), 2005.
[10] Aris Anagnostopoulos, Andrei Z. Broder, and David Carmel. Sampling search-engine results. World
Wide Web, 9(4):397–429, 2006.
[11] Rie Kubota Ando and Tong Zhang. A framework for learning predictive structures from multiple
tasks and unlabeled data. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6:1817–1853, 2005.
71
[12] Alina Andreevskaia and Sabine Bergler. Mining WordNet for a fuzzy sentiment: Sentiment tag ex-
traction from WordNet glosses. In Proceedings of the European Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (EACL), 2006.
[13] Werner Antweiler and Murray Z. Frank. Is all that talk just noise? The information content of internet
stock message boards. Journal of Finance, 59(3):1259–1294, 2004.
[14] Nikolay Archak, Anindya Ghose, and Panagiotis Ipeirotis. Show me the money! Deriving the pric-
ing power of product features by mining consumer reviews. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), 2007.
[15] Shlomo Argamon, editor. Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on DOING IT WITH STYLE: Compu-
tational Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthesis. 2003.
[16] Shlomo Argamon, Jussi Karlgren, and James G. Shanahan, editors. Proceedings of the SIGIR Work-
shop on Stylistic Analysis Of Text For Information Access. ACM, 2005.
[17] Shlomo Argamon, Jussi Karlgren, and Ozlem Uzuner, editors. Proceedings of the SIGIR Workshop
on Stylistics for Text Retrieval in Practice. ACM, 2006.
[18] Shlomo Argamon-Engelson, Moshe Koppel, and Galit Avneri. Style-based text categorization: What
newspaper am I reading? In Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Text Categorization, pages 1–4,
1998.
[19] Yigal Attali and Jill Burstein. Automated essay scoring with e-rater v.2. Journal of Technology,
Learning, and Assessment, 4(3), February 2006.
[20] Anthony Aue and Michael Gamon. Automatic identification of sentiment vocabulary: Exploiting low
association with known sentiment terms. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Feature Engineer-
ing for Machine Learning in Natural Language Processing, 2005.
[21] Anthony Aue and Michael Gamon. Customizing sentiment classifiers to new domains: A case study.
In Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP), 2005.
[22] Baruch Awerbuch and Robert Kleinberg. Competitive collaborative learning. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), pages 233–248, 2005. Journal version to appear in Journal
of Computer and System Sciences, special issue on computational learning theory.
[23] Patrick Bajari and Ali Hortaçsu. The winner’s curse, reserve prices, and endogenous entry: Empirical
insights from eBay auctions. RAND Journal of Economics, 34(2):329–355, 2003.
[24] Patrick Bajari and Ali Hortaçsu. Economic insights from internet auctions. Journal of Economic
Literature, 42(2):457–486, 2004.
[25] Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceed-
ings of COLING/ACL, 1998.
[26] Ann Banfield. Unspeakable sentences: Narration and representation in the language of fiction. Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1982.
[27] Mohit Bansal, Claire Cardie, and Lillian Lee. The power of negative thinking: Exploiting label dis-
agreement in the min-cut classification framework. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING), 2008. Poster paper.
[28] Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro, Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan
Szpektor. The second PASCAL recognising textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the
Second PASCAL Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual Entailment, 2006.
[29] Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee. Learning to paraphrase: An unsupervised approach using multiple-
sequence alignment. In Proceedings of the Joint Human Language Technology/North American
Chapter of the ACL Conference (HLT-NAACL), pages 16–23, 2003.
72
[30] Regina Barzilay and Kathleen McKeown. Extracting paraphrases from a parallel corpus. In Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 50–57, 2001.
[31] Suman Basuroy, Subimal Chatterjee, and S. Abraham Ravid. How critical are critical reviews? the
box office effects of film critics, star power and budgets. Journal of Marketing, 67(4):103–117, 2003.
[32] Mikhail Bautin, Lohit Vijayarenu, and Steven Skiena. International sentiment analysis for news and
blogs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2008.
[33] Philip Beineke, Trevor Hastie, Christopher Manning, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. Exploring sen-
timent summarization. In Qu et al. [245]. AAAI technical report SS-04-07.
[34] Farah Benamara, Carmine Cesarano, Antonio Picariello, Diego Reforgiato, and V. S. Subrahmanian.
Sentiment analysis: Adjectives and adverbs are better than adjectives alone. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2007. Short paper.
[35] Jonah Berger, Alan T. Sorensen, and Scott J. Rasmussen. Negative publicity: When is negative a
positive? Manuscript. PDF file’s last modification date: October 16, 2007. URL http://www.
stanford.edu/˜asorense/papers/Negative_Publicity.pdf.
[36] Yves Bestgen, Cédrick Fairon, and Laurent Kerves. Un baromètre affectif effectif: Corpus de
référence et méthode pour déterminer la valence affective de phrases. In Journées internationales
d’analyse statistique des donnés textuelles (JADT), pages 182–191, 2004.
[37] Steven Bethard, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton, Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky. Automatic
extraction of opinion propositions and their holders. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium
on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text, 2004.
[38] Douglas Biber. Variation across Speech and Writing. Cambridge University Press, 1988.
[39] David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 3:993–1022, 2003.
[40] John Blitzer, Mark Dredze, and Fernando Pereira. Biographies, Bollywood, boom-boxes and
blenders: Domain adaptation for sentiment classification. In Proceedings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL), 2007.
[41] S. R. K. Branavan, Harr Chen, Jacob Eisenstein, and Regina Barzilay. Learning document-level
semantic properties from free-text annotations. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), 2008.
[42] Eric Breck and Claire Cardie. Playing the telephone game: Determining the hierarchical structure
of perspective and speech expressions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING), 2004.
[43] Eric Breck, Yejin Choi, and Claire Cardie. Identifying expressions of opinion in context. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), Hyderabad, India,
2007.
[44] Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine. In
Proceedings of the 7th International World Wide Web Conference, pages 107–117, 1998.
[45] Rebecca F. Bruce and Janyce M. Wiebe. Recognizing subjectivity: A case study in manual tagging.
Natural Language Engineering, 5(2), 1999.
[46] Judee K. Burgoon, J. P. Blair, Tiantian Qin, and Jay F. Nunamaker, Jr. Detecting deception through
linguistic analysis. In Proceedings of Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), number 2665 in
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, page 958, 2008.
[47] Luı́s Cabral and Ali Hortaçsu. The dynamics of seller reputation: Theory and evidence from eBay.
Working paper, downloaded version revised in March, 2006. URL http://pages.stern.nyu.
73
edu/˜lcabral/workingpapers/CabralHortacsu_Mar06.pdf.
[48] Jaime Carbonell. Subjective Understanding: Computer Models of Belief Systems. PhD thesis, Yale,
1979.
[49] Claire Cardie. Empirical methods in information extraction. AI Magazine, 18(4):65–79, 1997.
[50] Claire Cardie, Cynthia Farina, Thomas Bruce, and Erica Wagner. Using natural language processing
to improve eRulemaking. In Proceedings of Digital Government Research (dg.o), 2006.
[51] Claire Cardie, Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Diane Litman. Combining low-level and summary
representations of opinions for multi-perspective question answering. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Spring Symposium on New Directions in Question Answering, pages 20–27, 2003.
[52] Giuseppe Carenini, Raymond Ng, and Adam Pauls. Multi-document summarization of evaluative
text. In Proceedings of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL), pages 305–312, 2006.
[53] Giuseppe Carenini, Raymond T. Ng, and Adam Pauls. Interactive multimedia summaries of evaluative
text. In Proceedings of Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI), pages 124–131. ACM Press, 2006.
[54] Dorwin Cartwright and Frank Harary. Structural balance: A generalization of Heider’s theory. Psy-
chological Review, 63(5):277–293, 1956.
[55] Pimwadee Chaovalit and Lina Zhou. Movie review mining: A comparison between supervised and
unsupervised classification approaches. In Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS), 2005.
[56] Pei-Yu Sharon Chen, Shin-yi Wu, and Jungsun Yoon. The impact of online recommendations and
consumer feedback on sales. In International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), pages 711–
724, 2004.
[57] Yubo Chen and Jinhong Xie. Online consumer review: Word-of-mouth as a new element of marketing
communication mix. Management Science, 54(3):477–491, 2008.
[58] Paula Chesley, Bruce Vincent, Li Xu, and Rohini Srihari. Using verbs and adjectives to automatically
classify blog sentiment. In AAAI Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs
(AAAI-CAAW), pages 27–29, 2006.
[59] Judith A. Chevalier and Dina Mayzlin. The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online book reviews.
Journal of Marketing Research, 43(3):345–354, August 2006.
[60] Yejin Choi, Eric Breck, and Claire Cardie. Joint extraction of entities and relations for opinion recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), 2006.
[61] Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, Ellen Riloff, and Siddharth Patwardhan. Identifying sources of opinions
with conditional random fields and extraction patterns. In Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference and the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(HLT/EMNLP), 2005.
[62] Eric K. Clemons, Guodong “Gordon” Gao, and Lorin M. Hitt. When online reviews meet hyperdif-
ferentiation: A study of the craft beer industry. Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(2):
149–171, 2006.
[63] comScore/the Kelsey group. Online consumer-generated reviews have significant impact on offline
purchase behavior. Press Release, November 2007. http://www.comscore.com/press/
release.asp?press=1928.
[64] Jack G. Conrad and Frank Schilder. Opinion mining in legal blogs. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL), pages 231–236, New York, NY, USA, 2007.
74
ACM.
[65] W. Bruce Croft and John Lafferty, editors. Language Modeling for Information Retrieval. Number 13
in the Information Retrieval Series. Kluwer/Springer, 2003.
[66] Sanjiv Das and Mike Chen. Yahoo! for Amazon: Extracting market sentiment from stock message
boards. In Proceedings of the Asia Pacific Finance Association Annual Conference (APFA), 2001.
[67] Sanjiv R. Das and Mike Y. Chen. Yahoo! for Amazon: Sentiment extraction from small talk on the
Web. Management Science, 53(9):1375–1388, 2007.
[68] Sanjiv Ranjan Das, Peter Tufano, and Francisco de Asis Martinez-Jerez. eInformation: A clinical
study of investor discussion and sentiment. Financial Management, 34(3):103–137, 2005.
[69] Kushal Dave, Steve Lawrence, and David M. Pennock. Mining the peanut gallery: Opinion extraction
and semantic classification of product reviews. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 519–528, 2003.
[70] Shay David and Trevor John Pinch. Six degrees of reputation: The use and abuse of online review
and recommendation systems. First Monday, July 2006. Special Issue on Commercial Applications
of the Internet.
[71] Chrysanthos Dellarocas. The digitization of word-of-mouth: Promise and challenges of online rep-
utation systems. Management Science, 49(10):1407–1424, 2003. Special issue on e-business and
management science.
[72] Chrysanthos Dellarocas, Xiaoquan (Michael) Zhang, and Neveen F. Awad. Exploring the value of
online product ratings in revenue forecasting: The case of motion pictures. Journal of Interactive
Marketing, 21(4):23–45, 2007.
[73] Ann Devitt and Khurshid Ahmad. Sentiment analysis in financial news: A cohesion-based approach.
In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 984–991, 2007.
[74] Michaël Dewally. Internet investment advice: Investing with a rock of salt. Financial Analysts Jour-
nal, 59(4):65–77, July/August 2003.
[75] Michaël Dewally and Louis Ederington. Reputation, certification, warranties, and information as
remedies for seller-buyer information asymmetries: Lessons from the online comic book market.
Journal of Business, 79(2):693–730, March 2006.
[76] Sanjeev Dewan and Vernon Hsu. Adverse selection in electronic markets: Evidence from online
stamp auctions. Journal of Industrial Economics, 52(4):497–516, December 2004.
[77] Douglas W. Diamond. Reputation acquisition in debt markets. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4):
828–862, 1989.
[78] Xiaowen Ding, Bing Liu, and Philip S. Yu. A holistic lexicon-based approach to opinion mining. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining (WSDM), 2008.
[79] Luca Dini and Giampaolo Mazzini. Opinion classification through information extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Data Mining Methods and Databases for Engineering, Finance and
Other Fields (Data Mining), pages 299–310, 2002.
[80] Wenjing Duan, Bin Gu, and Andrew B. Whinston. Do online reviews matter? - An empirical in-
vestigation of panel data. Social Science Research Network (SSRN) Working Paper Series, 2005.
http://ssrn.com/paper=616262. Version as of January.
[81] David H. Eaton. Valuing information: Evidence from guitar auctions on eBay. Journal of Applied
Economics and Policy, 24(1):1–19, 2005. Kentucky Economic Association (KEA) Best Paper Award.
[82] David H. Eaton. The impact of reputation timing and source on auction outcomes. The B. E. Journal
of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(1), 2007.
[83] Miles Efron. Cultural orientation: Classifying subjective documents by cociation [sic] analysis. In
75
Proceedings of the AAAI Fall Symposium on Style and Meaning in Language, Art, Music, and Design,
pages 41–48, 2004.
[84] Koji Eguchi and Victor Lavrenko. Sentiment retrieval using generative models. In Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 345–354, 2006.
[85] Koji Eguchi and Chirag Shah. Opinion retrieval experiments using generative models: Experiments
for the TREC 2006 blog track. In Proceedings of TREC, 2006.
[86] Paul Ekman. Emotion in the Human Face. Cambridge University Press, second edition, 1982.
[87] Jehoshua Eliashberg and Steve M. Shugan. Film critics: Influencers or predictors? Journal of Mar-
keting, 61(2):68–78, April 1997.
[88] Charlotta Engström. Topic dependence in sentiment classification. Master’s thesis, University of
Cambridge, 2004.
[89] Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. Determining the semantic orientation of terms through gloss
analysis. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM), 2005.
[90] Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. Determining term subjectivity and term orientation for opinion
mining. In Proceedings of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL), 2006.
[91] Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. SentiWordNet: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion
mining. In Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 2006.
[92] Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani. Pageranking wordnet synsets: An application to opinion min-
ing. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2007.
[93] David Kirk Evans, Lun-Wei Ku, Yohei Seki, Hsin-Hsi Chen, and Noriko Kando. Opinion analysis
across languages: An overview of and observations from the NTCIR6 opinion analysis pilot task. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Cross-Language Information Processing, volume 4578 (Applica-
tions of Fuzzy Sets Theory) of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 456–463, 2007.
[94] Anthony Fader, Dragomir R. Radev, Michael H. Crespin, Burt L. Monroe, Kevin M. Quinn, and
Michael Colaresi. MavenRank: Identifying influential members of the US Senate using lexical cen-
trality. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), 2007.
[95] Christiane Fellbaum, editor. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, 1998.
[96] Donghui Feng, Erin Shaw, Jihie Kim, and Eduard Hovy. Learning to detect conversation focus of
threaded discussions. In Proceedings of the Joint Human Language Technology/North American
Chapter of the ACL Conference (HLT-NAACL), pages 208–215, 2006.
[97] Aidan Finn and Nicholas Kushmerick. Learning to classify documents according to genre. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology (JASIST), 7(5), 2006. Special issue
on computational analysis of style.
[98] Aidan Finn, Nicholas Kushmerick, and Barry Smyth. Genre classification and domain transfer for
information filtering. In Proceedings of the 24th BCS-IRSG European Colloquium on IR Research:
Advances in Information Retrieval, number 2291 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 353–
362, Glasgow, 2002.
[99] Peter W. Foltz, Darrell Laham, and Thomas K. Landauer. Automated essay scoring: Applications to
education technology. In Proceedings of ED-MEDIA, pages 939–944, 1999.
[100] Chris Forman, Anindya Ghose, and Batia Wiesenfeld. Examining the relationship between reviews
and sales: The role of reviewer identity disclosure in electronic markets. Information Systems Re-
76
search, 19(3), 2008. Special issue on the interplay between digital and social networks.
[101] George Forman. An extensive empirical study of feature selection metrics for text classification.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:1289–1305, 2003.
[102] Tomohiro Fukuhara, Hiroshi Nakagawa, and Toyoaki Nishida. Understanding sentiment of people
from news articles: Temporal sentiment analysis of social events. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2007.
[103] Michael Gamon. Sentiment classification on customer feedback data: noisy data, large feature vectors,
and the role of linguistic analysis. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING), 2004.
[104] Michael Gamon, Anthony Aue, Simon Corston-Oliver, and Eric Ringger. Pulse: Mining customer
opinions from free text. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis
(IDA), number 3646 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 121–132, 2005.
[105] Rayid Ghani, Katharina Probst, Yan Liu, Marko Krema, and Andrew Fano. Text mining for product
attribute extraction. SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 8(1):41–48, 2006.
[106] Anindya Ghose and Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. Designing novel review ranking systems: Predicting
usefulness and impact of reviews. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Electronic
Commerce (ICEC), 2007. Invited paper.
[107] Anindya Ghose, Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis, and Arun Sundararajan. Opinion mining using econometrics:
A case study on reputation systems. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), 2007.
[108] Namrata Godbole, Manjunath Srinivasaiah, and Steven Skiena. Large-scale sentiment analysis for
news and blogs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media
(ICWSM), 2007.
[109] Andrew B. Goldberg and Jerry Zhu. Seeing stars when there aren’t many stars: Graph-based semi-
supervised learning for sentiment categorization. In TextGraphs: HLT/NAACL Workshop on Graph-
based Algorithms for Natural Language Processing, 2006.
[110] Andrew B. Goldberg, Jerry Zhu, and Stephen Wright. Dissimilarity in graph-based semi-supervised
classification. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2007.
[111] Stephan Greene. Spin: Lexical Semantics, Transitivity, and the Identification of Implicit Sentiment.
PhD thesis, University of Maryland, 2007.
[112] Gregory Grefenstette, Yan Qu, James G. Shanahan, and David A. Evans. Coupling niche browsers
and affect analysis for an opinion mining application. In Proceedings of Recherche d’Information
Assistée par Ordinateur (RIAO), 2004.
[113] Michelle L. Gregory, Nancy Chinchor, Paul Whitney, Richard Carter, Elizabeth Hetzler, and Alan
Turner. User-directed sentiment analysis: Visualizing the affective content of documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, pages 23–30, Sydney, Australia, July
2006. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[114] Bin Gu, Prabhudev Konana, Alex Liu, Balaji Rajagopalan, and Joydeep Ghosh. Predictive value of
stock message board sentiments. McCombs Research Paper No. IROM-11-06, version dated Novem-
ber, 2006.
[115] Ramanathan V. Guha, Ravi Kumar, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Andrew Tomkins. Propagation of trust
and distrust. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 403–412, 2004.
[116] Bennett A. Hagedorn, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Jordi Atserias. World knowledge in broad-
coverage information filtering. In Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Information
77
Retrieval (SIGIR), 2007. Poster paper.
[117] Jeffrey T. Hancock, Lauren Curry, Saurabh Goorha, and Michael Woodworth. Automated linguistic
analysis of deceptive and truthful synchronous computer-mediated communication. In Proceedings
of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), page 22c, 2005.
[118] Lisa Hankin. The effects of user reviews on online purchasing behavior across multiple product
categories. Master’s final project report, UC Berkeley School of Information, May 2007. http:
//www.ischool.berkeley.edu/files/lhankin_report.pdf.
[119] Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen McKeown. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjectives.
In Proceedings of the Joint ACL/EACL Conference, pages 174–181, 1997.
[120] Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Janyce Wiebe. Effects of adjective orientation and gradability on
sentence subjectivity. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), 2000.
[121] Marti Hearst. Direction-based text interpretation as an information access refinement. In Paul Jacobs,
editor, Text-Based Intelligent Systems, pages 257–274. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992.
[122] Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Marilyn Walker, and Rashmi Prasad. Learning to generate naturalistic ut-
terances using reviews in spoken dialogue systems. ACM Transactions on Speech and Language
Processing (TSLP), 2007.
[123] Paul Hitlin and Lee Rainie. The use of online reputation and rating systems. Pew Internet & American
Life Project Memo, October 2004.
[124] Thomas Hoffman. Online reputation management is hot — but is it ethical? Computerworld, February
2008.
[125] Thomas Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 50–57,
1999.
[126] Daniel Hopkins and Gary King. Extracting systematic social science meaning from text. Manuscript
available at http://gking.harvard.edu/files/words.pdf, 2007 version was the one
most recently consulted, 2007.
[127] John A. Horrigan. Online shopping. Pew Internet & American Life Project Report, 2008.
[128] Daniel Houser and John Wooders. Reputation in auctions: Theory, and evidence from eBay. Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy, 15:252–369, 2006.
[129] Meishan Hu, Aixin Sun, and Ee-Peng Lim. Comments-oriented blog summarization by sentence ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM), pages 901–904, 2007. ISBN 978-1-59593-803-9. Poster paper.
[130] Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 168–177, 2004.
[131] Minqing Hu and Bing Liu. Mining opinion features in customer reviews. In Proceedings of AAAI,
pages 755–760, 2004.
[132] Nan Hu, Paul A. Pavlou, and Jennifer Zhang. Can online reviews reveal a product’s true quality?:
empirical findings and analytical modeling of online word-of-mouth communication. In Proceedings
of Electronic Commerce (EC), pages 324–330, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
[133] Alison Huettner and Pero Subasic. Fuzzy typing for document management. In ACL 2000 Companion
Volume: Tutorial Abstracts and Demonstration Notes, pages 26–27, 2000.
[134] Matthew Hurst and Kamal Nigam. Retrieving topical sentiments from online document collections.
In Document Recognition and Retrieval XI, pages 27–34, 2004.
[135] Christian Jacquemin. Spotting and Discovering Terms through Natural Language Processing. MIT
78
Press, 2001.
[136] Ginger Jin and Andrew Kato. Price, quality and reputation: Evidence from an online field experiment.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4), 2006.
[137] Xin Jin, Ying Li, Teresa Mah, and Jie Tong. Sensitive webpage classification for content advertis-
ing. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Data Mining and Audience Intelligence for
Advertising, 2007.
[138] Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. Identifying comparative sentences in text documents. In Proceedings of
the ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR), 2006.
[139] Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. Mining comparative sentences and relations. In Proceedings of AAAI,
2006.
[140] Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. Review spam detection. In Proceedings of WWW, 2007. Poster paper.
[141] Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. Opinion spam and analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference on Web
Search and Web Data Mining (WSDM), pages 219–230, 2008.
[142] Nobuhiro Kaji and Masaru Kitsuregawa. Automatic construction of polarity-tagged corpus from html
documents. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL Main Conference Poster Sessions, 2006.
[143] Nobuhiro Kaji and Masaru Kitsuregawa. Building lexicon for sentiment analysis from massive col-
lection of HTML documents. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), pages
1075–1083, 2007.
[144] Anubhav Kale, Amit Karandikar, Pranam Kolari, Akshay Java, Tim Finin, and Anupam Joshi. Mod-
eling trust and influence in the blogosphere using link polarity. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2007. Short paper.
[145] Kirthi Kalyanam and Shelby H. McIntyre. The role of reputation in online auction markets. Santa
Clara University Working Paper 02/03-10-WP, 2001. Dated June 26.
[146] Jaap Kamps, Maarten Marx, Robert J. Mokken, and Maarten de Rijke. Using WordNet to measure
semantic orientation of adjectives. In LREC, 2004.
[147] Sepandar D. Kamvar, Mario T. Schlosser, and Hector Garcia-Molina. The Eigentrust algorithm for
reputation management in P2P networks. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 640–651, New York, NY,
USA, 2003. ACM. ISBN 1-58113-680-3.
[148] Hiroshi Kanayama and Tetsuya Nasukawa. Fully automatic lexicon expansion for domain-oriented
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 355–363, Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[149] Mark Kantrowitz. Method and apparatus for analyzing affect and emotion in text. U.S. Patent
6622140, 2003. Patent filed in November 2000.
[150] Jussi Karlgren and Douglass Cutting. Recognizing text genres with simple metrics using discriminant
analysis. In Proceedings of COLING, pages 1071–1075, 1994.
[151] Yukiko Kawai, Tadahiko Kumamoto, and Katsumi Tanaka. Fair News Reader: Recommending news
articles with different sentiments based on user preference. In Proceedings of Knowledge-Based
Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems (KES), number 4692 in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 612–622, 2007.
[152] Alistair Kennedy and Diana Inkpen. Sentiment classification of movie reviews using contextual
valence shifters. Computational Intelligence, 22(2, Special Issue on Sentiment Analysis)):110–125,
2006.
79
[153] Brett Kessler, Geoffrey Nunberg, and Hinrich Schütze. Automatic detection of text genre. In Pro-
ceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
Eighth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
32–38, 1997.
[154] Peter Kim. The Forrester Wave: Brand monitoring, Q3 2006. Forrester Wave (white paper), 2006.
[155] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. Determining the sentiment of opinions. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), 2004.
[156] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. Automatic detection of opinion bearing words and sentences. In
Companion Volume to the Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (IJCNLP), 2005.
[157] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. Identifying opinion holders for question answering in opinion texts.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Question Answering in Restricted Domains, 2005.
[158] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. Automatic identification of pro and con reasons in online reviews.
In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 483–490, 2006.
[159] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. Identifying and analyzing judgment opinions. In Proceedings of the
Joint Human Language Technology/North American Chapter of the ACL Conference (HLT-NAACL),
2006.
[160] Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy. Crystal: Analyzing predictive opinions on the web. In Proceedings
of the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL), 2007.
[161] Soo-Min Kim, Patrick Pantel, Tim Chklovski, and Marco Pennacchiotti. Automatically assessing
review helpfulness. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 423–430, Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[162] Benjamin Klein and Keith Leffler. The role of market forces in assuring contractual performance.
Journal of Political Economy, 89(4):615–641, 1981.
[163] Jon Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM-
SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 668–677, 1998. Extended version in Journal
of the ACM, 46:604–632, 1999.
[164] Jon Kleinberg and Éva Tardos. Approximation algorithms for classification problems with pairwise
relationships: Metric labeling and Markov random fields. Journal of the ACM, 49(5):616–639, 2002.
ISSN 0004-5411.
[165] Jon Kleinberg and Éva Tardos. Algorithm Design. Addison Wesley, 2006.
[166] Nozomi Kobayashi, Kentaro Inui, Yuji Matsumoto, Kenji Tateishi, and Toshikazu Fukushima. Col-
lecting evaluative expressions for opinion extraction. In Proceedings of the International Joint Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP), 2004.
[167] Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler. The importance of neutral examples for learning sentiment.
In Workshop on the Analysis of Informal and Formal Information Exchange During Negotiations
(FINEXIN), 2005.
[168] Moshe Koppel and Itai Shtrimberg. Good news or bad news? Let the market decide. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications,
pages 86–88, 2004.
[169] Lun-Wei Ku, Li-Ying Li, Tung-Ho Wu, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. Major topic detection and its applica-
tion to opinion summarization. In Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Information
80
Retrieval (SIGIR), pages 627–628, 2005. Poster paper.
[170] Lun-Wei Ku, Yu-Ting Liang, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. Opinion extraction, summarization and tracking
in news and blog corpora. In AAAI Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs
(AAAI-CAAW), pages 100–107, 2006.
[171] Lun-Wei Ku, Yu-Ting Liang, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. Tagging heterogeneous evaluation corpora for
opinionated tasks. In Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), 2006.
[172] Lun-Wei Ku, Yong-Shen Lo, and Hsin-Hsi Chen. Test collection selection and gold standard genera-
tion for a multiply-annotated opinion corpus. In Proceedings of the ACL Demo and Poster Sessions,
pages 89–92, 2007.
[173] Taku Kudo and Yuji Matsumoto. A boosting algorithm for classification of semi-structured text. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
2004.
[174] Sadao Kurohashi, Kentaro Inui, and Yoshikiyo Kato, editors. Workshop on Information Credibility
on the Web, 2007.
[175] Namhee Kwon, Stuart Shulman, and Eduard Hovy. Multidimensional text analysis for eRulemaking.
In Proceedings of Digital Government Research (dg.o), 2006.
[176] John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic
models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings of ICML, pages 282–289, 2001.
[177] John D. Lafferty and Chengxiang Zhai. Document language models, query models, and risk mini-
mization for information retrieval. In Proceedings of SIGIR, pages 111–119, 2001.
[178] Michael Laver, Kenneth Benoit, and John Garry. Extracting policy positions from political texts using
words as data. American Political Science Review, 97(2):311–331, 2003.
[179] Victor Lavrenko and W. Bruce Croft. Relevance-based language models. In Proceedings of SIGIR,
pages 120–127, 2001.
[180] Cynthia G. Lawson and V. Carlos Slawson. Reputation in an internet auction market. Economic
Inquiry, 40(4):533–650, 2002.
[181] Lillian Lee. ”I’m sorry Dave, I’m afraid I can’t do that”: Linguistics, statistics, and natural lan-
guage processing circa 2001. In Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges,
Computer Science Opportunities, and National Research Council Telecommunications Board, edi-
tors, Computer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field, pages 111–118. The
National Academies Press, 2004.
[182] Yong-Bae Lee and Sung Hyon Myaeng. Text genre classification with genre-revealing and subject-
revealing features. In Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval
(SIGIR), 2002.
[183] David Leinweber and Ananth Madhavan. Three hundred years of stock market manipulation. Journal
of Investing, 10(2):7–16, Summer 2001.
[184] Hang Li and Kenji Yamanishi. Mining from open answers in questionnaire data. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 443–449,
2001. Journal version in IEEE Intelligent Systems 17(5):58–63, 2002.
[185] Ying Li, Zijian Zheng, and Honghua (Kathy) Dai. KDD CUP-2005 report: Facing a great challenge.
SIGKDD Explorations, 7(2):91–99, 2005.
[186] Wei-Hao Lin and Alexander Hauptmann. Are these documents written from different perspectives?
A test of different perspectives based on statistical distribution divergence. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING)/Proceedings of the Association
81
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 1057–1064, Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[187] Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Alexander Hauptmann. Which side are you on?
identifying perspectives at the document and sentence levels. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), 2006.
[188] Jackson Liscombe, Giuseppe Riccardi, and Dilek Hakkani-Tür. Using context to improve emotion
detection in spoken dialog systems. In Interspeech, pages 1845–1848, 2005.
[189] Lucian Vlad Lita, Andrew Hazen Schlaikjer, WeiChang Hong, and Eric Nyberg. Qualitative dimen-
sions in question answering: Extending the definitional QA task. In Proceedings of AAAI, pages
1616–1617, 2005. Student abstract.
[190] Bing Liu. Web data mining; Exploring hyperlinks, contents, and usage data, chapter 11: Opinion
Mining. Springer, 2006.
[191] Bing Liu, Minqing Hu, and Junsheng Cheng. Opinion observer: Analyzing and comparing opinions
on the web. In Proceedings of WWW, 2005.
[192] Hugo Liu, Henry Lieberman, and Ted Selker. A model of textual affect sensing using real-world
knowledge. In Proceedings of Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI), pages 125–132, 2003.
[193] Jingjing Liu, Yunbo Cao, Chin-Yew Lin, Yalou Huang, and Ming Zhou. Low-quality product review
detection in opinion summarization. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning (EMNLP-CoNLL),
pages 334–342, 2007. Poster paper.
[194] Yang Liu, Jimmy Huang, Aijun An, and Xiaohui Yu. ARSA: A sentiment-aware model for predicting
sales performance using blogs. In Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Information
Retrieval (SIGIR), 2007.
[195] Yong Liu. Word-of-mouth for movies: Its dynamics and impact on box office revenue. Journal of
Marketing, 70(3):74–89, 2006.
[196] Jeffrey A. Livingston. How valuable is a good reputation? A sample selection model of internet
auctions. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3):453–465, August 2005.
[197] Levon Lloyd, Dimitrios Kechagias, and Steven Skiena. Lydia: A system for large-scale news analysis.
In Proceedings of String Processing and Information Retrieval (SPIRE), number 3772 in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 161–166, 2005.
[198] David Lucking-Reiley, Doug Bryan, Naghi Prasad, and Daniel Reeves. Pennies from eBay: The
determinants of price in online auctions. Journal of Industrial Economics, 55(2):223–233, 2007.
[199] Craig Macdonald and Iadh Ounis. The TREC Blogs06 collection: creating and analysing a blog test
collection. Technical Report TR-2006-224, Department of Computer Science, University of Glasgow,
2006.
[200] Yi Mao and Guy Lebanon. Sequential models for sentiment prediction. In ICML Workshop on
Learning in Structured Output Spaces, 2006.
[201] Yi Mao and Guy Lebanon. Isotonic conditional random fields and local sentiment flow. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2007.
[202] Lanny W. Martin and Georg Vanberg. A robust transformation procedure for interpreting political
text. Political Analysis, 16(1):93–100, 2008.
[203] Hassan Masum and Yi-Cheng Zhang. Manifesto for the reputation society. First Monday, 9(7), 2004.
[204] Shotaro Matsumoto, Hiroya Takamura, and Manabu Okumura. Sentiment classification using word
sub-sequences and dependency sub-trees. In Proceedings of PAKDD’05, the 9th Pacific-Asia Confer-
82
ence on Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2005.
[205] Ryan McDonald, Kerry Hannan, Tyler Neylon, Mike Wells, and Jeff Reynar. Structured models for
fine-to-coarse sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL), pages 432–439, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
[206] Qiaozhu Mei, Xu Ling, Matthew Wondra, Hang Su, and ChengXiang Zhai. Topic sentiment mixture:
Modeling facets and opinions in weblogs. In Proceedings of WWW, pages 171–180, New York, NY,
USA, 2007. ACM Press. ISBN 978-1-59593-654-7.
[207] Mikhail I. Melnik and James Alm. Does a seller’s eCommerce reputation matter? Evidence from
eBay auctions. Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(3):337–349, 2002.
[208] Mikhail I. Melnik and James Alm. Seller reputation, information signals, and prices for heterogeneous
coins on eBay. Southern Economic Journal, 72(2):305–328, 2005.
[209] Rada Mihalcea, Carmen Banea, and Janyce Wiebe. Learning multilingual subjective language via
cross-lingual projections. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
pages 976–983, Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007.
[210] Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava. Learning to laugh (automatically): Computational models for
humor recognition. Journal of Computational Intelligence, 2006.
[211] Gilad Mishne and Maarten de Rijke. Capturing global mood levels using blog posts. In AAAI Sym-
posium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW), pages 145–152, 2006.
[212] Gilad Mishne and Maarten de Rijke. Moodviews: Tools for blog mood analysis. In AAAI Symposium
on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW), pages 153–154, 2006.
[213] Gilad Mishne and Maarten de Rijke. A study of blog search. In Proceedings of the European Con-
ference on Information Retrieval Research (ECIR), 2006.
[214] Gilad Mishne and Natalie Glance. Predicting movie sales from blogger sentiment. In AAAI Sympo-
sium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW), pages 155–158, 2006.
[215] Satoshi Morinaga, Kenji Yamanishi, Kenji Tateishi, and Toshikazu Fukushima. Mining product rep-
utations on the web. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD), pages 341–349, 2002. Industry track.
[216] Frederick Mosteller and David L. Wallace. Applied Bayesian and Classical Inference: The Case of
the Federalist Papers. Springer-Verlag, 1984.
[217] Tony Mullen and Nigel Collier. Sentiment analysis using support vector machines with diverse in-
formation sources. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), pages 412–418, July 2004. Poster paper.
[218] Tony Mullen and Robert Malouf. A preliminary investigation into sentiment analysis of informal
political discourse. In AAAI Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-
CAAW), pages 159–162, 2006.
[219] Tony Mullen and Robert Malouf. Taking sides: User classification for informal online political dis-
course. Internet Research, 18:177–190, 2008.
[220] Jin-Cheon Na, Haiyang Sui, Christopher Khoo, Syin Chan, and Yunyun Zhou. Effectiveness of simple
linguistic processing in automatic sentiment classification of product reviews. In Conference of the
International Society for Knowledge Organization (ISKO), pages 49–54, 2004.
[221] Tetsuya Nasukawa and Jeonghee Yi. Sentiment analysis: Capturing favorability using natural lan-
guage processing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Knowledge Capture (K-CAP), 2003.
[222] Vincent Ng, Sajib Dasgupta, and S. M. Niaz Arifin. Examining the role of linguistic knowledge
83
sources in the automatic identification and classification of reviews. In Proceedings of the COL-
ING/ACL Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 611–618, Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
[223] Xiaochuan Ni, Gui-Rong Xue, Xiao Ling, Yong Yu, and Qiang Yang. Exploring in the weblog space
by detecting informative and affective articles. In Proceedings of WWW, 2007. Industrial practice
and experience track.
[224] Nicolas Nicolov, Franco Salvetti, Mark Liberman, and James H. Martin, editors. AAAI Symposium
on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW). AAAI Press, 2006.
[225] Kamal Nigam and Matthew Hurst. Towards a robust metric of polarity. In James G. Shanahan, Yan
Qu, and Janyce Wiebe, editors, Computing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications,
number 20 in the Information Retrieval Series. Springer, 2006.
[226] Yun Niu, Xiaodan Zhu, Jianhua Li, and Graeme Hirst. Analysis of polarity information in medical
text. In Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Association 2005 Annual Symposium,
2005.
[227] Iadh Ounis, Maarten de Rijke, Craig Macdonald, Gilad Mishne, and Ian Soboroff. Overview of the
TREC-2006 Blog Track. In Proceedings of the 15th Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2006), 2006.
[228] Iadh Ounis, Craig Macdonald, and Ian Soboroff. On the TREC Blog Track. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2008.
[229] Sara Owsley, Sanjay Sood, and Kristian J. Hammond. Domain specific affective classification of
documents. In AAAI Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW),
pages 181–183, 2006.
[230] Martha Palmer, Dan Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. The proposition bank: A corpus annotated with
semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31(1), March 2005.
[231] Bo Pang, Kevin Knight, and Daniel Marcu. Syntax-based alignment of multiple translations: Extract-
ing paraphrases and generating new sentences. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL, 2003.
[232] Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. A sentimental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summariza-
tion based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
pages 271–278, 2004.
[233] Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. Seeing stars: Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization
with respect to rating scales. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
pages 115–124, 2005.
[234] Bo Pang and Lillian Lee. Using very simple statistics for review search: An exploration. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), 2008. Poster paper.
[235] Bo Pang, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using
machine learning techniques. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 79–86, 2002.
[236] Do-Hyung Park, Jumin Lee, and Ingoo Han. The effect of on-line consumer reviews on consumer
purchasing intention: The moderating role of involvement. International Journal of Electronic Com-
merce, 11(4):125–148, 2007. ISSN 1086-4415.
[237] Paul A. Pavlou and Angelika Dimoka. The nature and role of feedback text comments in online
marketplaces: Implications for trust building, price premiums, and seller differentiation. Information
Systems Research, 17(4):392–414, 2006.
[238] Scott Piao, Sophia Ananiadou, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka, Yutaka Sasaki, and John McNaught. Min-
ing opinion polarity relations of citations. In International Workshop on Computational Semantics
84
(IWCS), pages 366–371, 2007. Short paper.
[239] Rosalind Picard. Affective Computing. MIT Press, 1997.
[240] Trevor Pinch and Katharine Athanasiades. ACIDplanet: A study of users of an on-line music commu-
nity. http://sts.nthu.edu.tw/sts_camp/files/ACIDplanet%20by%20Trevor%
20Pinch.ppt. Presented at the 50th Society for Ethnomusicology (SEM) conference, 2005.
[241] Gabriel Pinski and Francis Narin. Citation influence for journal aggregates of scientific publications:
Theory, with application to the literature of physics. Information Processing and Management, 12:
297–312, 1976.
[242] Livia Polanyi and Annie Zaenen. Contextual lexical valence shifters. In Qu et al. [245]. AAAI
technical report SS-04-07.
[243] Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. A language modeling approach to information retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of SIGIR, pages 275–281, 1998.
[244] Ana-Maria Popescu and Oren Etzioni. Extracting product features and opinions from reviews. In Pro-
ceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference and the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), 2005.
[245] Yan Qu, James Shanahan, and Janyce Wiebe, editors. Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on
Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications. AAAI Press, 2004. AAAI technical
report SS-04-07.
[246] Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. A comprehensive grammar
of the English language. Longman, 1985.
[247] Dragomir Radev, Timothy Allison, Sasha Blair-Goldensohn, John Blitzer, Arda Çelebi, Stanko Dim-
itrov, Elliott Drabek, Ali Hakim, Wai Lam, Danyu Liu, Jahna Otterbacher, Hong Qi, Horacio Saggion,
Simone Teufel, Michael Topper, Adam Winkel, and Zhu Zhang. MEAD — A platform for multi-
document multilingual text summarization. In Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Lisbon, Portugal, May 2004.
[248] Dragomir R. Radev, Eduard Hovy, and Kathleen McKeown. Introduction to the special issue on
summarization. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):399–408, 2002. ISSN 0891-2017.
[249] Lee Rainie and John Horrigan. Election 2006 online. Pew Internet & American Life Project Report,
January 2007.
[250] Jonathon Read. Using emoticons to reduce dependency in machine learning techniques for sentiment
classification. In Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop, 2005.
[251] David A. Reinstein and Christopher M. Snyder. The influence of expert reviews on consumer demand
for experience goods: A case study of movie critics. Journal of Industrial Economics, 53(1):27–51,
03 2005.
[252] Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. Building Natural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge, 2000.
[253] Paul Resnick, Ko Kuwabara, Richard Zeckhauser, and Eric Friedman. Reputation systems. Communi-
cations of the Association for Computing Machinery (CACM), 43(12):45–48, 2000. ISSN 0001-0782.
[254] Paul Resnick, Richard Zeckhauser, John Swanson, and Kate Lockwood. The value of reputation on
eBay: A controlled experiment. Experimental Economics, 9(2):79–101, 2006.
[255] Ellen Riloff, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Janyce Wiebe. Feature subsumption for opinion analysis.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
2006.
[256] Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. Learning extraction patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2003.
85
[257] Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and William Phillips. Exploiting subjectivity classification to improve
information extraction. In Proceedings of AAAI, pages 1106–1111, 2005.
[258] Ellen Riloff, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern
bootstrapping. In Proceedings of the Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages
25–32, 2003.
[259] Everett Rogers. Diffusion of Innovations. Free Press, New York, 1962. ISBN 0743222091. Fifth
edition dated 2003.
[260] Sherwin Rosen. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure competition.
The Journal of Political Economy, 82(1):34–55, Jan-Feb 1974.
[261] Dan Roth and Wen Yih. Probabilistic reasoning for entity and relation recognition. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), 2004.
[262] Victoria L. Rubin and Elizabeth D. Liddy. Assessing credibility of weblogs. In AAAI Symposium on
Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs (AAAI-CAAW), pages 187–190, 2006.
[263] Warren Sack. On the computation of point of view. In Proceedings of AAAI, page 1488, 1994. Student
abstract.
[264] Fabrizio Sebastiani. Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing Surveys,
34(1):1–47, 2002.
[265] Yohei Seki, Koji Eguchi, and Noriko Kando. Analysis of multi-document viewpoint summarization
using multi-dimensional genres. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude
and Affect in Text: Theories and Applications, pages 142–145, 2004.
[266] Yohei Seki, Koji Eguchi, Noriko Kando, and Masaki Aono. Multi-document summarization with sub-
jectivity analysis at DUC 2005. In Proceedings of the Document Understanding Conference (DUC),
2005.
[267] Yohei Seki, Koji Eguchi, Noriko Kando, and Masaki Aono. Opinion-focused summarization and its
analysis at DUC 2006. In Proceedings of the Document Understanding Conference (DUC), pages
122–130, 2006.
[268] Yohei Seki, David Kirk Evans, Lun-Wei Ku, Hsin-Hsi Chen, Noriko Kando, and Chin-Yew Lin.
Overview of opinion analysis pilot task at NTCIR-6. In Proceedings of the Workshop Meeting of the
National Institute of Informatics (NII) Test Collection for Information Retrieval Systems (NTCIR),
pages 265–278, 2007.
[269] Carl Shapiro. Consumer information, product quality, and seller reputation. Bell Journal of Eco-
nomics, 13(1):20–35, 1982.
[270] Carl Shapiro. Premiums for high quality products as returns to reputations. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 98(4):659–680, 1983.
[271] Ben Shneiderman. Tree visualization with tree-maps: 2-d space-filling approach. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 11(1):92–99, 1992.
[272] Stuart Shulman, Jamie Callan, Eduard Hovy, and Stephen Zavestoski. Language processing technolo-
gies for electronic rulemaking: A project highlight. In Proceedings of Digital Government Research
(dg.o), pages 87–88, 2005.
[273] Benjamin Snyder and Regina Barzilay. Multiple aspect ranking using the Good Grief algorithm. In
Proceedings of the Joint Human Language Technology/North American Chapter of the ACL Confer-
ence (HLT-NAACL), pages 300–307, 2007.
[274] Swapna Somasundaran, Josef Ruppenhofer, and Janyce Wiebe. Detecting arguing and sentiment in
meetings. In Proceedings of the SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, 2007.
86
[275] Swapna Somasundaran, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Veselin Stoyanov. QA with attitude:
Exploiting opinion type analysis for improving question answering in on-line discussions and the
news. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2007.
[276] Xiaodan Song, Yun Chi, Koji Hino, and Belle Tseng. Identifying opinion leaders in the blogosphere.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM),
pages 971–974, 2007.
[277] Ellen Spertus. Smokey: Automatic recognition of hostile messages. In Proceedings of Innovative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI), pages 1058–1065, 1997.
[278] Efstathios Stamatatos, Nikos Fakotakis, and George Kokkinakis. Text genre detection using common
word frequencies. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), 2000.
[279] Stephen S. Standifird. Reputation and e-commerce: ebay auctions and the asymmetrical impact of
positive and negative ratings. Journal of Management, 27(3):279–295, 2001.
[280] Adam Stepinski and Vibhu Mittal. A fact/opinion classifier for news articles. In Proceedings of the
ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR), pages 807–808, New York, NY, USA,
2007. ACM Press. ISBN 978-1-59593-597-7.
[281] Brad Stone and Matt Richtel. The hand that controls the sock puppet could get slapped. The New
York Times, July 16 2007.
[282] Philip J. Stone. The General Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis. The MIT Press,
1966.
[283] Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie. Partially supervised coreference resolution for opinion summa-
rization through structured rule learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 336–344, Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[284] Veselin Stoyanov, Claire Cardie, Diane Litman, and Janyce Wiebe. Evaluating an opinion annotation
scheme using a new multi-perspective question and answer corpus. In Qu et al. [245]. AAAI technical
report SS-04-07.
[285] Veselin Stoyanov, Claire Cardie, and Janyce Wiebe. Multi-perspective question answering using the
OpQA corpus. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference and the Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 923–930, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada, October 2005. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[286] Pero Subasic and Alison Huettner. Affect analysis of text using fuzzy semantic typing. IEEE Trans-
actions on Fuzzy Systems, 9(4):483–496, 2001.
[287] Maite Taboada, Caroline Anthony, and Kimberly Voll. Methods for creating semantic orientation
dictionaries. In Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 427–432, 2006.
[288] Maite Taboada, Mary Ann Gillies, and Paul McFetridge. Sentiment classification techniques for
tracking literary reputation. In LREC Workshop: Towards Computational Models of Literary Analysis,
pages 36–43, 2006.
[289] Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura. Extracting semantic orientation of words
using spin model. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
133–140, 2005.
[290] Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura. Latent variable models for semantic orien-
tations of phrases. In Proceedings of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL), 2006.
87
[291] Hiroya Takamura, Takashi Inui, and Manabu Okumura. Extracting semantic orientations of phrases
from dictionary. In Proceedings of the Joint Human Language Technology/North American Chapter
of the ACL Conference (HLT-NAACL), 2007.
[292] Kenji Tateishi, Yoshihide Ishiguro, and Toshikazu Fukushima. Opinion information retrieval from
the Internet. Information Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ) SIG Notes, 2001(69(20010716)):75–82,
2001. Also cited as “A reputation search engine that gathers people’s opinions from the Internet”,
IPSJ Technical Report NL-14411. In Japanese.
[293] Junichi Tatemura. Virtual reviewers for collaborative exploration of movie reviews. In Proceedings
of Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI), pages 272–275, 2000.
[294] Loren Terveen, Will Hill, Brian Amento, David McDonald, and Josh Creter. PHOAKS: A system for
sharing recommendations. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery (CACM),
40(3):59–62, 1997.
[295] Matt Thomas, Bo Pang, and Lillian Lee. Get out the vote: Determining support or opposition from
Congressional floor-debate transcripts. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 327–335, 2006.
[296] Ryoko Tokuhisa and Ryuta Terashima. Relationship between utterances and “enthusiasm” in non-
task-oriented conversational dialogue. In Proceedings of the SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and
Dialogue, pages 161–167, Sydney, Australia, July 2006. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[297] Richard M. Tong. An operational system for detecting and tracking opinions in on-line discussion.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Operational Text Classification (OTC), 2001.
[298] Robert Tumarkin and Robert F. Whitelaw. News or noise? Internet postings and stock prices. Finan-
cial Analysts Journal, 57(3):41–51, May/June 2001.
[299] Peter Turney. Thumbs up or thumbs down? Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classifi-
cation of reviews. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
417–424, 2002.
[300] Peter D. Turney and Michael L. Littman. Measuring praise and criticism: Inference of semantic
orientation from association. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 21(4):315–346,
2003.
[301] Stephen Wan and Kathy McKeown. Generating overview summaries of ongoing email thread dis-
cussions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING),
pages 549–555, Geneva, Switzerland, 2004.
[302] Michael White, Claire Cardie, and Vincent Ng. Detecting discrepancies in numeric estimates us-
ing multidocument hypertext summaries. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Language
Technology, pages 336–341, 2002.
[303] Michael White, Claire Cardie, Vincent Ng, Kiri Wagstaff, and Daryl McCullough. Detecting discrep-
ancies and improving intelligibility: Two preliminary evaluations of RIPTIDES. In Proceedings of
the Document Understanding Conference (DUC), 2001.
[304] Casey Whitelaw, Navendu Garg, and Shlomo Argamon. Using appraisal groups for sentiment anal-
ysis. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM), pages 625–631. ACM, 2005.
[305] Jan Wiebe and Rada Mihalcea. Word sense and subjectivity. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Computational Linguistics / Association for Computational Linguistics (COLING/ACL), 2006.
[306] Janyce Wiebe. Learning subjective adjectives from corpora. In Proceedings of AAAI, 2000.
[307] Janyce Wiebe, Eric Breck, Christopher Buckley, Claire Cardie, Paul Davis, Bruce Fraser, Diane Lit-
88
man, David Pierce, Ellen Riloff, Theresa Wilson, David Day, and Mark Maybury. Recognizing and
organizing opinions expressed in the world press. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on
New Directions in Question Answering, 2003.
[308] Janyce Wiebe and Rebecca Bruce. Probabilistic classifiers for tracking point of view. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Empirical Methods in Discourse Interpretation and Generation,
pages 181–187, 1995.
[309] Janyce Wiebe and Theresa Wilson. Learning to disambiguate potentially subjective expressions. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 112–118, 2002.
[310] Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie. Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions
in language. Language Resources and Evaluation (formerly Computers and the Humanities), 39(2/3):
164–210, 2005.
[311] Janyce M. Wiebe. Identifying subjective characters in narrative. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages 401–408, 1990.
[312] Janyce M. Wiebe. Tracking point of view in narrative. Computational Linguistics, 20(2):233–287,
1994.
[313] Janyce M. Wiebe, Rebecca F. Bruce, and Thomas P. O’Hara. Development and use of a gold stan-
dard data set for subjectivity classifications. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pages 246–253, 1999.
[314] Janyce M. Wiebe and William J. Rapaport. A computational theory of perspective and reference in
narrative. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 131–138,
1988.
[315] Janyce M. Wiebe and Ellen Riloff. Creating subjective and objective sentence classifiers from unan-
notated texts. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing (CICLing), number 3406 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 486–497, 2005.
[316] Janyce M. Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Matthew Bell. Identifying collocations for recognizing opin-
ions. In Proceedings of the ACL/EACL Workshop on Collocation: Computational Extraction, Analy-
sis, and Exploitation, 2001.
[317] Janyce M. Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce, Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. Learning
subjective language. Computational Linguistics, 30(3):277–308, September 2004.
[318] Yorick Wilks and Janusz Bien. Beliefs, points of view and multiple environments. In Proceedings of
the international NATO symposium on artificial and human intelligence, pages 147–171, New York,
NY, USA, 1984. Elsevier North-Holland, Inc.
[319] Yorick Wilks and Mark Stevenson. The grammar of sense: Using part-of-speech tags as a first step in
semantic disambiguation. Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 4(2):135–144, 1998.
[320] Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference and the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP), pages 347–354, 2005.
[321] Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa. Just how mad are you? Finding strong and weak
opinion clauses. In Proceedings of AAAI, pages 761–769, 2004. Extended version in Computational
Intelligence 22(2, Special Issue on Sentiment Analysis):73–99, 2006.
[322] Hui Yang, Luo Si, and Jamie Callan. Knowledge transfer and opinion detection in the TREC2006
blog track. In Proceedings of TREC, 2006.
[323] Kiduk Yang, Ning Yu, Alejandro Valerio, and Hui Zhang. WIDIT in TREC-2006 Blog track. In
Proceedings of TREC, 2006.
89
[324] Jeonghee Yi, Tetsuya Nasukawa, Razvan Bunescu, and Wayne Niblack. Sentiment analyzer: Extract-
ing sentiments about a given topic using natural language processing techniques. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 2003.
[325] Jeonghee Yi and Wayne Niblack. Sentiment mining in WebFountain. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), 2005.
[326] Pai-Ling Yin. Information dispersion and auction prices. Social Science Research Network (SSRN)
Working Paper Series, Version dated March 2005.
[327] Hong Yu and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. Towards answering opinion questions: Separating facts
from opinions and identifying the polarity of opinion sentences. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2003.
[328] Jeff Zabin and Alex Jefferies. Social media monitoring and analysis: Generating consumer insights
from online conversation. Aberdeen Group Benchmark Report, January 2008.
[329] Zhu Zhang and Balaji Varadarajan. Utility scoring of product reviews. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGIR Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), pages 51–57, 2006.
[330] Liang Zhou and Eduard Hovy. On the summarization of dynamically introduced information: Online
discussions and blogs. In AAAI Symposium on Computational Approaches to Analysing Weblogs
(AAAI-CAAW), pages 237–242, 2006.
[331] Lina Zhou, Judee K. Burgeon, and Douglas P. Twitchell. A longitudinal analysis of language behavior
of deception in e-mail. In Proceedings of Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), number 2665 in
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, page 959, 2008.
[332] Feng Zhu and Xiaoquan (Michael) Zhang. The influence of online consumer reviews on the demand
for experience goods: The case of video games. In International Conference on Information Systems
(ICIS), 2006.
[333] Li Zhuang, Feng Jing, Xiao-yan Zhu, and Lei Zhang. Movie review mining and summarization. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM),
2006.
90

