Models and Issues in Data Stream Systems 
Brian Babcock Shivnath Babu Mayur Datar Rajeev Motwani Jennifer Widom
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
fbabcock,shivnath,datar,rajeev,widomg@cs.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
In this overview paper we motivate the need for and research issues
arising from a new model of data processing. In this model, data
does not take the form of persistent relations, but rather arrives in
multiple, continuous, rapid, time-varying data streams. In addition
to reviewing past work relevant to data stream systems and current
projects in the area, the paper explores topics in stream query lan-
guages, new requirements and challenges in query processing, and
algorithmic issues.
1. INTRODUCTION
Recently a new class of data-intensive applications has become
widely recognized: applications in which the data is modeled best
not as persistent relations but rather as transient data streams. Ex-
amples of such applications include financial applications, network
monitoring, security, telecommunications data management, web
applications, manufacturing, sensor networks, and others. In the
data stream model, individual data items may be relational tuples,
e.g., network measurements, call records, web page visits, sensor
readings, and so on. However, their continuous arrival in multiple,
rapid, time-varying, possibly unpredictable and unboundedstreams
appears to yield some fundamentally new research problems.
In all of the applications cited above, it is not feasible to sim-
ply load the arriving data into a traditional database management
system (DBMS) and operate on it there. Traditional DBMS’s are
not designed for rapid and continuous loading of individual data
items, and they do not directly support the continuous queries [82]
that are typical of data stream applications. Furthermore, it is rec-
ognized that both approximation [30] and adaptivity [8] are key
ingredients in executing queries and performing other processing
(e.g., data analysis and mining) over rapid data streams, while tradi-
tional DBMS’s focus largely on the opposite goal of precise answers
computed by stable query plans.
In this paper we consider fundamental models and issues in devel-
oping a general-purpose Data Stream ManagementSystem (DSMS).
Work supported by NSF Grant IIS-0118173. Mayur Datar was also
supported by a Microsoft Graduate Fellowship. Rajeev Motwani
received partial support from an Okawa Foundation ResearchGrant.
We are developing such a system at Stanford [80], and we will touch
on some of our own work in this paper. However, we also attempt
to provide a general overview of the area, along with its related and
current work. (Any glaring omissions are, naturally, our own fault.)
We begin in Section 2 by considering the data stream model and
queries over streams. In this section we take a simple view: streams
are append-onlyrelations with transient tuples, and queries are SQL
operating over these logical relations. In later sections we discuss
several issues that complicate the model and query language, such
as ordering, timestamping, and sliding windows. Section 2 also
presents some concrete examples to ground our discussion.
In Section 3 we review recentprojects geared specifically towards
data stream processing, as well as a plethora of past research in areas
related to data streams: active databases, continuous queries, fil-
tering systems, view management, sequence databases, and others.
Although much of this work clearly has applications to data stream
processing, we hope to show in this paper that there are many new
problems to address in realizing a complete DSMS.
Section 4 delves more deeply into the area of query processing,
uncovering a number of important issues, including:
 Queries that require an unbounded amount of memory to eval-
uate precisely, and approximate query processing techniques
to address this problem.
 Sliding window query processing (i.e., considering “recent”
portions of the streams only), both as an approximation tech-
nique and as an option in the query language since many
applications prefer sliding-window queries.
 Batch processing, sampling, and synopsis structures to han-
dle situations where the flow rate of the input streams may
overwhelm the query processor.
 The meaning and implementation of blocking operators (e.g.,
aggregation and sorting) in the presence of unending streams.
 Continuous queries that are registered when portions of the
data streams have already “passed by,” yet the queries wish
to reference stream history.
Section 5 then outlines some details of a query language and an
architecture for a DSMS query processor designed specifically to
address the issues above.
In Section 6 we review algorithmic results in data stream process-
ing. Our focus is primarily on sketching techniques and building
summary structures (synopses). We also touch upon sliding win-
dow computations, present some negative results, and discuss a few
additional algorithmic issues.
We conclude in Section 7 with some remarks on the evolution of
this new field, and a summary of directions for further work.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work or 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.  To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
ACM PODS 2002 June 3-6, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 
© 2002 ACM 1-58113-507-6/02/06...$5.00. 
1
2. THE DATA STREAM MODEL
In the data stream model, some or all of the input data that are
to be operated on are not available for random access from disk or
memory, but rather arrive as one or more continuous data streams.
Data streams differ from the conventional stored relation model in
several ways:
 The data elements in the stream arrive online.
 The system has no control over the order in which data ele-
ments arrive to be processed, either within a data stream or
across data streams.
 Data streams are potentially unbounded in size.
 Once an element from a data stream has been processed it is
discarded or archived — it cannot be retrieved easily unless
it is explicitly stored in memory, which typically is small
relative to the size of the data streams.
Operating in the data stream model does not preclude the pres-
ence of some data in conventional stored relations. Often, data
stream queries may perform joins between data streams and stored
relational data. For the purposes of this paper, we will assume
that if stored relations are used, their contents remain static. Thus,
we preclude any potential transaction-processing issues that might
arise from the presence of updates to stored relations that occur
concurrently with data stream processing.
2.1 Queries
Queries over continuous data streams have much in common
with queries in a traditional database management system. How-
ever, there are two important distinctions peculiar to the data stream
model. The first distinction is between one-time queries and contin-
uous queries [82]. One-time queries (a class that includes traditional
DBMS queries) are queries that are evaluated once over a point-in-
time snapshot of the data set, with the answer returned to the user.
Continuous queries, on the other hand, are evaluated continuously
as data streams continue to arrive. Continuous queries are the more
interesting class of data stream queries, and it is to them that we
will devote most of our attention. The answer to a continuous query
is produced over time, always reflecting the stream data seen so far.
Continuous query answers may be stored and updated as new data
arrives, or they may be produced as data streams themselves. Some-
times one or the other mode is preferred. For example, aggregation
queries may involve frequent changes to answer tuples, dictating the
stored approach, while join queries are monotonic and may produce
rapid, unbounded answers, dictating the stream approach.
The second distinction is between predefined queries and ad hoc
queries. A predefinedquery is one that is supplied to the data stream
management system before any relevant data has arrived. Prede-
fined queries are generally continuous queries, although scheduled
one-time queries can also be predefined. Ad hoc queries, on the
other hand, are issued online after the data streams have already
begun. Ad hoc queries can be either one-time queries or continuous
queries. Ad hoc queries complicate the design of a data stream
management system, both because they are not known in advance
for the purposes of query optimization, identification of common
subexpressions across queries, etc., and more importantly because
the correct answer to an ad hoc query may require referencing data
elements that have already arrived on the data streams (and poten-
tially have already been discarded). Ad hoc queries are discussed
in more detail in Section 4.6.
2.2 Motivating Examples
Examples motivating a data stream system can be found in many
application domains including finance, web applications, security,
networking, and sensor monitoring.
 Traderbot [83] is a web-based financial search engine that
evaluates queries over real-time streaming financial data such
as stock tickers and news feeds. The Traderbot web site [83]
gives some examples of one-time and continuous queries that
are commonly posed by its customers.
 Modern security applications often apply sophisticated rules
over network packet streams. For example, iPolicy Net-
works [52] provides an integrated security platform provid-
ing services such as firewall support and intrusion detection
over multi-gigabit network packet streams. Such a platform
needs to perform complex stream processing including URL-
filtering based on table lookups, and correlation across mul-
tiple network traffic flows.
 Large web sites monitor web logs (clickstreams) online to en-
able applications such as personalization, performance moni-
toring, and load-balancing. Some web sites served by widely
distributed web servers (e.g., Yahoo [93]) may need to co-
ordinate many distributed clickstream analyses, e.g., to track
heavily accessed web pages as part of their real-time perfor-
mance monitoring.
 There are several emerging applications in the area of sensor
monitoring [15, 58] where a large number of sensors are
distributed in the physical world and generate streams of data
that need to be combined, monitored, and analyzed.
The application domain that we use for more detailed examples
is network traffic management, which involves monitoring network
packet header information across a set of routers to obtain informa-
tion on traffic flow patterns. Based on a description of Babu and
Widom [10], we delve into this example in some detail to help illus-
trate that continuous queries arise naturally in real applications and
that conventional DBMS technology does not adequately support
such queries.
Consider the network traffic management system of a large net-
work, e.g., the backbone network of an Internet Service Provider
(ISP) [29]. Such systems monitor a variety of continuous data
streams that may be characterized as unpredictable and arriving
at a high rate, including both packet traces and network perfor-
mance measurements. Typically, current traffic-management tools
either rely on a special-purpose system that performs online pro-
cessing of simple hand-coded continuous queries, or they just log
the traffic data and perform periodic offline query processing. Con-
ventional DBMS’s are deemed inadequate to provide the kind of
online continuous query processing that would be most beneficial
in this domain. A data stream system that could provide effective
online processing of continuous queries over data streams would
allow network operators to install, modify, or remove appropriate
monitoring queries to support efficient management of the ISP’s
network resources.
Consider the following concrete setting. Network packet traces
are being collected from a number of links in the network. The
focus is on two specific links: a customer link, C, which connects
the network of a customer to the ISP’s network, and a backbone link,
B, which connects two routers within the backbone network of the
ISP. LetC andB denote two streams of packet traces corresponding
to these two links. We assume, for simplicity, that the traces contain
just the five fields of the packet header that are listed below.
2
src: IP address of packet sender.
dest: IP address of packet destination.
id: Identification number given by sender so that destination can
uniquely identify each packet.
len: Length of the packet.
time: Time when packet header was recorded.
Consider first the continuous query Q1, which computes load
on the link B averaged over one-minute intervals, notifying the
network operator when the load crosses a specified threshold t. The
functions getminute and notifyoperator have the natural
interpretation.
Q1: SELECT notifyoperator(sum(len))
FROM B
GROUP BY getminute(time)
HAVING sum(len) > t
While the functionality of such a query may possibly be achieved
in a DBMS via the use of triggers, we are likely to prefer the use of
special techniques for performance reasons. For example, consider
the case where the link B has a very high throughput (e.g., if it
were an optical link). In that case, we may choose to compute an
approximate answer to Q1 by employing random sampling on the
stream — a task outside the reach of standard trigger mechanisms.
The second query Q2 isolates flows in the backbone link and
determines the amount of traffic generated by each flow. A flow
is defined here as a sequence of packets grouped in time, and sent
from a specific source to a specific destination.
Q2: SELECT flowid, src, dest, sum(len) AS flowlen
FROM (SELECT src, dest, len, time
FROM B
ORDER BY time )
GROUP BY src, dest, getflowid(src, dest, time)
AS flowid
Here getflowid is a user-defined function which takes the source
IP address, the destination IP address,and the timestamp of a packet,
and returns the identifier of the flow to which the packet belongs.
We assume that the data in the view (or table expression) in the
FROM clause is passed to the getflowid function in the order
defined by the ORDER BY clause.
Observe that handlingQ2 over streamB is particularly challeng-
ing due to the presence of GROUP BY and ORDER BY clauses,
which lead to “blocking” operators in a query execution plan.
Consider now the task of determining the fraction of the backbone
link’s traffic that can be attributed to the customer network. This
query, Q3, is an example of the kind of ad hoc continuous queries
that may be registered during periods of congestion to determine
whether the customer network is the likely cause.
Q3: (SELECT count (*)
FROM C, B
WHERE C.src = B.src and C.dest = B.dest
and C.id = B.id) =
(SELECT count (*) FROMB)
Observe that Q3 joins streams C and B on their keys to obtain a
count of the number of common packets. Since joining two streams
could potentially require unbounded intermediate storage (for ex-
ample if there is no bound on the delay between a packet showing
up on the two links), the user may prefer to compute an approxi-
mate answer. One approximation technique would be to maintain
bounded-memory synopses of the two streams (see Section 6); al-
ternatively, one could exploit aspects of the application semantics
to bound the required storage (e.g., we may know that joining tuples
are very likely to occur within a bounded time window).
Our final example, Q4 , is a continuous query for monitoring the
source-destination pairs in the top 5 percent in terms of backbone
traffic. For ease of exposition, we employ the WITH construct from
SQL-99 [85].
Q4:WITH Load AS
(SELECT src, dest, sum(len) AS traffic
FROM B
GROUP BY src, dest)
SELECT src, dest, traffic
FROM Load AS L1
WHERE (SELECT count(*)
FROM Load AS L2
WHERE L2.traffic < L1 .traffic) >
(SELECT 0:95count(*) FROM Load)
ORDER BY traffic
3. REVIEW OF DATA STREAM PROJECTS
We now provide an overview of several past and current projects
related to data stream management. We will revisit some of these
projects in later sections when we discuss the issues that we are fac-
ing in building a general-purpose data stream management system
at Stanford.
Continuous queries were used in the Tapestry system [82] for
content-based filtering over an append-only database of email and
bulletin board messages. A restricted subsetof SQL was used as the
query language in order to provide guarantees about efficient evalua-
tion and append-only query results. The Alert system [72] provides
a mechanism for implementing event-condition-action style trig-
gers in a conventional SQL database, by using continuous queries
defined over special append-only active tables. The XFilter content-
based filtering system [6] performs efficient filtering of XML doc-
uments based on user profiles expressed as continuous queries in
the XPath language [92]. Xyleme [67] is a similar content-based
filtering system that enables very high throughput with a restricted
query language. The Tribeca stream database manager [81] pro-
vides restricted querying capability over network packet streams.
The OpenCQ [57] and NiagaraCQ [23] systems support con-
tinuous queries for monitoring persistent data sets spread over a
wide-area network, e.g., web sites over the Internet. OpenCQ uses
a query processing algorithm based on incremental view mainte-
nance, while NiagaraCQ addresses scalability in number of queries
by proposing techniques for grouping continuous queries for ef-
ficient evaluation. Within the NiagaraCQ project, Shanmugasun-
daram et al. [77] discuss the problem of supporting blocking opera-
tors in query plans over data streams, and Viglas and Naughton [87]
propose rate-based optimization for queries over data streams, a
new optimization methodology that is based on stream-arrival and
data-processing rates.
The Chronicle data model [55] introduced append-only ordered
sequences of tuples (chronicles), a form of data streams. They de-
fined a restricted view definition language and algebra (chronicle
algebra) that operates over chronicles together with traditional re-
lations. The focus of the work was to ensure that views defined
in chronicle algebra could be maintained incrementally without
storing any of the chronicles. An algebra and a declarative query
language for querying ordered relations (sequences) was proposed
3
by Seshadri, Livny, and Ramakrishnan [74, 75, 76]. In many appli-
cations, continuous queries need to refer to the sequencingaspectof
streams, particularly in the form of sliding windows over streams.
Related work in this category also includes work on temporal [78]
and time-series databases [31], where the ordering of tuples implied
by time can be used in querying, indexing, and query optimization.
The body of work on materialized views relates to continuous
queries, since materialized views are effectively queries that need
to be reevaluated or incrementally updated whenever the base data
changes. Of particular importance is work on self-maintenance
[14, 45, 69]—ensuring that enough data has been saved to maintain
a view even when the base data is unavailable—and the related
problem of data expiration [36]—determining when certain base
data can be discarded without compromising the ability to maintain
a view. Nevertheless, several differences exist between materialized
views and continuous queries in the data stream context: continuous
queries may stream rather than store their results, they may deal
with append-only input data, they may provide approximate rather
than exact answers, and their processing strategy may adapt as
characteristics of the data streams change.
The Telegraph project [8, 47, 58, 59] shares some target appli-
cations and basic technical ideas with a DSMS. Telegraph uses an
adaptive query engine (based on the Eddy concept [8]) to process
queries efficiently in volatile and unpredictable environments (e.g.,
autonomous data sources over the Internet, or sensor networks).
Madden and Franklin [58] focus on query execution strategies over
data streams generated by sensors, and Madden et al. [59] discuss
adaptive processing techniques for multiple continuous queries.
The Tukwila system [53] also supports adaptive query processing,
in order to perform dynamic data integration over autonomous data
sources.
The Aurora project [15] is building a new data processing system
targeted exclusively towards stream monitoring applications. The
core of the Aurora system consists of a large network of triggers.
Each trigger is a data-flow graph with each node being one among
seven built-in operators (or boxes in Aurora’s terminology). For
each stream monitoring application using the Aurora system, an
application administrator creates and adds one or more triggers
into Aurora’s trigger network. Aurora performs both compile-time
optimization (e.g., reordering operators, shared state for common
subexpressions) and run-time optimization of the trigger network.
As part of run-time optimization, Aurora detects resource overload
and performs load shedding based on application-specific measures
of quality of service.
4. QUERIES OVER DATA STREAMS
Query processing in the data stream model of computation comes
with its own unique challenges. In this section, we will outline
what we consider to be the most interesting of these challenges, and
describe several alternative approaches for resolving them. The
issues raised in this section will frame the discussion in the rest of
the paper.
4.1 Unbounded Memory Requirements
Since data streams are potentially unbounded in size, the amount
of storage required to compute an exact answer to a data stream
query may also grow without bound. While external memory al-
gorithms [89] for handling data sets larger than main memory have
been studied, such algorithms are not well suited to data stream
applications since they do not support continuous queries and are
typically too slow for real-time response. The continuous data
stream model is most applicable to problems where timely query
responses are important and there are large volumes of data that
are being continually produced at a high rate over time. New data
is constantly arriving even as the old data is being processed; the
amount of computation time per data element must be low, or else
the latency of the computation will be too high and the algorithm
will not be able to keep pace with the data stream. For this reason,
we are interested in algorithms that are able to confine themselves
to main memory without accessing disk.
Arasu et al. [7] took some initial steps towards distinguishing be-
tween queries that can be answered exactly using a given bounded
amount of memory and queries that must be approximated un-
less disk accesses are allowed. They consider a limited class of
queries and, for that class, provide a complete characterization of
the queries that require a potentially unbounded amount of mem-
ory (proportional to the size of the input data streams) to answer.
Their result shows that without knowing the size of the input data
streams, it is impossible to place a limit on the memory require-
ments for most common queries involving joins, unless the domains
of the attributes involved in the query are restricted (either based on
known characteristics of the data or through the imposition of query
predicates). The basic intuition is that without domain restrictions
an unbounded number of attribute values must be remembered, be-
cause they might turn out to join with tuples that arrive in the future.
Extending these results to full generality remains an open research
problem.
4.2 Approximate Query Answering
As described in the previous section, when we are limited to a
bounded amount of memory it is not always possible to produce
exact answers for data stream queries; however, high-quality ap-
proximate answers are often acceptable in lieu of exact answers.
Approximation algorithms for problems defined over data streams
has been a fruitful research area in the algorithms community in
recent years, as discussed in detail in Section 6. This work has led
to some general techniques for data reduction and synopsis con-
struction, including: sketches [5, 35], random sampling [1, 2, 21],
histograms [51, 68], and wavelets [16, 90]. Based on these summa-
rization techniques, we have seen some work on approximate query
answering. For example, recent work [26, 37] develops histogram-
based techniques to provide approximate answers for correlated
aggregate queries over data streams, and Gilbert et al. [40] present
a general approach for building small-space summaries over data
streams to provide approximate answers for many classes of aggre-
gate queries. However, research problems abound in the area of
approximate query answering, with or without streams. Even the
basic notion of approximations remains to be investigated in detail
for queries involving more than simple aggregation. In the next
two subsections, we will touch upon several approaches to approx-
imation, some of which are peculiar to the data stream model of
computation.
4.3 Sliding Windows
One technique for producing an approximate answer to a data
stream query is to evaluate the query not over the entire past history
of the data streams, but rather only over sliding windows of recent
data from the streams. For example, only data from the last week
could be considered in producing query answers, with data older
than one week being discarded.
Imposing sliding windows on data streams is a natural method
for approximation that has several attractive properties. It is well-
defined and easily understood: the semantics of the approximation
are clear, so that users of the system can be confident that they
understand what is given up in producing the approximate answer.
It is deterministic, so there is no danger that unfortunate random
4
choices will produce a bad approximation. Most importantly, it
emphasizes recent data, which in the majority of real-world appli-
cations is more important and relevant than old data: if one is trying
in real-time to make sense of network traffic patterns, or phone call
or transaction records, or scientific sensor data, then in general in-
sights based on the recent past will be more informative and useful
than insights based on stale data. In fact, for many such applica-
tions, sliding windows can be thought of not as an approximation
technique reluctantly imposed due to the infeasibility of computing
over all historical data, but rather as part of the desired query seman-
tics explicitly expressed as part of the user’s query. For example,
queries Q3 and Q4 from Section 2.2, which tracked traffic on the
network backbone, would likely be applied not to all traffic over all
time, but rather to traffic in the recent past.
There are a variety of research issues in the use of sliding windows
over data streams. To begin with, as we will discuss in Section 5.1,
there is the fundamental issue of how we define timestamps over
the streams to facilitate the use of windows. Extending SQL or
relational algebra to incorporate explicit window specifications is
nontrivial and we also touch upon this topic in Section 5.1. The im-
plementation of sliding window queries and their impact on query
optimization is a largely untouched area. In the case where the
sliding window is large enough so that the entire contents of the
window cannot be buffered in memory, there are also theoretical
challenges in designing algorithms that can give approximate an-
swers using only the available memory. Some recent results in this
vein can be found in [9, 25].
While existing work on sequence and temporal databases has
addressed many of the issues involved in time-sensitive queries (a
class that includes sliding window queries) in a relational database
context [74, 75, 76, 78], differences in the data stream computation
model pose new challenges. Research in temporal databases [78]
is concerned primarily with maintaining a full history of each data
value over time, while in a data stream system we are concerned
primarily with processing new data elements on-the-fly. Sequence
databases [74, 75, 76] attempt to produce query plans that allow
for stream access, meaning that a single scan of the input data is
sufficient to evaluate the plan and the amount of memory required
for plan evaluation is a constant, independent of the data. This
model assumes that the database system has control over which
sequence to process tuples from next, e.g., when merging multiple
sequences, which we cannot assume in a data stream system.
4.4 Batch Processing, Sampling, and Synopses
Another class of techniques for producing approximate answers
is to give up on processing every data element as it arrives, resorting
to some sort of sampling or batch processing technique to speed up
query execution. We describe a general framework for these tech-
niques. Suppose that a data stream query is answered using a data
structure that can be maintained incrementally. The most general
description of such a data structure is that it supports two operations,
update(tuple) and computeAnswer(). The update op-
eration is invoked to update the data structure as each new data ele-
ment arrives, and the computeAnswer method produces new or
updated results to the query. When processing continuous queries,
the best scenario is that both operations are fast relative to the arrival
rate of elements in the data streams. In this case, no special tech-
niques are necessary to keep up with the data stream and produce
timely answers: as each data element arrives, it is used to update
the data structure, and then new results are computed from the data
structure, all in less than the average inter-arrival time of the data
elements. If one or both of the data structure operations are slow,
however, then producing an exact answer that is continually up to
date is not possible. We consider the two possible bottlenecks and
approaches for dealing with them.
Batch Processing
The first scenario is that the update operation is fast but the
computeAnswer operation is slow. In this case, the natural
solution is to process the data in batches. Rather than producing
a continually up-to-date answer, the data elements are buffered as
they arrive, and the answer to the query is computed periodically
as time permits. The query answer may be considered approximate
in the sense that it is not timely, i.e., it represents the exact answer
at a point in the recent past rather than the exact answer at the
present moment. This approach of approximation through batch
processing is attractive because it does not cause any uncertainty
about the accuracy of the answer, sacrificing timeliness instead. It
is also a good approach when data streams are bursty. An algorithm
that cannot keep up with the peak data stream rate may be able to
handle the average stream rate quite comfortably by buffering the
streams when their rate is high and catching up during the slow
periods. This is the approach used in the XJoin algorithm [86].
Sampling
In the second scenario, computeAnswer may be fast, but the
update operation is slow — it takes longer than the average inter-
arrival time of the data elements. It is futile to attempt to make use of
all the data when computing an answer, because data arrives faster
than it can be processed. Instead, some tuples must be skipped
altogether, so that the query is evaluated over a sample of the data
stream rather than over the entire data stream. We obtain an approx-
imate answer, but in some cases one can give confidence bounds
on the degree of error introduced by the sampling process [48].
Unfortunately, for many situations (including most queries involv-
ing joins [19, 21]), sampling-based approaches cannot give reliable
approximation guarantees. Designing sampling-based algorithms
that can produce approximate answers that are provably close to the
exact answer is an important and active area of research.
Synopsis Data Structures
Quite obiously, data structures where both the update and the
computeAnswer operations are fast are most desirable. For
classes of data stream queries where no exact data structure with
the desired properties exists, one can often design an approximate
data structure that maintains a small synopsis or sketch of the data
rather than an exact representation, and therefore is able to keep
computation per data element to a minimum. Performing data
reduction through synopsis data structures as an alternative to batch
processing or sampling is a fruitful research area with particular
relevance to the data stream computation model. Synopsis data
structures are discussed in more detail in Section 6.
4.5 Blocking Operators
A blocking query operator is a query operator that is unable to
produce the first tuple of its output until it has seen its entire input.
Sorting is an example of a blocking operator, as are aggregation
operators such as SUM, COUNT, MIN, MAX, and AVG. If one
thinks about evaluating continuous stream queries using a traditional
tree of query operators, where data streams enter at the leaves and
final query answers are produced at the root, then the incorporation
of blocking operators into the query tree poses problems. Since
continuous data streams may be infinite, a blocking operator that
has a data stream as one of its inputs will never see its entire
input, and therefore it will never be able to produce any output.
Clearly, blocking operators are not very suitable to the data stream
5
computation model, but aggregate queries are extremely common,
and sorted data is easier to work with and can often be processed
more efficiently than unsorted data. Doing away with blocking
operators altogether would be problematic, but dealing with them
effectively is one of the more challenging aspects of data stream
computation.
Blocking operators that are the root of a tree of query operators
are more tractable than blocking operators that are interior nodes
in the tree, producing intermediate results that are fed to other
operators for further processing (for example, the “sort” phase of
a sort-merge join, or an aggregate used in a subquery). When
we have a blocking aggregation operator at the root of a query
tree, if the operator produces a single value or a small number of
values, then updates to the answer can be streamed out as they are
produced. When the answer is larger, however, such as when the
query answer is a relation that is to be produced in sorted order, it
is more practical to maintain a data structure with the up-to-date
answer, since continually retransmitting the entire answer would
be cumbersome. Neither of these two approaches works well for
blocking operators that produce intermediate results, however. The
central problem is that the results produced by blocking operators
may continue to change over time until all the data has been seen,
so operators that are consuming those results cannot make reliable
decisions based on the results at an intermediate stage of query
execution.
One approach to handling blocking operators as interior nodes
in a query tree is to replace them with non-blocking analogs that
perform approximately the same task. An example of this approach
is the juggle operator [70], which is a non-blocking version of sort:
it aims to locally reorder a data stream so that tuples that come
earlier in the desired sort order are produced before tuples that
come later in the sort order, although some tuples may be delivered
out of order. An interesting open problem is how to extend this
work to other types of blocking operators, as well as to quantify the
error that is introduced by approximating blocking operators with
non-blocking ones.
Tucker et al. [84] have proposed a different approach to blocking
operators. They suggest augmenting data streams with assertions
about what can and cannot appear in the remainder of the data
stream. These assertions, which are called punctuations, are inter-
leaved with the data elements in the streams. An example of the
type of punctuation one might see in a stream with an attribute called
daynumber is “for all future tuples, daynumber  10.” Upon
seeing this punctuation, an aggregation operator that was grouping
by daynumber could stream out its answers for all daynumbers
less than 10. Similarly, a join operator could discard all its saved
state relating to previously-seen tuples in the joining stream with
daynumber< 10, reducing its memory consumption.
An interesting open problem is to formalize the relationship be-
tween punctuation and the memory requirements of a query — e.g.,
a query that might otherwise require unbounded memory could be
proved to be answerable in bounded memory if guarantees about
the presence of appropriate punctuation are provided. Closely re-
lated is the idea of schema-level assertions (constraints) on data
streams, which also may help with blocking operators and other
aspects of data stream processing. For example, we may know that
daynumbers are clustered or strictly increasing, or when joining
two stream we may know that a kind of “referential integrity” exists
in the arrival of join attribute values. In both cases we may use these
constraints to “unblock” operators or reduce memory requirements.
4.6 Queries Referencing Past Data
In the data stream model of computation, once a data element
has been streamed by, it cannot be revisited. This limitation means
that ad hoc queries that are issued after some data has already been
discarded may be impossible to answer accurately. One simple
solution to this problem is to stipulate that ad hoc queries are only
allowed to reference future data: they are evaluated as though the
data streams began at the point when the query was issued, and any
past stream elements are ignored (for the purposes of that query).
While this solution may not appear very satisfying, it may turn out
to be perfectly acceptable for many applications.
A more ambitious approach to handling ad hoc queries that refer-
ence past data is to maintain summaries of data streams (in the form
of general-purpose synopses or aggregates) that can be used to give
approximate answers to future ad hoc queries. Taking this approach
requires making a decision in advance about the best way to use
memory resources to give good approximate answers to a broad
range of possible future queries. The problem is similar in some
ways to problems in physical database design such as selection of
indexes and materialized views [22]. However, there is an impor-
tant difference: in a traditional database system, when an index or
view is lacking, it is possible to go to the underlying relation, albeit
at an increased cost. In the data stream model of computation, if
the appropriate summary structure is not present, then no further
recourse is available.
Even if ad hoc queries are declared only to pertain to future
data, there are still research issues involved in how best to process
them. In data stream applications, where most queries are long-
lived continuous queries rather than ephemeral one-time queries,
the gains that can be achieved by multi-query optimization can be
significantly greater than what is possible in traditional database
systems. The presence of ad hoc queries transforms the problem
of finding the best query plan for a set of queries from an offline
problem to an online problem. Ad hoc queries also raise the issue of
adaptivity in query plans. The Eddy query execution framework [8]
introduces the notion of flexible query plans that adapt to changes in
data arrival rates or other data characteristics over time. Extending
this idea to adapt the joint plan for a set of continuous queries as
new queries are added and old ones are removed remains an open
research area.
5. PROPOSAL FOR A DSMS
At Stanford we have begun the design and prototype implemen-
tation of a comprehensive DSMS called STREAM (for STanford
StREam DatA Manager) [80]. As discussed in earlier sections, in
a DSMS traditional one-time queries are replaced or augmented
with continuous queries, and techniques such as sliding windows,
synopsis structures, approximate answers, and adaptive query pro-
cessing become fundamental features of the system. Other aspects
of a complete DBMS also need to be reconsidered, including query
languages, storage and buffer management, user and application
interfaces, and transaction support. In this section we will focus
primarily on the query language and query processing components
of a DSMS and only touch upon other issues based on our initial
experiences.
5.1 Query Language for a DSMS
Any general-purpose data management system must have a flex-
ible and intuitive method by which the users of the system can
express their queries. In the STREAM project, we have chosen
to use a modified version of SQL as the query interface to the
system (although we are also providing a means to submit query
plans directly). SQL is a well-known language with a large user
population. It is also a declarative language that gives the system
flexibility in selecting the optimal evaluation procedure to produce
6
the desired answer. Other methods for receiving queries from users
are possible; for example, the Aurora system described in [15] uses
a graphical “boxes and arrows” interface for specifying data flow
through the system. This interface is intuitive and gives the user
more control over the exact series of steps by which the query an-
swer is obtained than is provided by a declarative query language.
The main modification that we have made to standard SQL, in
addition to allowing the FROM clause to refer to streams as well as
relations, is to extend the expressiveness of the query language for
sliding windows. It is possible to formulate sliding window queries
in SQL by referring to timestamps explicitly, but it is often quite
awkward. SQL-99 [13, 79] introduces analytical functions that
partially address the shortcomings of SQL for expressing sliding
window queries by allowing the specification of moving averages
and other aggregation operations over sliding windows. However,
the SQL-99 syntax is not sufficiently expressive for data stream
queries since it cannot be applied to non-aggregation operations
such as joins.
The notion of sliding windows requires at least an ordering on
data stream elements. In many cases, the arrival order of the el-
ements suffices as an “implicit timestamp” attached to each data
element; however, sometimes it is preferable to use “explicit times-
tamps” provided as part of the data stream. Formally we say (follow-
ing [15]) that a data stream S consists of a set of (tuple, timestamp)
pairs: S = f(s1; i1); (s2; i2); : : : ; (sn; in)g. The timestamp at-
tribute could be a traditional timestamp or it could be a sequence
number — all that is required is that it comes from a totally ordered
domain with a distance metric. The ordering induced by the times-
tamps is used when selecting the data elements making up a sliding
window.
We extend SQL by allowing an optional window specification
to be provided, enclosed in brackets, after a stream (or subquery
producing a stream) that is supplied in a query’s FROM clause. A
window specification consists of:
1. an optional partitioning clause, which partitions the data into
several groups and maintains a separate window for each
group,
2. a window size, either in “physical” units (i.e., the number of
data elements in the window) or in “logical” units (i.e., the
range of time covered by a window, such as 30 days), and
3. an optional filtering predicate.
As in SQL-99, physical windows are specified using the ROWS
keyword (e.g., ROWS 50 PRECEDING), while logical windows
are specified via the RANGE keyword (e.g., RANGE 15 MINUTES
PRECEDING). In lieu of a formal grammar, we present several
examples to illustrate our language extension.
The underlying source of data for our examples will be a stream of
telephone call records, each with four attributes: customer id,
type, minutes, and timestamp. The timestamp attribute
is the ordering attribute for the records. Suppose a user wanted to
compute the average call length, but considering only the ten most
recent long-distance calls placed by each customer. The query can
be formulated as follows:
SELECT AVG(S.minutes)
FROM Calls S [PARTITION BY S.customer id
ROWS 10 PRECEDING
WHERE S.type = ’Long Distance’]
where the expression in braces defines a sliding window on the
stream of calls.
Contrast the previous query to a similar one that computes the
average call length considering only long-distance calls that are
among the last 10 calls of all types placed by each customer:
SELECT AVG(S.minutes)
FROM Calls S [PARTITION BY S.customer id
ROWS 10 PRECEDING]
WHERE S.type = ’Long Distance’
The distinction between filtering predicates applied before calculat-
ing the sliding window cutoffs and predicates applied after window-
ing motivates our inclusion of an optional WHERE clause within
the window specification.
Here is a slightly more complicated example returning the av-
erage length of the last 1000 telephone calls placed by “Gold”
customers:
SELECT AVG(V.minutes)
FROM (SELECT S.minutes
FROM Calls S, Customers T
WHERE S.customer id = T.customer id
AND T.tier = ’Gold’)
V [ROWS 1000 PRECEDING]
Notice that in this example, the stream of calls must be joined to
the Customers relation before applying the sliding window.
5.2 Timestamps in Streams
In the previous section, sliding windows are defined with respect
to a timestamp or sequence number attribute representing a tuple’s
arrival time. This approach is unambiguous for tuples that come
from a single stream, but it is less clear what is meant when attempt-
ing to apply sliding windows to composite tuples that are derived
from tuples from multiple underlying streams (e.g., windows on the
output of a join operator). What should the timestamp of a tuple in
the join result be when the timestamps of the tuples that were joined
to form the result tuple are different? Timestamp issues also arise
when a set of distributed streams make up a single logical stream,
as in the web monitoring application described in Section 2.2, or in
truly distributed streams such as sensor networks when comparing
timestamps across stream elements may be relevant.
In the previous section we introduced implicit timestamps, in
which the system adds a special field to each incoming tuple, and
explicit timestamps, in which a data attribute is designated as the
timestamp. Explicit timestamps are used when each tuple corre-
sponds to a real-world event at a particular time that is of importance
to the meaning of the tuple. Implicit timestamps are used when the
data source does not already include timestamp information, or
when the exact moment in time associated with a tuple is not im-
portant, but general considerations such as “recent” or “old” may
be important. The distinction between implicit and explicit times-
tamps is similar to that between transaction and valid time in the
temporal database literature [78].
Explicit timestamps have the drawback that tuples may not arrive
in the same order as their timestamps — tuples with later times-
tamps may come before tuples with earlier timestamps. This lack
of guaranteed ordering makes it difficult to perform sliding window
computations that are defined in relation to explicit timestamps, or
any other processing based on order. However, as long as an input
stream is “almost-sorted” by timestamp, except for local perturba-
tions, then out-of-order tuples can easily be corrected with little
buffering. It seems reasonable to assume that even when explicit
timestamps are used, tuples will be delivered in roughly increasing
timestamp order.
7
Let us now look at how to assign appropriate timestamps to tu-
ples output by binary operators, using join as an example. There
are several possible approaches that could be taken; we discuss two.
The first approach, which fits better with implicit timestamps, is to
provide no guarantees about the output order of tuples from a join
operator, but to simply assume that tuples that arrive earlier are likely
to pass through the join earlier; exact ordering may depend on im-
plementation and scheduling vagaries. Each tuple that is produced
by a join operator is assigned an implicit timestamp that is set to the
time that it was produced by the join operator. This “best-effort”
approach has the advantage that it maximizes implementation flex-
ibility; it has the disadvantage that it makes it impossible to impose
precisely-defined, deterministic sliding-window semantics on the
results of subqueries.
The second approach, which fits with either explicit or implicit
timestamps, is to have the user specify as part of the query what
timestamp is to be assigned to tuples resulting from the join of
multiple streams. One simple policy is that the order in which
the streams are listed in the FROM clause of the query represents
a prioritization of the streams. The timestamp for a tuple output
by a join should be the timestamp of the joining tuple from the
input stream listed first in the FROM clause. This approach can
result in multiple tuples with the same timestamp; for the purpose
of ordering the results, ties can be broken using the timestamp of
the other input stream. For example, if the query is
SELECT *
FROM S1 [ROWS 1000 PRECEDING],
S2 [ROWS 100 PRECEDING]
WHERE S1.A = S2.B
then the output tuples would first be sorted by the timestamp of S1,
and then ties would be broken according to the timestamp of S2.
The second, stricter approach to assigning timestamps to the
results of binary operators can have a drawback from an implemen-
tation point of view. If it is desirable for the output from a join to
be sorted by timestamp, the join operator will need to buffer output
tuples until it can be certain that future input tuples will not disrupt
the ordering of output tuples. For example, if S1’s timestamp has
priority over S2’s and a recent S1 tuple joins with an S2 tuple, it
is possible that a future S2 tuple will join with an older S1 tuple
that still falls within the current window. In that case, the join tuple
that was produced second belongs before the join tuple that was
produced first. In a query tree consisting of multiple joins, the extra
latency introduced for this reason could propagate up the tree in an
additive fashion. If the inputs to the join operator did not have slid-
ing windows at all, then the join operator could never confidently
produce outputs in sorted order.
As mentioned earlier, sliding windows have two distinct pur-
poses: sometimes they are an important part of the query semantics,
and other times they are an approximation scheme to improve query
efficiency and reduce data volumes to a manageable size. When
the sliding window serves mostly to increase query processing ef-
ficiency, then the best-effort approach, which allows wide latitude
over the ordering of tuples, is usually acceptable. On the other
hand, when the ordering of tuples plays a significant role in the
meaning of the query, such as for query-defined sliding windows,
then the stricter approach may be preferred, even at the cost of less
efficient implementation. A general-purpose data stream process-
ing system should support both types of sliding windows, and the
query language should allow users to specify one or the other.
In our system, we add an extra keyword, RECENT, that replaces
PRECEDING when a “best-effort” ordering may be used. For ex-
ample, the clauseROWS 10 PRECEDING specifiesa window con-
sisting of the previous 10 tuples, strictly sorted by timestamp order.
By comparison, ROWS 10 RECENT also specifies a sliding win-
dow consisting of 10 records, but the DSMS is allowed to use
its own ordering to produce the sliding window, rather than be-
ing constrained to follow the timestamp ordering. The RECENT
keyword is only used with “physical” window sizes specified as a
number of records; “logical” windows such as RANGE 3 DAYS
PRECEDING must use the PRECEDING keyword.
5.3 Query Processing Architecture of a DSMS
In this section, we describe the query processing architecture of
our DSMS. So far we have focused on continuous queries only.
When a query is registered, a query execution plan is produced that
begins executing and continues indefinitely. We have not yet ad-
dressed ad hoc queries registered after relevant streams have begun
(Section 4.6).
Query execution plans in our system consist of operators con-
nected by queues. Operators can maintain intermediate state in
synopsis data structures. A portion of an example query plan is
shown in Figure 1, with one binary operator (Op1 ) and one unary
operator (Op2 ). The two operators are connected by a queue Q3 ,
and operatorOp1 has two input queues,Q1 andQ2. Also shown in
Figure 1 are two synopsis structures used by operator Op1 , Syn1
and Syn2 , one per input. For example, Op1 could be a sliding
window join operator, which maintains a sliding window synopsis
for each join input (Section 4.3). The system memory is partitioned
dynamically among the synopses and queues in query plans, along
with the buffers used for handling streams coming over the network
and a cache for disk-resident data. Note that both Aurora [15] and
Eddies [8] use a single globally-shared queue for inter-operator data
flow instead of separate queues between operators as in Figure 1.
Q1 Q2
Q3
Op1
Op2
Syn3
Syn1 Syn2
Figure 1: A portion of a query plan in our DSMS.
Operators in our system are scheduled for execution by a cen-
tral scheduler. During execution, an operator reads data from its
input queues, updates the synopsis structures that it maintains, and
writes results to its output queues. (Our operators thus adhere to the
update and computeAnswer model discussed in Section 4.4.)
The period of execution of an operator is determined dynamically
by the scheduler and the operator returns control back to the sched-
uler once its period expires. We are experimenting with different
policies for scheduling operators and for determining the period
of execution. The period of execution may be based on time, or
it may be based on other quantities, such as the number of tuples
8
consumed or produced. Both Aurora and Eddies have chosen to
perform fine-grained scheduling where, in each step, the scheduler
chooses a tuple from the global queue and passes it to an opera-
tor for processing, an approach that our scheduler could choose if
appropriate.
We expect continuous queries and the data streams on which
they operate to be long-running. During the lifetime of a contin-
uous query parameters such as stream data characteristics, stream
flow rates, and the number of concurrently running queries may
vary considerably. To handle these fluctuations, all of our opera-
tors are adaptive. So far we have focused primarily on adaptivity
to available memory, although other factors could be considered,
including using disk to increase temporary storage at the expense
of latency.
Our approach to memory adaptivity is basically one of trading
accuracy for memory. Specifically, each operator maximizes the
accuracy of its output based on the size of its available memory,
and handles dynamic changes in the size of its available memory
gracefully, since at run-time memory may be taken away from one
operator and given to another. As a simple example, a sliding
window join operator as discussed above may be used as an ap-
proximation to a join over the entire history of input streams. If so,
the larger the windows (stored in available memory), the better the
approximation. Other examples include duplicate elimination using
limited-size hash tables, and sampling using reservoirs [88]. The
Aurora system [15] also proposes adaptivity and approximations,
and uses load-shedding techniques based on application-specified
measures of quality of service for graceful degradation in the face
of system overload.
Our fundamental approach of trading accuracy for memory brings
up some interesting problems:
 We first need to understand how different query operators can
produce approximate answers under limited memory, and
how approximate results behave when operators are com-
posed in query plans.
 Given a query plan as a tree of operators and a certain amount
of memory, how can the DSMS allocate memory to the op-
erators to maximize the accuracy of the answer to the query
(i.e., minimize approximation)?
 Under changing conditions, how can the DSMS reallocate
memory among operators?
 Suppose we are given a query rather than a query plan. How
does the query optimizer efficiently find the plan that, with the
best memory allocation, minimizes approximation? Should
plans be modified when conditions change?
 Even further, since synopses could be shared among query
plans [73], how do we optimally consider a set of queries,
which may be weighted by importance?
In addition to memory management, we are faced the problem of
scheduling multiple query plans in a DSMS. The scheduler needs
to provide rate synchronization within operators (such as stream
joins) and also across pipelined operators in query plans [8, 87].
Time-varying arrival rates of data streams and time-varying output
rates of operators add to the complexity of scheduling. Scheduling
decisions also need to take into account memory allocation across
operators, including management of buffers for incoming streams,
availability of synopses on disk as opposed to in memory, and the
performance requirements of individual queries.
Aside from the query processing architecture, user and appli-
cation interfaces need to be reinvestigated in a DSMS given the
dynamic environment in which it operates. Systems such as Au-
rora [15] and Hancock [24] completely eliminate declarative query-
ing and provide only procedural mechanisms for querying. In con-
trast, we will provide a declarative language for continuous queries,
similar to SQL but extended with operators such as those discussed
in Section 5.1, as well as a mechanism for directly submitting plans
in the query algebra that underlies our language.
We are developing a comprehensive DSMS interface that allows
users and administrators to visually monitor the execution of contin-
uous queries, including memory usageand approximation behavior.
We will also provide a way for administrators to adjust system pa-
rameters as queries are running, including memory allocation and
scheduling policies.
6. ALGORITHMIC ISSUES
The algorithms community has been fairly active of late in the
area of data streams, typically motivated by problems in databases
and networking. The modelof computation underlying the algorith-
mic work is similar to that in Section 2 and can be formally stated as
follows: A data stream algorithm takes as input a sequence of data
items x1; : : : ; xN ; : : : called the data stream, where the sequence
is scanned only once in the increasing order of the indexes. The
algorithm is required to maintain the value of a function f on the
prefix of the stream seen so far.
The main complexity measure is the space used by the algorithm,
although the time required to process each stream element is also
relevant. In some cases, the algorithm maintains a data structure
which can be used to compute the value of the functionf on demand,
and then the time required to process each such query also becomes
of interest. Henzinger et al. [49] defined a similar model but also
allowed the algorithm to make multiple passes over the stream data,
making the number of passes itself a complexity measure. We will
restrict our attention to algorithms which are allowed only one pass.
We will measure space and time in terms of the parameter N
which denotes the number of stream elements seen so far. The
primary performance goal is to ensure that the space required by a
stream algorithm is “small.” Ideally, one would want the memory
bound to be independent of N (which is unbounded). However,
for most interesting problems it is easy to prove a space lower
bound that precludes this possibility, thereby forcing us to settle for
bounds that are merely sublinear in N . A problem is considered to
be “well-solved” if one can devise an algorithm which requires at
most O(poly(logN)) space and O(poly(logN)) processing time
per data element or query1. We will see that in some cases it is
impossible to achieve such an algorithm, even if one is willing to
settle for approximations.
The rest of this section summarizes the state of the art for data
stream algorithms, at least as relevant to databases. We will focus
primarily on the problems of creating summary structures (syn-
opses) for a data stream, such as histograms, wavelet representa-
tion, clustering, and decision trees; in addition, we will also touch
upon known lower bounds for space and time requirements of data
stream algorithms. Most of these summary structures have been
considered for traditional databases [30]. The challenge is to adapt
some of these techniques to the data stream model.
6.1 Random Samples
Random samples can be used as a summary structure in many
scenarios where a small sample is expected to capture the essential
characteristics of the data set [65]. It is perhaps the easiest form
of summarization in a DSMS and other synopses can be built from
1We use poly to denote a polynomial function.
9
a sample itself. In fact, the join synopsis in the AQUA system [2]
is nothing but a uniform sample of the base relation. Recently
stratified sampling has been proposed as an alternative to uniform
sampling to reduce error due to the variance in data and also to
reduce error for group-by queries [1, 18]. To actually compute a
random sample over a data stream is relatively easy. The reservoir
sampling algorithm of Vitter [88] makes one pass over the data
set and is well suited for the data stream model. There is also an
extension by Chaudhuri, Motwani and Narasayya [21] to the case
of weighted sampling.
6.2 Sketching Techniques
In their seminal paper, Alon, Matias and Szegedy [5] introduced
the notion of randomized sketchingwhich has been widely used ever
since. Sketching involves building a summary of a data stream using
a small amount of memory, using which it is possible to estimate
the answer to certain queries (typically, “distance” queries) over the
data set.
Let S = (x1; : : : ; xN ) be a sequence of elements where each
xi belongs to the domain D = f1; : : : ; dg. Let the multiplicity
mi = jfjjxj = igj denote the number of occurrences of value i
in the sequenceS. For k  0, the kth frequency moment Fk of S
is defined as Fk =
Pd
i=1m
k
i ; further, we define F

1 = maximi.
The frequency moments capture the statistics of the distribution of
values in S — for instance, F0 is the number of distinct values in
the sequence, F1 is the length of the sequence, F2 is the self-join
size (also called Gini’s index of homogeneity), and F1 is the most
frequent item’s multiplicity. It is not very difficult to see that an
exact computation of these moments requires linear space and so
we focus our attention on approximations.
The problem of efficiently estimating the number of distinct val-
ues (F0) has received particular attention in the database literature,
particularly in the context of using single pass or random sampling
algorithms [17, 46]. A sketching technique to compute F0 was
presented earlier by Flajolet and Martin [35]; however, this had the
drawback of requiring explicit families of hash functions with very
strong independence properties. This requirement was relaxed by
Alon, Matias, and Szegedy [5] who presented a sketching technique
to estimateF0 within a constant factor2. Their technique uses linear
hash functions and requires only O(log d) memory. The key con-
tribution of Alon et al. [5] was a sketching technique to estimate F2
that uses onlyO(log d+logN) spaceand provides arbitrarily small
approximation factors. This technique has found many applications
in the database literature, including join size estimation [4], esti-
mating L1 norm of vectors [33], and processing complex aggregate
queries over multiple streams [26, 37]. It remains an open problem
to come up with techniques to maintain correlated aggregates [37]
that have provable guarantees.
The key idea behind theF2-sketching technique can be described
as follows: Every element i in the domainD is hashed uniformly at
random onto a value zi 2 f 1;+1g. Define the random variable
X =
P
imizi and returnX
2 as the estimator of F2. Observe that
the estimator can be computed in a single pass over the data provided
we can efficiently compute the zi values. If the hash functions have
four-way independence3, it is easy to prove that the quantityX2 has
expectation equal to F2 and variance less than 2F 22 . Using standard
2As discussed in Section 6.7, recently Bar-Yossef et al. [12] and
Gibbons and Tirthapura [38] have devised algorithms which, under
certain conditions, provide arbitrarily small approximation factors
without recourse to perfect hash functions.
3Hash functions with four-way independencecan be obtained using
standard techniques involving the use of parity check matrices of
BCH codes [65].
tricks, we can combine several independentestimators to accurately
and with high probability obtain an estimate of F2. At an intuitive
level, we can view this technique as a tug-of-war where elements
are randomly assigned to one of the two sides of the rope based on
the value i; the square of the displacement of the rope captures the
skew F2 in the data.
Observe that computing the self-join size of a relation is exactly
the same as computing F2 for the values of the join attribute in the
relation. Alon et al. [4] extended this technique to estimating the
join size between two distinct relations A andB, as follows. Let Y
andZ be random variables corresponding to A andB, respectively,
similar to the random variableX above; the mapping from domain
values i to zi is the same for both relations. Then, it can be
proved that the estimator Y Z has expected value equal to jA 1 Bj
and variance less than 2jA 1 AjjB 1 Bj. In order to get small
relative error, we can use O( jA1AjjB1Bj
jA1Bj2
) independent estimators.
Observe that for estimating joins between two relations, the number
of estimators depends on the data distribution. In a recent paper,
Dobra et al. [26] extended this technique to estimate the size of
multi-way joins and for answering complex aggregates queries over
them. They also provide techniques to optimally partition the data
domain and use estimators on each partition independently, so as to
minimize the total memory requirement.
The frequency moment F2 can also be viewed as the L2 norm
of a vector whose value along the ith dimension is the multiplicity
mi. Thus, the above technique can be used to compute the L2 norm
under a update model for vectors, where each data element (v; i)
increments (or decrements) some mi by a quantity v. On seeing
such an update, we update the corresponding sketch by adding vzi
to the sum. The sketching idea can also be extended to compute
the L1 norm of a vector, as follows. Let us assume that each
dimension of the underlying vector is an integer, bounded by M .
Consider the unary representation of the vector. It has Md bit
positions (elements), where d is the dimension of the underlying
vector. A 1 in the unary representation denotes that the element
corresponding to the bit position is present once; otherwise, it is not
present. Then F2 captures the L1 norm of the vector. The catch
is that, given an element ri along dimension i, it is required that
we can efficiently compute the range sum
Pri 1
j=0 zi;j of the hash
values corresponding to the pertinent bit positions that are set to
1. Feigenbaum et al. [33] showed how to construct such a family
of range-summable 1-valued hash functions with limited (four-
way) independence. Indyk [50] provided a uniform framework to
compute the Lp norm (for p 2 (0; 2]) using the so-called p-stable
distributions, improving upon the previous paper [33] for estimating
the L1 norm, in that it allowed for arbitrary addition and deletion
updates in every dimension. The ability to efficiently compute L1
and L2 norm of the difference of two vectors is central to some
synopsis structures designed for data streams.
6.3 Histograms
Histograms are commonly-used summary structures to succinctly
capture the distribution of values in a data set (i.e., a column, or
possibly even a collection of columns, in a table). They have been
employed for a multitude of tasks such as query size estimation,
approximate query answering, and data mining. We consider the
summarization of data streams using histograms. There are sev-
eral different types of histograms that have been proposed in the
literature. Some popular definitions are:
 V-Optimal Histogram: These approximate the distribution of
a set of values v1; : : : ; vn by a piecewise-constant function
bv(i), so as to minimize the sum of squared error Pi(vi  
10
bv(i))2.
 Equi-Width Histograms: These partition the domain into
buckets such that the number of vi values falling into each
bucket is uniform across all buckets. In other words, they
maintain quantiles for the underlying data distribution as the
bucket boundaries.
 End-Biased Histograms: These will maintain exact counts of
items that occur with frequency above a threshold, and ap-
proximate the other counts by an uniform distribution. Main-
taining the count of such frequent items is related to Iceberg
queries [32].
We give an overview of recent work on computing such histograms
over data streams.
V-Optimal Histograms over Data Streams
Jagadish et al. [54] showed how to compute optimal V-Optimal
Histograms for a given data set using dynamic programming. The
algorithm uses O(N) space and requires O(N2B) time, where N
is the size of the data set and B is the number of buckets. This is
prohibitive for data streams. Guha, Koudas and Shim [43] adapted
this algorithm to sorted data streams. Their algorithm constructs
an arbitrarily-close V-Optimal Histogram (i.e., with error arbitrarily
close to that of the optimal histogram), using O(B2 logN) space
and O(B2 logN) time per data element.
In a recent paper, Gilbert et al. [39], removed the restriction
that the data stream be sorted, providing algorithms based on the
sketching technique described earlier for computingL2 norms. The
idea is to view each data element as an update to an underlying
vector of length N that we are trying to approximate using the
best B-bucket histogram. The time to process a data element,
the time to reconstruct the histogram, and the size of the sketch
are each bounded by poly(B; logN; 1=), where  is the relative
error we are willing to tolerate. Their algorithm proceeds by first
constructing a robust approximation to the underlying “signal.” A
robust approximation is built by repeatedly adding a dyadic interval
of constant value4 which best reduces the approximation error. In
order to find such a dyadic interval it is necessary to efficiently
compute the sketch of the original signal minus the constant dyadic
interval5. This translates to efficiently computing the range sum
of p-stable random variables (used for computing the L2 sketch,
see Indyk [50]) over the dyadic interval. Gilbert et al. [39] show
how to construct such efficiently range-summablep-stable random
variables. From the robust histogram they cull a histogram of
desired accuracy and with B buckets.
Equi-Width Histograms and Quantiles
Equi-width histograms based on histograms are summary structures
which characterize data distributions in a manner that is less sensi-
tive to outliers. In traditional databases they are used by optimizers
for selectivity estimation. Parallel database systems employ value
range data partitioning that requires generation of quantiles or split-
ters that partition the data into approximately equal parts. Recently,
Greenwald and Khanna [41] presented a single-pass deterministic
algorithm for efficient computation of quantiles. Their algorithm
needs O( 1 log N) space and guarantees a precision of N . They
employ a novel data structure that maintains a sample of the values
seen so far (quantiles), along with a range of possible ranks that the
4A signal that corresponds to a constant value over the dyadic
interval and zero everywhere else.
5That is, a sketch forL2 norm of the difference between the original
signal and the dyadic interval with constant value.
samples can take. The error associated with each quantile is the
width of this range. They periodically merge quantiles with “sim-
ilar” errors so long as the error for the combined quantile does not
exceed N . This algorithm improves upon the previous set of re-
sults by Manku, Rajagopalan, and Lindsay [61, 62] and Chaudhuri,
Motwani, and Narasayya [20].
End-Biased Histograms and Iceberg Queries
Many applications maintain simple aggregates (count) over an at-
tribute to find aggregate values above a specified threshold. These
queries are referred to as iceberg queries [32]. Such iceberg queries
arise in many applications, including data mining, data warehous-
ing, information retrieval, market basket analysis, copy detection,
and clustering. For example, a search engine might be interested in
gathering search terms that account for more than 1% of the queries.
Such frequent item summaries are useful for applications such as
caching and analyzing trends. Fang et al. [32] gave an efficient al-
gorithm to compute Iceberg queries over disk-resident data. Their
algorithm requires multiple passes which is not suited to the stream-
ing model. In a recent paper, Manku and Motwani [60] presented
randomized and deterministic algorithms for frequency counting
and iceberg queries over data streams. The randomized algorithm
uses adaptive sampling and the main idea is that any item which
accounts for an  fraction of the items is highly likely to be a part of
a uniform sample of size 1

. The deterministic algorithm maintains
a sample of the distinct items along with their frequency. Whenever
a new item is added, it is given a benefit of doubt by over-estimating
its frequency. If we see an item that already exists in the sample, its
frequency is incremented. Periodically items with low frequency
are deleted. Their algorithms require O( 1

log(N)) space, where
N is the length of the data stream, and guarantee that any element
is undercounted by at most N . Thus, these algorithms report all
items of count greater than N . Moreover, for all items reported,
they guarantee that the reported count is less than the actual count,
but by no more than N .
6.4 Wavelets
Wavelets are often used as a technique to provide a summary
representation of the data. Wavelets coefficients are projections
of the given signal (set of data values) onto an orthogonal set of
basis vector. The choice of basis vectors determines the type of
wavelets. Often Haar wavelets are used in databases for their ease
of computation. Wavelet coefficients have the desirable property
that the signal reconstructed from the top few wavelet coefficients
best approximates the original signal in terms of the L2 norm.
Recent papers have demonstrated the efficacy of wavelets for dif-
ferent tasks such as selectivity estimation [63], data cube approx-
imation [91] and computing multi-dimensional aggregates [90].
This body of work indicates that estimates obtained from wavelets
were more accurate than those obtained from histograms with the
same amount of memory. Chakrabarti et al. [16] propose the use
of wavelets for general purpose approximate query processing and
demonstrate how to compute joins, aggregations, and selections
entirely in the wavelet coefficient domain.
To extend this body of work to data streams, it becomes impor-
tant to devise techniques for computing wavelets in the streaming
model. In a related development, Matias, Vitter, and Wang [64]
show how to dynamically maintain the top wavelet coefficients ef-
ficiently as the underlying data distribution is updated. There has
been recent work in computing the top wavelet coefficients in the
data stream model. The technique of Gilbert et al. [39], to approxi-
mate the best dyadic interval that most reduces the error, gives rise
to an easy greedy algorithm to find the best B-term Haar wavelet
11
representation. This is because the Haar wavelet basis consists
of dyadic intervals with constant values. This improves upon a
previous result by Gilbert et al. [40]. If the data is presented in
a sorted order, there is a simple algorithm that maintains the best
B-term Haar wavelet representation using O(B + logN) space in
a deterministic manner [40].
While there has been lot of work on summary structures, it re-
mains an interesting open problem to address the issue of global
space allocation between different synopses vying for the same
space. It requires that we come up with a global error metric for
the synopses, which we minimize given the (main memory) space
constraint. Moreover, the allocation will have to be dynamic as the
underlying data distribution and query workload changes over time.
6.5 Sliding Windows
As discussed in Section 4, sliding windows prevent stale data
from influencing analysis and statistics, and also serve as a tool
for approximation in face of bounded memory. There has been
very little work on extending summarization techniques to sliding
windows and it remains a ripe research area. We briefly describe
some of the recent work.
Datar et al. [25] showed how to maintain simple statistics over
sliding windows, including the sketches used for computing the
L1 or L2 norm. Their technique requires a multiplicative space
overhead of O( 1

logN), where N is the length of the sliding
window and  is the accuracy parameter. This enables the adaptation
of the sketching-based algorithms to the sliding windows model.
They also provide space lower bounds for various problems in
the sliding windows model. In another paper, Babock, Datar and
Motwani [9] adapt the reservoir sampling algorithm to the sliding
windows case. In their paper for computing Iceberg queries over
data streams, Manku and Motwani [60] also present techniques to
adapt their algorithms to the sliding window model. Guha and
Koudas [42] have adapted their earlier paper [43], to provide a
technique for maintaining V-Optimal Histograms over sorted data
streams for the sliding window model; however, they require the
buffering of all the elements in the sliding window. The space
requirement is linear in the size of the sliding window (N ), although
update time per data element is amortized to O((B3=2) log3N),
where B is the number of buckets in the histogram and  is the
accuracy parameter.
Some open problems for sliding windows are: clustering, main-
taining top wavelet coefficients, maintaining statistics like variance,
and computing correlated aggregates [37].
6.6 Negative Results
There is an emerging set of negative results on space-time require-
ments of algorithms that operate in data stream model. Henzinger,
Raghavan, and Rajagopalan [49] provided space lower bounds for
concrete problems in the data stream model. These lower bounds
are derived from results in communication complexity [56]. To
understand the connection, observe that the memory used by any
one-pass algorithm for a function f , after seeing a prefix of the data
stream, is lower bounded by the one-way communication required
by two parties trying to compute f where the first party has access
to the same prefix and the second party has access to the suffix of
the stream that is yet to arrive. Henzinger et al. use this approach to
provide lower bounds for problems such as frequent item counting,
approximate median, and some graph problems.
Again based on communication complexity, Alon, Matias and
Szegedy [5] provide almost tight lower bounds for computing the
frequency moments. In particular they proved a lower bound of

(N) for estimating F1, the count of the most frequent item,
where N is the domain size. At first glance this lower bound and a
similar lower bound in Henzinger et al. [49] may seem to contradict
the frequent item-set counting results of Manku and Motwani [60].
But note that the latter paperestimates the count of the most frequent
item only if it exceeds N . Such skewed distributions are common
in practice, while the lower bounds are proven for pathological dis-
tributions where items have near-uniform frequency. This serves as
a reminder that while it may be possible to prove strong space lower
bounds for stream computations, considerations from applications
sometimes enable us to circumvent the negative results.
Saks and Sun [71] provide space lower bounds for distance ap-
proximation between two vectors under the Lp norm, for p > 3,
in the data stream model. Munro and Paterson [66] showed that
any algorithm that computes quantiles exactly in p passes requires

(N1=p) space. Space lower bounds for maintaining simple statis-
tics like count, sum, min/max, and number of distinct values under
the sliding windows model can be found in the work of Datar et
al. [25].
A general lower bound technique for sampling-based algorithms
was presented by Bar-Yossef et al. [11]. It is useful for deriving
space lower bounds for data stream algorithms that resort to obliv-
ious sampling. It remains an interesting open problem to obtain
similar general lower bound techniques for other classes of algo-
rithms for the data stream model. We feel that techniques based
on communication complexity results [56] will prove useful in this
context.
6.7 Miscellaneous
In this section, we give a potpourri of algorithmic results for data
streams.
Data Mining
Decision trees are another form of synopsis used for prediction.
Domingos et al. [27, 28] have studied the problem of maintaining
decision trees over data streams. Clustering is yet another way to
summarize data. Consider the k-median formulation for clustering:
Given n data points in a metric space, the objective is to choose
k representative points, such that the sum of the errors over the
n data points is minimized. The “error” for each data point is the
distance from that point to the nearest of the k chosen representative
points. Guha et al. [44] presented a single-pass algorithm for main-
taining approximate k-medians (cluster centers) that uses O(N )
space for some  < 1 using O(poly(logN)) amortized time per
data element, to compute a constant factor approximation to the
k-median problem. Their algorithm uses a divide-and-conquer ap-
proach which works as follows: Clustering proceeds hierarchically,
where a small number (N ) of the original data points are clustered
into k centers. These k-centers are weighted by the number of
points that are closest to them in the local solution. When we get
N  weighted cluster centers by clustering different sets, we cluster
them into higher-level cluster centers, and so on.
Multiple Streams
Gibbons and Tirthapura [38] considered the problem of computing
simple functions, such as the number of distinct elements, over
unions of data stream. This is useful for applications that work in a
distributed environment, where it is not feasible to send all the data
to a central site for processing. It is important to note that some of
the techniques presented earlier, especially those that are based on
sketching, are amenable to distributed computation over multiple
streams.
12
Reductions of Streams
In a recent paper, Bar-Yossef, Kumar, and Sivakumar [12] introduce
the notion of reductions in streaming algorithms. In order for the
reductions to be efficient, one needs to employ list-efficient stream-
ing algorithms. The idea behind list-efficient streaming algorithms
is that instead of being presented one data item at a time, they are
implicitly presented with a list of data items in a succinct form. If
the algorithm can efficiently process the list in time that is a function
of the succinct representation size, then it is said to be list-efficient.
They develop some list-efficient algorithms and using the reduction
paradigm address several interesting problems like computing fre-
quency moments [5] (which includes the special case of counting
the number of distinct elements) and counting the number of trian-
gles in a graph presented as a stream. They also prove a space lower
bound for the latter problem. To the best of our knowledge, besides
this work and that of Henzinger et al. [49], there has been little work
on graph problems in the streaming model. Such algorithms will
likely be very useful for analyzing large graphical structures such
as the web graph.
Property Testing
Feigenbaumet al. [34] introduced the conceptof streamingproperty
testers and streaming spot checkers. These are programs that make
one pass over the data and using small space verify if the data
satisfies certain property. They show that there are properties that
are efficiently testable by a streaming-tester but not by a sampling-
tester, and other problems for which the converse is true. They also
present an efficient sampling-tester for testing the “groupedness”
property of a sequence that use O(
p
N) samples, O(
p
N) space
and O(
p
N logN) time. A sequence 1; : : : ; N is said to be
grouped if i = j and i < k < j imply i = k = j , i.e., for
each type T , all occurrences of T are in a single contiguous run.
Thus, groupedness is a natural relaxation of the sortedness property
and is a natural property that one may desire in a massive streaming
data set. The work discussed here illustrates that some properties
are efficiently testable by sampling algorithms but not streaming
algorithms.
Measuring Sortedness
Measuring the “sortedness” of a data stream could be useful in
some applications; for example, it is useful in determining the
choice of a sort algorithm for the underlying data. Ajtai et al. [3]
have studied the problem of estimating the number of inversions (a
measure of sortedness) in a permutation to within a factor , where
the permutation is presented in a data stream model. They obtained
an algorithm using O(logN log logN) space and O(logN) time
per data element. They also prove an 
(N) space lower bound for
randomized exact computation, thus showing that approximation is
essential.
7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have isolated a number of issues that arise when considering
data management, query processing, and algorithmic problems in
the new setting of continuous data streams. We proposed some
initial solutions, described past and current work related to data
streams, and suggested a general architecture for a Data Stream
Management System (DSMS). At this point let us take a step back
and consider some “meta-questions” with regard to the motivations
and need for a new approach.
 Is there more to effective data stream systems than conven-
tional database technology with enhancedsupport for stream-
ing primitives such as triggers, temporal constructs, and data
rate management?
 Is there a need for database researchers to develop fundamen-
tal and general-purpose models, algorithms, and systems for
data streams? Perhaps it suffices to build ad hoc solutions for
each specific application (network management, web moni-
toring, security, finance, sensors etc.).
 Are there any “killer apps” for data stream systems?
We believe that all three questions can be answered in the affirma-
tive, although of course only time will tell.
Assuming positive answers to the “meta-questions” above,we see
several fundamental aspects to the design of data stream systems,
some of which we discussed in detail in this paper. One impor-
tant general question is the interface provided by the DSMS. Our
approach at Stanford is to extend SQL to support stream-oriented
primitives, providing a purely declarative interface as in traditional
database systems,although we also allow direct submission of query
plans. In contrast, the Aurora project [15] provides a procedural
“boxes and arrows” approach as the primary interface for the appli-
cation developer.
Other fundamental issues discussed in the paper include times-
tamping and ordering, support for sliding window queries, and
dealing effectively with blocking operators. A major open question,
about which we had very little to say, is that of dealing with dis-
tributed streams. It does not make sense to redirect high-rate streams
to a central location for query processing, so it becomes imperative
to push some processing to the points of arrival of the distributed
streams, raising a host of issues at every level of a DSMS [58].
Another issue we touched on only briefly in Section 4.5 is that of
constraints over streams, and how they can be exploited in query
processing. Finally, many systems questions remain open in query
optimization, construction of synopses, resource management, ap-
proximate query processing, and the development of an appropriate
and well-accepted benchmark for data stream systems.
From a purely theoretical perspective, perhaps the most inter-
esting open question is that of defining extensions of relational
operators to handle data stream constructs, and to study the re-
sulting “stream algebra” and other properties of these extensions.
Such a foundation is surely key to developing a general-purpose
well-understood query processor for data streams.
Acknowledgements
We thank all the members of the Stanford STREAM research group
for their contributions and feedback.
8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Acharya, P. B. Gibbons, and V. Poosala. Congressional
samples for approximate answering of group-by queries. In
Proc. of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management
of Data, pages 487–498, May 2000.
[2] S. Acharya, P. B. Gibbons, V. Poosala, and S. Ramaswamy.
Join synopses for approximate query answering. In Proc. of
the 1999 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data,
pages 275–286, June 1999.
[3] M. Ajtai, T. Jayram, R. Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Counting
inversions in a data stream. manuscript, 2001.
[4] N. Alon, P. Gibbons, Y. Matias, and M. Szegedy. Tracking
join and self-join sizes in limited storage. In Proc. of the
1999 ACM Symp. on Principles of Database Systems, pages
10–20, 1999.
13
[5] N. Alon, Y. Matias, and M. Szegedy. The space complexity
of approximating the frequency moments. In Proc. of the
1996 Annual ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing, pages
20–29, 1996.
[6] M. Altinel and M. J. Franklin. Efficient filtering of XML
documents for selective dissemination of information. In
Proc. of the 2000 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases,
pages 53–64, Sept. 2000.
[7] A. Arasu, B. Babcock, S. Babu, J. McAlister, and J. Widom.
Characterizing memory requirements for queries over
continuous data streams. In Proc. of the 2002 ACM Symp. on
Principles of Database Systems, June 2002. Available at
http://dbpubs.stanford.edu/pub/2001-49.
[8] R. Avnur and J. Hellerstein. Eddies: Continuously adaptive
query processing. In Proc. of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data, pages 261–272, May 2000.
[9] B. Babcock, M. Datar, and R. Motwani. Sampling from a
moving window over streaming data. In Proc. of the 2002
Annual ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms, pages
633–634, 2002.
[10] S. Babu and J. Widom. Continuous queries over data
streams. SIGMOD Record, 30(3):109–120, Sept. 2001.
[11] Z. Bar-Yossef, R. Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Sampling
algorithms: Lower bounds and applications. In Proc. of the
2001 Annual ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing, pages
266–275, 2001.
[12] Z. Bar-Yossef, R. Kumar, and D. Sivakumar. Reductions in
streaming algorithms, with an application to counting
triangles in graphs. In Proc. of the 2002 Annual ACM-SIAM
Symp. on Discrete Algorithms, pages 623–632, 2002.
[13] S. Bellamkonda, T. Borzkaya, B. Ghosh, A. Gupta, J. Haydu,
S. Subramanian, and A. Witkowski. Analytic functions in
oracle 8i. Available at
http://www-db.stanford.edu/dbseminar/Archive
/SpringY2000/speakers/agupta/paper.pdf.
[14] J. A. Blakeley, N. Coburn, and P. A. Larson. Updating
derived relations: Detecting irrelevant and autonomously
computable updates. ACM Trans. on Database Systems,
14(3):369–400, 1989.
[15] D. Carney, U. Cetinternel, M. Cherniack, C. Convey, S. Lee,
G. Seidman, M. Stonebraker, N. Tatbul, and S. Zdonik.
Monitoring streams – a new class of dbms applications.
Technical Report CS-02-01, Department of Computer
Science, Brown University, Feb. 2002.
[16] K. Chakrabarti, M. N. Garofalakis, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim.
Approximate query processing using wavelets. In Proc. of
the 2000 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases, pages
111–122, Sept. 2000.
[17] M. Charikar, S. Chaudhuri, R. Motwani, and V. Narasayya.
Towards estimation error guarantees for distinct values. In
Proc. of the 2000 ACM Symp. on Principles of Database
Systems, pages 268–279, 2000.
[18] S. Chaudhuri, G. Das, and V. Narasayya. A robust,
optimization-based approach for approximate answering of
aggregate queries. In Proc. of the 2001 ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data, pages 295–306, May 2001.
[19] S. Chaudhuri and R. Motwani. On sampling and relational
operators. Bulletin of the Technical Committee on Data
Engineering, 22:35–40, 1999.
[20] S. Chaudhuri, R. Motwani, and V. Narasayya. Random
sampling for histogram construction: How much is enough?
In Proc. of the 1998 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on
Management of Data, pages 436–447, 1998.
[21] S. Chaudhuri, R. Motwani, and V. Narasayya. On random
sampling over joins. In Proc. of the 1999 ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data, pages 263–274, June 1999.
[22] S. Chaudhuri and V. Narasayya. An efficient cost-driven
index selection tool for microsoft sql server. In Proc. of the
1997 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases, pages 146–155,
1997.
[23] J. Chen, D. J. DeWitt, F. Tian, and Y. Wang. NiagraCQ: A
scalable continuous query system for internet databases. In
Proc. of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management
of Data, pages 379–390, May 2000.
[24] C. Cortes, K. Fisher, D. Pregibon, and A. Rogers. Hancock:
a language for extracting signatures from data streams. In
Proc. of the 2000 ACM SIGKDD Intl. Conf. on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pages 9–17, Aug. 2000.
[25] M. Datar, A. Gionis, P. Indyk, and R. Motwani. Maintaining
stream statistics over sliding windows. In Proc. of the 2002
Annual ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms, pages
635–644, 2002.
[26] A. Dobra, J. Gehrke, M. Garofalakis, and R. Rastogi.
Processing complex aggregate queries over data streams. In
Proc. of the 2002 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management
of Data, 2002.
[27] P. Domingos and G. Hulten. Mining high-speed data streams.
In Proc. of the 2000 ACM SIGKDD Intl. Conf. on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pages 71–80, Aug. 2000.
[28] P. Domingos, G. Hulten, and L. Spencer. Mining
time-changing data streams. In Proc. of the 2001 ACM
SIGKDD Intl. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, pages 97–106, 2001.
[29] N. Duffield and M. Grossglauser. Trajectory sampling for
direct traffic observation. In Proc. of the 2000 ACM
SIGCOMM, pages 271–284, Sept. 2000.
[30] D. B. et al. The New Jersey data reduction report. IEEE Data
Engineering Bulletin, 20(4):3–45, 1997.
[31] C. Faloutsos, M. Ranganathan, and Y. Manolopoulos. Fast
subsequence matching in time-series databases. In Proc. of
the 1994 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data,
pages 419–429, May 1994.
[32] M. Fang, N. Shivakumar, H. Garcia-Molina, R. Motwani,
and J. D. Ullman. Computing iceberg queries efficiently. In
Proc. of the 1998 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases,
pages 299–310, 1998.
[33] J. Feigenbaum, S. Kannan, M. Strauss, and M. Viswanathan.
An approximate l1-difference algorithm for massive data
streams. In Proc. of the 1999 Annual IEEE Symp. on
Foundations of Computer Science, pages 501–511, 1999.
[34] J. Feigenbaum, S. Kannan, M. Strauss, and M. Viswanathan.
Testing and spot checking of data streams. In Proc. of the
2000 Annual ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms,
pages 165–174, 2000.
[35] P. Flajolet and G. Martin. Probabilistic counting. In Proc. of
the 1983 Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer
Science, 1983.
[36] H. Garcia-Molina, W. Labio, and J. Yang. Expiring data in a
warehouse. In Proc. of the 1998 Intl. Conf. on Very Large
Data Bases, pages 500–511, Aug. 1998.
[37] J. Gehrke, F. Korn, and D. Srivastava. On computing
correlated aggregates over continual data streams. In Proc. of
the 2001 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data,
14
pages 13–24, May 2001.
[38] P. Gibbons and S. Tirthapura. Estimating simple functions on
the union of data streams. In Proc. of the 2001 ACM Symp. on
Parallel Algorithms and Architectures, pages 281–291, 2001.
[39] A. Gilbert, S. Guha, P. Indyk, Y. Kotidis, S. Muthukrishnan,
and M. Strauss. Fast, small-space algorithms for approximate
histogram maintenance. In Proc. of the 2002 Annual ACM
Symp. on Theory of Computing, 2002.
[40] A. Gilbert, Y. Kotidis, S. Muthukrishnan, and M. Strauss.
Surfing wavelets on streams: One-pass summaries for
approximate aggregate queries. In Proc. of the 2001 Intl.
Conf. on Very Large Data Bases, pages 79–88, 2001.
[41] M. Greenwald and S. Khanna. Space-efficient online
computation of quantile summaries. In Proc. of the 2001
ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data, pages
58–66, 2001.
[42] S. Guha and N. Koudas. Approximating a data stream for
querying and estimation: Algorithms and performance
evaluation. In Proc. of the 2002 Intl. Conf. on Data
Engineering, 2002.
[43] S. Guha, N. Koudas, and K. Shim. Data-streams and
histograms. In Proc. of the 2001 Annual ACM Symp. on
Theory of Computing, pages 471–475, 2001.
[44] S. Guha, N. Mishra, R. Motwani, and L. O’Callaghan.
Clustering data streams. In Proc. of the 2000 Annual IEEE
Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 359–366,
Nov. 2000.
[45] A. Gupta, H. V. Jagadish, and I. S. Mumick. Data integration
using self-maintainable views. In Proc. of the 1996 Intl.
Conf. on Extending Database Technology, pages 140–144,
Mar. 1996.
[46] P. Haas, J. Naughton, P. Seshadri, and L. Stokes.
Sampling-based estimation of the number of distinct values
of an attribute. In Proc. of the 1995 Intl. Conf. on Very Large
Data Bases, pages 311–322, Sept. 1995.
[47] J. Hellerstein, M. Franklin, et al. Adaptive query processing:
Technology in evolution. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin,
23(2):7–18, June 2000.
[48] J. Hellerstein, P. Haas, and H. Wang. Online aggregation. In
Proc. of the 1997 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management
of Data, pages 171–182, May 1997.
[49] M. Henzinger, P. Raghavan, and S. Rajagopalan. Computing
on data streams. Technical Report TR 1998-011, Compaq
Systems Research Center, Palo Alto, California, May 1998.
[50] P. Indyk. Stable distributions, pseudorandom generators,
embeddings and data stream computation. In Proc. of the
2000 Annual IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer
Science, pages 189–197, 2000.
[51] Y. E. Ioannidis and V. Poosala. Histogram-based
approximation of set-valued query-answers. In Proc. of the
1999 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases, pages 174–185,
Sept. 1999.
[52] iPolicy Networks home page.
http://www.ipolicynetworks.com.
[53] Z. Ives, D. Florescu, M. Friedman, A. Levy, and D. Weld. An
adaptive query execution system for data integration. In
Proc. of the 1999 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management
of Data, pages 299–310, June 1999.
[54] H. Jagadish, N. Koudas, S. Muthukrishnan, V. Poosala,
K. Sevcik, and T. Suel. Optimal histograms with quality
guarantees. In Proc. of the 1998 Intl. Conf. on Very Large
Data Bases, pages 275–286, 1998.
[55] H. Jagadish, I. Mumick, and A. Silberschatz. View
maintenance issues for the Chronicle data model. In Proc. of
the 1995 ACM Symp. on Principles of Database Systems,
pages 113–124, May 1995.
[56] E. Kushlevitz and N. Nisan. Communication Complexity.
Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[57] L. Liu, C. Pu, and W. Tang. Continual queries for internet
scale event-driven information delivery. IEEE Trans. on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 11(4):583–590, Aug.
1999.
[58] S. Madden and M. J. Franklin. Fjording the stream: An
architecture for queries over streaming sensor data. In Proc.
of the 2002 Intl. Conf. on Data Engineering, Feb. 2002. (To
appear).
[59] S. Madden, J. Hellerstein, M. Shah, and V. Raman.
Continuously adaptive continuous queries over streams. In
Proc. of the 2002 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management
of Data, June 2002. (To appear).
[60] G. Manku and R. Motwani. Approximate frequency counts
over streaming data. manuscript, 2002.
[61] G. Manku, S. Rajagopalan, and B. G. Lindsay. Approximate
medians and other quantiles in one pass and with limited
memory. In Proc. of the 1998 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on
Management of Data, pages 426–435, June 1998.
[62] G. Manku, S. Rajagopalan, and B. G. Lindsay. Random
sampling techniques for space efficient online computation
of order statistics of large datasets. In Proc. of the 1999 ACM
SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data, pages
251–262, June 1999.
[63] Y. Matias, J. Vitter, and M. Wang. Wavelet-based histograms
for selectivity estimation. In Proc. of the 1998 ACM
SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data, pages
448–459, June 1998.
[64] Y. Matias, J. Vitter, and M. Wang. Dynamic maintenance of
wavelet-based histograms. In Proc. of the 2000 Intl. Conf. on
Very Large Data Bases, pages 101–110, Sept. 2000.
[65] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan. Randomized Algorithms.
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[66] J. Munro and M. Paterson. Selection and sorting with limited
storage. Theoretical Computer Science, 12:315–323, 1980.
[67] B. Nguyen, S. Abiteboul, G. Cobena, and M. Preda.
Monitoring XML data on the web. In Proc. of the 2001 ACM
SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data, pages
437–448, May 2001.
[68] V. Poosala and V. Ganti. Fast approximate answers to
aggregate queries on a data cube. In Proc. of the 1999 Intl.
Conf. on Scientific and Statistical Database Management,
pages 24–33, July 1999.
[69] D. Quass, A. Gupta, I. Mumick, and J. Widom. Making
views self-maintainable for data warehousing. In Proc. of the
1996 Intl. Conf. on Parallel and Distributed Information
Systems, pages 158–169, Dec. 1996.
[70] V. Raman, B. Raman, and J. Hellerstein. Online dynamic
reordering for interactive data processing. In Proc. of the
1999 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases, 1999.
[71] M. Saks and X. Sun. Space lower bounds for distance
approximation in the data stream model. In Proc. of the 2002
Annual ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing, 2002.
[72] U. Schreier, H. Pirahesh, R. Agrawal, and C. Mohan. Alert:
An architecture for transforming a passive DBMS into an
15
active DBMS. In Proc. of the 1991 Intl. Conf. on Very Large
Data Bases, pages 469–478, Sept. 1991.
[73] T. K. Sellis. Multiple-query optimization. ACM Trans. on
Database Systems, 13(1):23–52, 1988.
[74] P. Seshadri, M. Livny, and R. Ramakrishnan. Sequence query
processing. In Proc. of the 1994 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf.
on Management of Data, pages 430–441, May 1994.
[75] P. Seshadri, M. Livny, and R. Ramakrishnan. Seq: A model
for sequence databases. In Proc. of the 1995 Intl. Conf. on
Data Engineering, pages 232–239, Mar. 1995.
[76] P. Seshadri, M. Livny, and R. Ramakrishnan. The design and
implementation of a sequence database system. In Proc. of
the 1996 Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases, pages
99–110, Sept. 1996.
[77] J. Shanmugasundaram, K. Tufte, D. J. DeWitt, J. F.
Naughton, and D. Maier. Architecting a network query
engine for producing partial results. In Proc. of the 2000 Intl.
Workshop on the Web and Databases, pages 17–22, May
2000.
[78] R. Snodgrass and I. Ahn. A taxonomy of time in databases.
In Proc. of the 1985 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on
Management of Data, pages 236–245, 1985.
[79] S.-. Standard. On-line analytical processing (sql/olap).
Available from http://www.ansi.org/, document #ISO/IEC
9075-2/Amd1:2001.
[80] Stanford Stream Data Management (STREAM) Project.
http://www-db.stanford.edu/stream.
[81] M. Sullivan. Tribeca: A stream database manager for
network traffic analysis. In Proc. of the 1996 Intl. Conf. on
Very Large Data Bases, page 594, Sept. 1996.
[82] D. Terry, D. Goldberg, D. Nichols, and B. Oki. Continuous
queries over append-only databases. In Proc. of the 1992
ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data, pages
321–330, June 1992.
[83] Traderbot home page. http://www.traderbot.com.
[84] P. Tucker, D. Maier, T. Sheard, and L. Fegaras. Enhancing
relational operators for querying over punctuated data
streams. manuscript, 2002. Available at
http://www.cse.ogi.edu/dot/niagara
/pstream/punctuating.pdf.
[85] J. Ullman and J. Widom. A First Course in Database Systems.
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 1997.
[86] T. Urhan and M. Franklin. Xjoin: A reactively-scheduled
pipelined join operator. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin,
23(2):27–33, June 2000.
[87] S. Viglas and J. Naughton. Rate-based query optimization for
streaming information sources. In Proc. of the 2002 ACM
SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on Management of Data, June 2002. (To
appear).
[88] J. Vitter. Random sampling with a reservoir. ACM Trans. on
Mathematical Software, 11(1):37–57, 1985.
[89] J. Vitter. External memory algorithms and datastructures. In
J. Abello, editor, External Memory Algorithms, pages 1–18.
Dimacs, 1999.
[90] J. Vitter and M. Wang. Approximate computation of
multidimensional aggregates of sparse data using wavelets.
In Proc. of the 1999 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conf. on
Management of Data, pages 193–204, June 1999.
[91] J. Vitter, M. Wang, and B. Iyer. Data cube approximation and
histograms via wavelets. In Proc. of the 1998 Intl. Conf. on
Information and Knowledge Management, Nov. 1998.
[92] Xml path language (XPath) version 1.0, Nov. 1999. W3C
Recommendation available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath.
[93] Yahoo home page. http://www.yahoo.com.
16

