The Structure of Collaborative Tagging Systems 
Scott A. Golder and Bernardo A. Huberman 
Information Dynamics Lab, HP Labs 
{ scott.golder , bernardo.huberman }@hp.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
Collaborative tagging describes the process by which many 
users add metadata in the form of keywords to shared 
content.  Recently, collaborative tagging has grown in 
popularity on the web, on sites that allow users to tag 
bookmarks, photographs and other content.  In this paper 
we analyze the structure of collaborative tagging systems as 
well as their dynamical aspects. Specifically, we discovered 
regularities in user activity, tag frequencies, kinds of tags 
used, bursts of popularity in bookmarking and a remarkable 
stability in the relative proportions of tags within a given 
url. We also present a dynamical model of collaborative 
tagging that predicts these stable patterns and relates them 
to imitation and shared knowledge. 
KEYWORD LIST 
Collaborative tagging, folksonomy, Del.icio.us, bookmarks, web, 
sharing. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Marking content with descriptive terms, also called keywords or 
tags, is a common way of organizing content for future 
navigation, filtering or search.  Though organizing electronic 
content this way is not new, a collaborative form of this process, 
which has been given the name “tagging” by its proponents, is 
gaining popularity on the web.  
Document repositories or digital libraries often allow documents 
in their collections to be organized by assigned keywords.  
However, traditionally such categorizing or indexing is either 
performed by an authority, such as a librarian, or else derived 
from the material provided by the authors of the documents 
(Rowley 1995).  In contrast, collaborative tagging is the practice 
of allowing anyone – especially consumers – to freely attach 
keywords or tags to content.  Collaborative tagging is most useful 
when there is nobody in the “librarian” role or there is simply too 
much content for a single authority to classify; both of these traits 
are true of the web, where collaborative tagging has grown 
popular. 
This kind of collaborative tagging offers an interesting alternative 
to current efforts at semantic web ontologies (Shirky 2005) which 
have been a focus of research by a number of groups (e.g. Doan, 
Madhavan, Domingos & Halevy 2002). 
A number of now-prominent web sites feature collaborative 
tagging.  Typically, such sites allow users to publicly tag and 
share content, so that they can not only categorize information for 
themselves, they can browse the information categorized by 
others.  There is therefore at once both personal and public 
aspects to collaborative tagging systems.  In some sites, 
collaborative tagging is also known as “folksonomy,” short for 
“folk taxonomy;” however, there is some debate whether this term 
is accurate (Mathes 2004), and so we avoid using it here.   
Del.icio.us, the site on which we performed our analysis, allows 
for the collaborative tagging of shared website bookmarks.  
Yahoo’s MyWeb does this as well, and CiteULike and Connotea 
do the same for references to academic publications.  Some 
services allow users to tag, but only content they own, for 
example, Flickr for photographs  and Technorati for weblog posts.  
Though these two sites do not, strictly speaking, support 
collaborative tagging, we mention them to illustrate the growth of 
tagging in a variety of media.   
In this paper we analyze the structure of collaborative tagging 
systems as well as their dynamical aspects. Specifically, through 
the study of the collaborative tagging system Delicious, we are 
able to discover regularities in user activity, tag frequencies, kinds 
of tags used and bursts of popularity in bookmarking, as well as a 
remarkable stability in the relative proportions of tags within a 
given url. We also present a dynamical model of collaborative 
tagging that predicts these stable patterns and relates them to 
imitation and shared knowledge.  We conclude with a discussion 
of potential uses of the data that users of these systems 
collaboratively generate.   
2. TAGGING AND TAXONOMY 
Proponents of collaborative tagging, typically in the weblogging 
community, often contrast tagging-based systems from 
taxonomies.  While the latter are hierarchical and exclusive, the 
former are non-hierarchical and inclusive.  Familiar taxonomies 
include the Linnaean system of classifying living things, the 
Dewey Decimal classification for libraries, and computer file 
systems for organizing electronic files.  In such systems, each 
animal, book, file and so on, is in one unambiguous category 
which  is in turn within a yet more general one.  For example, 
lions and tigers fall in the genus panthera, and domestic cats in 
the genus felis, but panthera and felis are both part of family 
felidae, of which lions, tigers and domestic cats are all part.  
Similarly, books on Africa’s geography are in the Dewey Decimal 
system category 916 and books on South America’s in 918, but 
both are subsumed by the 900 category, covering all topics in 
geography. 
In contrast, tagging is neither exclusive nor hierarchical and 
therefore can in some circumstances have an advantage over 
hierarchical taxonomies.  For example, consider a hypothetical 
researcher who downloads an article about cat species native to 
Africa.  If the researcher wanted to organize all her downloaded 
articles in a hierarchy of folders, there are several hypothetical 
options, of which we consider four: 
1. c:\articles\cats all articles on cats  
2. c:\articles\africa all articles on Africa 
3. c:\articles\africa\cats all articles on African cats 
4. c:\articles\cats\africa all articles on cats from Africa 
  
Each choice reflects a decision about the relative importance of 
each characteristic.  Folder names and levels are in themselves 
informative, in that, like tags, they describe the information held 
within them (Jones et al. 2005).  Folders like 1. and 2. make 
central the fact that the folders are about “cats” and “africa” 
respectively, but elide all information about the other category.  3. 
and 4. organize the files by both categories, but establish the first 
as primary or more salient, and the second as secondary or more 
specific.  However, looking in 3. for a file in 4. will be fruitless, 
and so checking multiple locations becomes necessary. 
Despite these limitations, there are several good reasons to impose 
such a hierarchy.  Though there can be too many folders in a 
hierarchy, especially one created haphazardly, an efficiently 
organized file hierarchy neatly and unambiguously bounds a 
folder’s contents.  Unlike a keyword-based search, wherein the 
seeker cannot be sure that a query has returned all relevant items, 
a folder hierarchy assures the seeker that all the files it contains 
are in one stable place.   
In contrast to a hierarchical file system, a non-exclusive, flat 
tagging system could, unlike the system described above, identify 
such an article as being about a great variety of things 
simultaneously, including africa and cats, as well as animals 
more generally, and cheetahs, more specifically.   
Like a Venn diagram, the set of all the items marked cats and 
those marked africa would intersect in precisely one way, 
namely, those documents that are tagged as being about African 
cats.  Even this is not perfect, however.  For example, a document 
tagged only cheetah would not be found in the intersection of 
africa and cats, though it arguably ought to; like the foldering 
example above, a seeker may still need to search multiple 
locations.   
“cats” 
 
“africa” 
“cats” AND “africa” 
Figure 1. A Venn diagram showing the intersection of “cats” 
and “africa”. 
Looking at it another way, tagging is like filtering; out of all the 
possible documents (or other items) that are tagged, a filter (i.e. a 
tag) returns only those items tagged with that tag.  Depending on 
the implementation and query, a tagging system can, instead of 
providing the intersection of tags (thus, filtering), provide the 
union of tags; that is, all the items tagged with any of the given 
tags, rather than all of them.  From a user perspective, navigating 
a tag system is similar to conducting keyword-based searches; 
regardless of the implementation, users are providing salient, 
descriptive terms in order to retrieve a set of applicable items. 
2.1 Semantic and Cognitive Aspects of 
Classification 
Both tagging systems and taxonomies are beset by many problems 
that exist as a result of the necessarily imperfect, yet natural and 
evolving process of creating semantic relations between words 
and their referents.  Three of these problems are polysemy, 
synonymy, and basic level variation.   
A polysemous word is one that has many (“poly”) related senses 
(“semy”).  For example, a “window” may refer to a hole in the 
wall, or to the pane of glass that resides within it (Pustejovsky 
1995).  In practice, polysemy dilutes query results by returning 
related but potentially inapplicable items.  Superficially, polysemy 
is similar to homonymy, where a word has multiple, unrelated 
meanings.  However, homonymy is less a problem because 
homonyms can be largely ruled out in a tag-based search through 
the addition of a related term with which the unwanted homonym 
would not appear.  There are, of course, cases where homonyms 
are semantically related but not polysemous; for example, 
searching for employment at Apple may be problematic because 
of conflicts with the CEO’s surname. 
Synonymy, or multiple words having the same or closely related 
meanings, presents a greater problem for tagging systems because 
inconsistency among the terms used in tagging can make it very 
difficult for one to be sure that all the relevant items have been 
found.  It is difficult for a tagger to be consistent in the terms 
chosen for tags; for example, items about television may be 
tagged either television or tv.  This problem is compounded in a 
collaborative system, where all taggers either need to widely agree 
on a convention, or else accept that they must issue multiple or 
more complex queries to cover many possibilities.  Synonymy is a 
significant problem because it is impossible to know how many 
items “out there” one would have liked one’s query to have 
retrieved, but didn’t.  
Relatedly, plurals and parts of speech and spelling can stymie a 
tagging system.  For example, if tags cat and cats are distinct, 
then a query for one will not retrieve both, unless the system has 
the capability to perform such replacements built into it. 
Reflecting the cognitive aspect of hierarchy and categorization, 
the “basic level” problem is that related terms that describe an 
item vary along a continuum of specificity ranging from very 
general to very specific; as discussed above, cat, cheetah and 
animal are all reasonable ways to describe a particular entity.  The 
problem lies in the fact that different people may consider terms at 
different levels of specificity to be most useful or appropriate for 
describing the item in question.  The “basic level,” as opposed to 
superordinate (more general) and subordinate (more specific) 
levels, is that which is most directly related to humans’ 
interactions with them (Tanaka & Taylor 1991).  For most people, 
the basic level for felines would be “cat,” rather than “animal” or 
“siamese” or “persian.”  Experiments demonstrate that, when 
asked to identify dogs and birds, subjects used “dog” and “bird” 
more than “beagle” or “robin,” and when asked whether an item 
in a picture is an X, subjects responded more quickly when X was 
a “basic” level (Tanaka & Taylor 1991).  These experiments 
demonstrate general agreement across subjects. 
There is, however, systematic variation across individuals in what 
constitutes a basic level.  Expertise plays a role in defining what 
level of specificity an individual treats as “basic.”  For example, in 
the bird and dog experiments, subjects expert in one of the two 
domains demonstrated basic levels that were at levels of greater 
specificity than those without domain expertise; a dog expert 
might consider “beagle” a basic level where a bird expert might 
have “dog” and a bird expert “robin” where a dog expert has 
“bird” (Tanaka & Taylor 1991).   
The underlying factor behind this variation may be that basic 
levels vary in specificity to the degree that such specificity makes 
a difference in the lives of the individual.  A dog expert has not 
only the skill but also the need to differentiate beagles from 
poodles, for example.  Like variation in expertise, variations in 
other social or cultural categories likely yield variations in basic 
levels. 
For the purposes of tagging systems, however, conflicting basic 
levels can prove disastrous, as documents tagged perl and 
javascript may be too specific for some users, while a document 
tagged programming may be too general for others. 
Tagging is fundamentally about sensemaking.  Sensemaking is a 
process in which information is categorized and labeled and, 
critically, through which meaning emerges (Weick, Sutcliffe & 
Obstfeld forthcoming).  Recall that “basic levels” are related to 
the way in which humans interact with the items at those levels 
(Tanaka & Taylor 1991); when one interacts with the outside 
world, one makes sense of the things one encounters by 
categorizing them and ascribing meaning to them.  However, in 
practice, categories are often not well defined and their 
boundaries exhibit vagueness (Labov 1973).  Items often lie 
between categories or equally well in multiple categories.  The 
lines one ultimately draws for oneself reflect one’s own 
experiences, daily practices, needs and concerns.   
Sensemaking is also influenced by social factors (Weick et al. 
forthcoming).  Because many experiences are shared with others 
and may be nearly universal within a culture or community, 
similar ways of organizing and sensemaking do result; after all, 
societies are able to collectively organize knowledge and 
coordinate action.  Additionally, collective sensemaking is subject 
to conflict between the participating actors, where different 
opinions and perspectives can clash and power struggles to 
determine the terms of the debate can ensue (Weick et al. 
forthcoming). 
Collective tagging, then, has the potential to exacerbate the 
problems associated with the fuzziness of linguistic and cognitive 
boundaries.  As all taggers’ contributions collectively produce a 
larger classification system, that system consists of 
idiosyncratically personal categories as well as those that are 
widely agreed upon.  However, there is also opportunity to learn 
from one another through sharing and organizing information. 
3. DELICIOUS DYNAMICS 
Del.icio.us, or Delicious, is a collaborative tagging system for web 
bookmarks that its creator, Joshua Schachter, calls a “social 
bookmarks manager” (Delicious n.d.).   
We analyzed data from Delicious to uncover patterns among 
users, tags and URLs.  We briefly describe Delicious and analyze 
tags in this section, and analyze bookmarks and URLs in the 
following section.  Finally, we discuss the value of this 
collaboratively generated data. 
Much in the same way users save bookmarks within their 
browsers, they can save bookmarks in Delicious, instead; the 
benefit of doing so is that once one’s bookmarks are on the web, 
they are accessible from any computer, not just the user’s own 
browser.  This is helpful if one uses multiple computers, at home, 
work, school, and so on, and is touted as one of Delicious’ main 
features. 
Once users have created accounts, they may then begin 
bookmarking web pages; each bookmark records the web page’s 
URL and its title, as well as the time at which the bookmark is 
created.  Users can also choose to tag the bookmark with multiple 
tags, or keywords, of their choice. Each user has a personal page 
on which their bookmarks are displayed; this page is located at 
http://del.icio.us/username.  On this page, all the bookmarks the 
user has ever created are displayed in reverse-chronological order 
along with a list of all the tags the user has ever given to a 
bookmark.  By selecting a tag, one can filter one’s bookmark list 
so that only bookmarks with that tag are displayed. 
Delicious is considered “social” because, not only can one see 
one’s own bookmarks, one can also see all of every other user’s 
bookmarks.  The front page of Delicious shows several of the 
most recently added bookmarks, including the tags given to them, 
who created them, and how many other people have that 
bookmark in common.  There is also a “popular” page, which 
shows the same information for the URLs that are currently the 
most popular.  One can also see any other user’s personal page 
and filter it by tag, much in the way one can one’s own.   
Through others’ personal pages and the “popular” page, users can 
get a sense of what other people find interesting.  By browsing 
specific people and tags, users can find websites that are of 
interest to them and can find people who have common interests.  
This, too, is touted as a main feature of Delicious. 
These two features – storage of personal bookmarks and the 
public nature of those bookmarks – are somewhat at odds with 
one another.  The data we present below confirm that users 
bookmark primarily for their own benefit, not for the collective 
good, but may nevertheless constitute a useful public good. 
3.1 The Data 
Our analysis was performed on two sets of Delicious data, which 
we retrieved between the morning of Friday, June 23 and the 
morning of Monday June 27, 2005.  
The first set (“popular”) contains all the URLs which appeared on 
Delicious’ “popular” page during that timeframe.  Our dataset 
contains all bookmarks ever posted to each of those URLs 
regardless of time, so that for each URL our dataset contains its 
complete history within the system.  A total of 212 URLs and 
19,422 bookmarks comprise this dataset. 
Our second dataset (“people”) consists of a random sample of 229 
users who posted to Delicious during the above timeframe.  Our 
dataset contains all bookmarks ever posted by those users, 
regardless of time, so that for each user our dataset contains that 
user’s complete history.  A total of 68,668 bookmarks comprise 
this dataset. 
We begin by looking at the tag use of individual users.  As users 
bookmark new URLs, they create tags to describe them.  Over 
time, users’ lists of tags can be considered descriptive of the 
interests they hold as well as of their method of classifying those 
interests.  First, we look at users’ activity with respect to their tag 
use.  Next, we examine tags themselves in greater detail. 
3.2 User Activity and Tag Quantity 
As might be expected, users vary greatly in the frequency and 
nature of their Delicious use.  In our “people” dataset, there is 
only a weak relationship between the age of the user’s account 
(i.e. the time since they created the account) and the number of 
days on which they created at least one bookmark (n=229; 
R2=.52).  That is, some users use Delicious very frequently, and 
others less frequently.  Note that these data do not include any 
users who had previously used Delicious but stopped, as they 
were all active users at the time the dataset was collected. 
More interestingly, there is not a strong relationship between the 
number of bookmarks a user has created and the number of tags 
they used in those bookmarks (n=229; R2=.33).  The relationship 
is weak at the low end of the scale, users with fewer than 30 
bookmarks (n=39; R2=.33), and even weaker at the upper end, 
users with more than 500 bookmarks (n=36; R2=.14).  Some users 
have comparatively large sets of tags, and other users have 
comparatively small sets (Figures 2, 3). 
Users’ tag lists grow over time, as they discover new interests and 
add new tags to categorize and describe them.  Tags may exhibit 
very different growth rates, however, reflecting how users’ 
interests develop and change over time.  Figures 4a and 4b show 
how use of each tag increases as each user adds more bookmarks 
over time.  For each user, two of those tags’ usages grow steadily, 
reflecting continual interests tagged in a consistent way.  One tag 
grows rapidly, reflecting a newfound interest or a change in 
tagging practice.  It is possible that the newly growing tag 
represents a new interest or category to the user. Another 
possibility is that the user has chosen to draw a new distinction 
among their bookmarks, which can prove problematic for the 
user. 
Because sensemaking is a retrospective process, information must 
be observed before one can establish its meaning (Weick et al. 
forthcoming).  Therefore, a distinction may go unnoticed for a 
long time until it is finally created by the individual, who then 
continues to find that distinction important in making sense of 
future information.  Since finding previously encountered 
information is extremely important (Dumais et al. 2003), this is 
deeply problematic for past information.  For example, user # 575 
(Figure 4a) did not use “tag 3” until approximately the 2500th 
bookmark.  If ‘tag 3” indeed constitutes a new distinction among 
the kinds of items this user bookmarks, though Delicious does 
allow users to alter previous bookmarks, it would be arduous to 
reconsider each of the earlier 2500 bookmarks to decide whether 
to add “tag 3” to them.  Further, if in the future this user needs to 
filter his bookmarks by “tag 3”, then no bookmark before the 
 
Figure 2. The number of tags in each user’s tag list, in 
decreasing order. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Two extreme users’ (#575, #635) tag growth.  
As they add more bookmarks, the number of tags they 
use increases, but at very different rates. 
  
Figure 4a,b. Growth rate of three selected tags for two users (#575, #635). 
 
2500th will be retrieved, compromising the practical usefulness of 
the tag. 
Figures 4a and 4b show that users’ tag collections, like their 
interests, are continually growing and evolving.  Next, we look at 
what functions tags play in bookmarks. 
3.3 Kinds of Tags 
Tagging, as discussed above, is an act of organizing through 
labeling, a way of making sense of many discrete, varied items 
according to their meaning.  By looking at those tags, we can 
examine what kinds of distinctions are important to taggers.   
There is some discussion among the Delicious tagging community 
concerning whether a tag is properly considered to be descriptive 
of the thing itself, or descriptive of a category into which the thing 
falls (Coates 2005).  However, we see no contradiction between 
these two kinds of tag.  When a category is defined as 
circumscribing many objects with a particular property, we 
naturally consider each of those objects to have that property.  In 
our estimation, the scope of the tag – whether it describes an 
object or a group of objects – is less interesting than the function 
of a tag, or what kind of information it conveys and how it is 
used.  Here, we identify several functions tags perform for 
bookmarks. 
1. Identifying What (or Who) it is About.  Overwhelmingly, 
tags identify the topics of bookmarked items.  These items 
include common nouns of many levels of specificity, as well 
as many proper nouns, in the case of content discussing 
people or organizations. 
2. Identifying What it Is.  Tags can identify what kind of thing 
a bookmarked item is, in addition to what it is about.  For 
example, article, blog and book. 
3. Identifying Who Owns It.  Some bookmarks are tagged 
according to who owns or created the bookmarked content.  
Given the apparent popularity of weblogs among Delicious 
users, identifying content ownership can be particularly 
important. 
4. Refining Categories.  Some tags do not seem to stand alone 
and, rather than establish categories themselves, refine or 
qualify existing categories.  Numbers, especially round 
numbers (e.g. 25, 100), can perform this function. 
5. Identifying Qualities or Characteristics. Adjectives such as 
scary, funny, stupid, inspirational tag bookmarks 
according to the tagger’s opinion of the content. 
6. Self Reference.  Tags beginning with “my,” like mystuff and 
mycomments identify content in terms of its relation to the 
tagger. 
7. Task Organizing.  When collecting information related to 
performing a task, that information might be tagged 
according to that task, in order to group that information 
together.  Examples include toread, jobsearch.  Grouping 
task-related information can be an important part of 
organizing while performing a task (Jones et al. 2005). 
The tension between tags that may be useful to the Delicious 
community at large and those useful only to oneself is evident 
here.  The first three are not necessarily explicitly personal.  
Though identifying what some item is or is about presents some of 
the problems discussed earlier, like basic level differences, what 
unifies the first four functions is that the information is extrinsic 
to the tagger, so one can expect significant overlap among 
individuals.  In contrast, the unifying characteristic of the final 
three functions is that the information they provide is relative to 
or only relevant to the tagger. 
As others have observed (Biddulph 2004), some tags are used by 
many people, while other tags are used by fewer people.  For the 
reasons described above, those tags that are generally meaningful 
will likely be used by many taggers, while tags with personal or 
specialized meaning will likely be used by fewer users.   
Users have a strong bias toward using general tags first.  In each 
bookmark, the first tag used has the highest median rank (i.e. 
greatest frequency), and successive tags generally have a 
decreasing median rank (Figure 5).  Earlier in the discussion of 
basic levels, one study showed that basic levels were those that 
were most quickly identified and most generally agreed upon.  We 
suggest, therefore, that the earlier tags in a bookmark represent 
basic levels, because they are not only widespread in agreement, 
but are also the first terms that users thought of when tagging the 
URLs in question.  A system seeking to make use of this data in 
order to establish the most broad categories might therefore not 
only look at the tags that are overall most popular, but also at 
those that are used earliest within bookmarks. 
4. BOOKMARKS 
We turn our attention to URLs, the bookmarks that reference 
them, and the tags that describe them.  Here we look at how URLs 
are bookmarked over time, and at how the sets of tags in a URL’s 
bookmarks constitute a stable way of describing a URL’s content. 
4.1 Trends in Bookmarking 
It has been observed elsewhere (Biddulph 2004) that URLs often 
receive most of their bookmarks very quickly, the rate of new 
bookmarks decreasing over time.  While true, this tells only part 
of the story.  While many URLs (e.g. Figure 6a) do indeed reach 
their peak of popularity as soon as they reach Delicious, many 
other URLs (e.g. Figure 6b) have relatively few bookmarks for a 
long time until they are “rediscovered” and then experience a 
rapid jump in popularity.  Of the 212 popular URLs in our 
dataset, 142 (67%) reached their peak popularity in their first 10 
days in Delicious, 37 of which (17%) on their first day.  However, 
at the other end of the spectrum, another 37 (17%) were in the 
 
Figure 5. As tags’ order in a bookmark (horizontal) 
increases, its rank in the list of tags (vertical) decreases.  
This pattern is shown here for two URLs (#1209, #1310). 
 
Delicious system for at least six months before reaching their peak 
of popularity.  The URL in our sample that took the longest 
amount of time to peak in popularity did not do so until it had 
been in the system for over 33 months. 
A burst in popularity may be self-sustaining, as popular URLs are 
displayed on the “popular” page, which users can visit to learn 
what others are currently talking about.  However, the initial cause 
of a popularity burst is likely exogenous to Delicious; given that 
Delicious is a bookmarking service, a mention on a widely read 
weblog or website is a plausible primary cause.  Kumar et al. 
(2003) demonstrate “burstiness” among links in weblogs, and 
literature on opinion and fad formation demonstrate how “well-
connected” individuals and “fashion leaders” can spread 
information and influence others (Wu & Huberman 2005; 
Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer & Welch 1998). 
4.2 Stable Patterns in Tag Proportions 
As a URL receives more and more bookmarks, the set of tags used 
in those bookmarks, as well as the frequency of each tag’s use 
within that set, represents the combined description of that URL 
by many users. 
One might expect that individuals’ varying tag collections and 
personal preferences, compounded by an ever-increasing number 
of users, would yield a chaotic pattern of tags.  However, it turns 
out that the combined tags of many users’ bookmarks give rise to 
a stable pattern in which the proportions of each tag are nearly 
fixed.  Empirically, we found that, usually after the first 100 or so 
bookmarks, each tag’s frequency is a nearly fixed proportion of 
the total frequency of all tags used.  Figures 7a and 7b show this 
pattern. Each line represents a tag; as more bookmarks are added 
(horizontal axis), the proportion of the tags represented by that tag 
(vertical axis) flattens out.  A web tool that visualizes Delicious 
data, called Cloudalicious also shows this pattern. 
This stable pattern can be explained by resorting to the dynamics 
of a stochastic urn model originally proposed by Eggenberger and 
Polya to model disease contagion (Eggenberger & Polya 1923). In 
its simplest form, this probabilistic model consists of an urn 
initially containing two balls, one red and one black.  At each time 
step, a ball is randomly selected and replaced in the urn along 
with an additional ball of the same color. Thus, after N steps, the 
urn contains N+2 balls.  The remarkable property of such a model 
is that, in spite of its random nature, after a number of draws a 
pattern emerges such that the fraction of balls of a given color 
becomes stable over time.  Furthermore, that fraction converges to 
a random limit. This implies that if the process is run forever the 
fraction converges to a limit, but the next time one starts the 
process over and run it again the stable fraction will converge to a 
different number. 
This behavior is shown in Figures 7a and 7b, which are 
indistinguishable from what one would obtain from running a 
computer simulation of the urn model, where the colored balls 
would correspond to the tags observed.   
  
Figure 7a,b. The stabilization of tags’ relative proportions for two popular URLs (#1310, #1209).  The vertical axis denotes 
fractions and the horizontal axis time in units of bookmarks added. 
  
Figure 6a,b. The addition of bookmarks to two URLs (#1310, #1209) over time.  URL #1310 (left) peaks immediately, whereas 
#1209 (right) is long obscure before peaking. 
This stability has important implications for the collective 
usefulness of individual tagging behavior.  After a relatively small 
number of bookmarks, a nascent consensus seems to form, one 
that is not affected by the addition of further tags.  Users may 
continually add bookmarks, but the stability of the overall system 
is not significantly changed.  The commonly used tags, which are 
more general, have higher proportions, and the varied, personally-
oriented tags that users may use can coexist with them. 
Moreover, because this stability emerges after fewer than 100 
bookmarks, URLs need not become very popular for the tag data 
to be useful.  For example, Figures 6b and 7b show URL #1209, 
which reaches its stable pattern at least 100 days before its spike 
in popularity. 
Two reasons why this stabilization might occur are imitation and 
shared knowledge.  In the probabilistic model, replacement of a 
ball with another ball of the same color can be seen as a kind of 
imitation.  Likewise, Delicious users may imitate the tag selection 
of other users.  The Delicious interface through which users add 
bookmarks shows users the tags most commonly used by others 
who bookmarked that URL already; users can easily select those 
tags for use in their own bookmarks, thus imitating the choices of 
previous users.  This can be helpful, especially if a user does not 
know how to categorize a particular URL.  A user may use the 
suggested popular tags as a way of looking to others to see what 
the “right” thing to do is.  The principle of “social proof” suggests 
that actions are viewed as correct to the extent that one sees others 
doing them (Cialdini 2001).  In this case, choosing tags others 
have already used may seem like a “safe” choice, or one that does 
not require time or effort. 
Imitation, however, does not explain everything.  The interface of 
Delicious shows only a few of the most commonly used tags, but 
the stable pattern persists even for less common tags, which are 
not shown.  Shared knowledge among taggers may also account 
for their making the same choices. 
Recall from above the social aspect of sensemaking.  We may 
expect that users of Delicious, or any other tagging system, share 
some background, linguistic, cultural, educational, and so on.  In 
the case of Delicious, many users appear to have strong technical 
backgrounds, as many of the bookmarked URLs are technology-
related.  Accordingly, some documents may occupy roughly the 
same status in many of those users’ lives; since they may make 
use of web documents in the same way, users may categorize them 
the same way, as well. 
Part of the reason these stable patterns emerge is that the ideas 
and characteristics that are represented in tags are stable.  As the 
ideas themselves change, these stable states may likewise change.  
For example, in Speroni (2005), one URL’s Cloudalicious chart 
shows surging growth of the tag “ajax.”  This example illustrates a 
change in how some users categorized the technologies they use 
in their work.  Specifically, the term “ajax” came to represent a set 
of technologies that previously had no name, but as this concept 
came into being, it represented an innovation that changed the 
way some people thought and spoke about the technologies they 
used, as well as the URLs they tagged about those technologies. 
5. CONCLUSION 
We have observed that collaborative tagging users exhibit a great 
variety in their sets of tags; some users have many tags, and others 
have few.  Tags themselves vary in frequency of use, as well as in 
what they describe.  Nevertheless, because stable patterns emerge 
in tag proportions, minority opinions can coexist alongside 
extremely popular ones without disrupting the nearly stable 
consensus choices made by many users.  
The prevalence of tagging with a very large number of tags and 
according to information intrinsic to the tagger demonstrates that 
a significant amount of tagging, if not all, is done for personal use 
rather than public benefit.  Nevertheless, even information tagged 
for personal use can benefit other users.  For example, if many 
users find something funny, there is a reasonable likelihood 
someone else would also find it to be so, and may want to explore 
it.  Likewise, one might want to read something that many other 
people have decided they want toread as well.  In this way, 
Delicious functions as a recommendation system, even without 
explicitly providing recommendations.  However, information 
tagged by others is only useful to the extent that the users in 
question make sense of the content in the same way, so as to 
overlap in their classification choices.  
The stable, consensus choices that emerge may be used on a large 
scale to describe and organize how web documents interact with 
one another.  Currently this is being performed, problematically, 
on small scales by experts and, equally problematically, on large 
scales by machines (Shirky 2005; Doan et al. 2002).  The stability 
we have shown here demonstrates that tagged bookmarks may be 
valuable in aggregate as well as individually, in performing this 
larger function across the web. 
Given the current proliferation of sites that support collaborative 
tagging, we expect that these sites will continue to provide a 
fertile ground for studying computer mediated collaborative 
systems in addition to providing users with new ways to share and 
organize content. 
6. REFERENCES 
Biddulph, M. (2004).  Introducing Del.icio.us.  XML.com.  
http://www.xml.com/pub/a/2004/11/10/delicious.html.  
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. & Welch, I. (1998). Learning 
from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads and Informational 
Cascades. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 12(3). 151-170. 
Cialdini, R. (2001).  Influence: Science and Practice.  4th ed. 
Allyn and Bacon. 
CiteULike.  http://www.citeulike.org/ 
Cloudalicious.  http://cloudalicio.us/ 
Coates, T.  (2005). Two Cultures of Fauxonomies Collide. 
http://plasticbag.org.  June 4, 2005. 
Connotea.  http://www.connotea.org/ 
Del.icio.us.  http://del.icio.us/ 
Doan, A., Madhavan, J., Domingos, P. & Halevy, A. (2002).  
Learning to Map between Ontologies on the Semantic Web.  
Proceedings of WWW2002. 
Dumais, S., Cuttrell, E., Cadiz, J., Jancke, G., Sarin, R., & 
Robbins, D. (2003).  Stuff I’ve Seen: A System for Personal 
Information Retrieval and Re-Use.  Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Information Retrieval.   
Eggenberger, F. and Polya, G. (1923). Uber die Statistik verketter 
vorgage. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 1, 279-289. 
Flickr.  http://www.flickr.com/ 
Jones, W., Phuwanartnurak, A., Gill, R. & Bruce, H.  (2005). 
Don’t Take My Folders Away! Organizing Personal Information 
to Get Things Done.  Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). 
Kumar, R., Novak, J., Raghavan, P. & Tomkins, A.  (2003). On 
the Bursty Evolution of Blogspace.  Proceedings of WWW2003. 
Labov, W. (1973).  The Boundaries of Words and their Meanings. 
In C.J. Bailey and R. Shy, eds., New Ways of Analyzing Variation 
in English. 
Mathes, A. (2004).  Folksonomies – Cooperative Classification 
and Communication Through Shared Metadata.  
http://www.adammathes.com/academic/computer-mediated-
communication/folksonomies.html 
Pustejovsky, J. (1995).  The Generative Lexicon. MIT Press.  
Rowley, J. (1995). Organizing Knowledge. 2nd Ed. Brookfield, 
VT: Gower. 
Shirky, C.  (2005). Ontology is Overrated: Categories, Links and 
Tags.  http://www.shirky.com/writings/ontology_overrated.html 
Speroni, P. (2005).  Tagclouds and Cultural Changes.  
http://blog.pietrosperoni.it.  May 28, 2005. 
Tanaka, J., & Taylor, M.  (1991). Object Categories and 
Expertise: Is the Basic Level in the Eye of the Beholder?  
Cognitive Psychology 23(3). 457-482.  
Technorati.  http://www.technorati.com/ 
Weick, K., Sutcliffe, K. & Obstfeld, D.  (forthcoming). 
Organizing and the Process of Sensemaking.  Organizational 
Science. 
Wu, F. & Huberman, B.  (2005). Social Structure and Opinion 
Formation.  
http://www.hpl.hp.com/research/idl/papers/opinions/opinions.pdf 
Yahoo MyWeb 2.0. http://myweb2.search.yahoo.com/myweb
 

