www.nitrkl.ac.in
•	 B.Tech
•	 M.Tech	Dual	Degree
CURRICULA	AND	SYLLABI
1
PREAMBLE
The curriculum of an institution of higher learning is a living entity. It evolves with time; 
it reflects the ever changing needs of the society and keeps pace with the growing talent 
of the students and the faculty. The curriculum of the B. Tech and M. Sc programmes 
of NIT Rourkela is no exception. Half a century of experience in preparing graduates 
in engineering and postgraduates in science for a wide variety of industries has led to 
creation of the new curriculum. I sincerely believe that it will meet the aspirations of all 
stake holders – students, faculty and the employers of the graduates and postgraduates 
of NIT Rourkela.
In the old college – university system the curricula and syllabi represented the upper limit 
of the material to be covered, the teacher having no motivation for stepping outside the 
defined territory. In the autonomous institute system, the curriculum and syllabi only 
serve as a guideline. The teacher enjoys freedom to expand it in any direction he feels 
appropriate, incorporates his latest knowledge and stimulates the creative minds of 
the students. He experiments with new contents and new techniques. A new teaching-
learning paradigm is born.  
This book of curricula is the culmination of the efforts of large number of faculty members 
and supporting staff. It also reflects the creative contribution of hundreds of teachers – 
both serving and retired, over the past five decades. In keeping with the demands of the 
changing times, it contains many innovative features. The introductory sections of the 
book highlight the special features of the NIT Rourkela UG curriculum. I sincerely hope that 
the faculty and students of NIT Rourkela will take full advantage of the dynamic features 
of the curriculum and make the teaching-learning process a truly sublime experience for 
all.
On behalf of the Senate of NIT Rourkela, I record my appreciation of the meticulous work 
done by the colleagues for bringing out this book. I also record my personal gratitude to 
the members of the Senate who have lent every bit of their wisdom to make the contents 
truly superior. 
                                                                                                                              
    Sunil Kr Sarangi
2
3
CONTENTS
Sl. No Topic Page No
A. Philosophy of our Curriculum 5
B. Excerpts from Regulations 9
C. Curricula of B.Tech Programme 21
D. Curricula of M.Tech. Dual Degree
E. Detailed Syllabi of Courses 143
Philosophy of Our Curriculum
4
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Philosophy of Our Curriculum
5
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
PHILOSOPHY OF OUR CURRICULUM
Like most institutions of higher learning, the teaching-learning process of NIT Rourkela is expressed in terms of course 
credits, one credit being approximately equal to 1 hour of lecture class or 1.5 hours of laboratory or design class per 
week. The 4-year B. Tech programme shall consist of approximately 210 credits of instruction including lectures, 
tutorials, practical and design work, project, and special academic activities. The two year M.A. / M. Sc programme 
shall cover between 100 and 110 credits, while the 5 year integrated M. Sc and M. Tech programmes are expected to 
contain about 260 credits.
In the global context, B. Tech programme containing 210 credits may appear too heavy. A close examination of the 
curricula will, however, reveal that nearly 22 of the 210 credits are dedicated to co-curricular and research activities 
such as physical education, seminar and technical writing, SIRE, research projects and comprehensive viva-voce that 
contribute to a student’s personality growth without taking the time to the same extent as the hard academic credits 
of other subjects. Further, as per our academic traditions in India, supplementary reading, as a fraction of the total 
academic content of a course, is normally well below that in European or American universities. In the opinion of the 
NIT Senate, the curriculum prescribed strikes a judicious balance between need for formal instruction and free time 
to think beyond the course work.
The undergraduate curriculum of NIT Rourkela has strived to offer both theory courses as well as laboratory and 
design practice in all major areas of study. It has, however, consciously avoided combining theory and laboratory 
classes in the same course (e.g. L-T-P = 3-0-3). It was felt that an inflexible combination of theory and laboratory 
components will limit the opportunity to study a wider variety of subjects and increase failure rate. Instead, the NITR 
system offers separate courses for theory and laboratory components in the form of (3-0-0) or (3-1-0) theory courses 
and (0-0-3) laboratory courses. In order to make the time table simple and easily implementable, the variety of course 
volume has been limited to only three types – (3-0-0) 3 credits, (3-1-0) 4 credits and (0-0-3) 2 credits. Teachers are 
expected to package appropriate volume of teaching material in a subject to justify one of these three modes. Finely 
split subjects, carrying one or two credits, and super heavy courses carrying 4 credits or more, have been consciously 
avoided to ensure easy and convenient implementation.
The total teaching duration in a week is divided into several “slots” in the time table. Wednesday mornings have 
generally been kept free to facilitate compensatory classes as well as departmental and institute level meetings by 
faculty. That leaves enough time to cover five theory and four laboratory subjects in a semester. Thus, typically, a 
student shall study maximum 40 theory courses and 32 laboratory or design subjects in a four year B. Tech programme. 
The actual distribution of subjects shall stand close to what is given below making provision for 10 credit project 
work, 4 credit seminar & technical writing course and other non traditional components of an academic programme.
 Theory Courses
 Type of Course     No. of Courses  Credits  
   
  Foundation Courses (1st& 2nd Year):            12    42-44 
  Professional Core Courses:             10 – 12    36-40 
  Professional Electives:             10   30-34 
  Open Electives:              6   18       
  ___________________________________________________________________________
      Total:  38 – 40    126-136  
	 Practical/	Design	Courses	
  Type of Course     No. of Courses  Credits
  Foundation Laboratories (1st & 2nd Years):  10   20  
  Professional Laboratory Courses:   10   20  
  Analytical or Computer based Design Courses:  10   20 
  ___________________________________________________________________________
      Total:  30   60  
Philosophy of Our Curriculum
6
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
 Miscellaneous Subjects
  Type of Course     No. of Courses  Credits
  Extra Academic Activity:     2   4  
  Short term Industrial/Research Experience (SIRE):  1   2  
  Seminar & technical writing:   2   4  
  Project work:     2               10  
  Comprehensive Viva-Voce:    1   2  
  _________________________________________________________________________
       Total:    22 
The above table gives the general guideline, different departments organizing their curricular load around these 
values. A similar scheme has been proposed for the 2 year and the 5 year integrated M.Sc./ M.A. programmes.
Common courses taught mainly during the first year of study shall consist of: (a) the basic science subjects: Chemistry, 
Physics and Biology, (b) Mathematics with at least one Computing Laboratory course, (c) Mechanical/Electrical 
Workshop practice, (d) Computer Language, (e) English including language laboratory, (f) Engineering Drawing and (g) 
Basic Engineering Courses such as Engineering Mechanics, Basic Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Basic Materials 
Engineering, Basic Thermal Engineering and Environmental Engineering etc. Limited amount of choice shall be offered 
to departments and to students within a department in choosing the subjects of study. 
A noteworthy feature of the new curriculum is the choice of the basic science courses in first year B. Tech/M.Sc. 
programme. Multiple courses will be offered in Physics, Chemistry and Life Science, and a student shall choose the 
required number of courses honouring some necessary constraints. While all courses will carry the same credit 
value, the content and character of the courses will vary. The variation in contents may be in terms of mathematical 
vs descriptive approach, traditional vs modern topics or fundamental science vs applications. While every attempt 
should be made to make the contents equally challenging, depending on the aptitude and previous training, a student 
may find difference in difficulty level among courses. 
The course distribution will be subject to certain beneficial constraints, among them:
a. At least 2 of the 6 open electives (8 in case of 5 year Integrated M.Sc. and 4 in case of 2 year M.Sc.) shall be in the 
area of Management or Humanities and Social Sciences.
b. If a student gets F grade in an elective subject and needs to register once again, he may change the elective 
subject, subject to other relevant constraints and consent of faculty adviser. This facility is ordinarily not available 
for core courses.
c. In the case of an inter-institutional credit transfer, a sub-committee of the Senate may identify substitution 
courses from the NITR curriculum. While an exact overlap of contents is desirable, the Senate shall be free to pick 
up a widely different subject, if it is considered prudent in the interest of academic pursuit. 
NIT Rourkela curriculum has certain innovative features that are rather uncommon in traditional universities and 
institutes in India. Among them are:
1. Special Topic in <specialisation name> [Course Nos.: AA 391 and AA 392, AA standing for the Department code]. 
While for a normal subject, the syllabus needs to be approved by the Senate and notified in advance, the syllabus 
of a special topic shall be approved by the Departmental Academic Committee of the offering department and 
reported to the Senate at its earliest meeting. The contents may change semester to semester and multiple 
instances may be floated in a single semester. A student, may however, register for maximum one special 
topic in an odd semester (AA 391) and another in an even semester (AA 392). Such courses give opportunity 
to departments to convert new ideas of existing faculty, expertise of new and visiting faculty, suggestions of 
employers etc. to tangible courses without waiting for prior approval of the Senate. It is expected that if a course 
is offered as a special topic and is expected to continue, the department will take steps to introduce a formal 
course on the subject with approval of the Senate.
2. Special Laboratory in <specialization name> [Course Nos.: AA 393 and AA 394:] Similar to special topics AA 391 
and AA 392 except that the latter are for theory courses, while the special laboratories cover practical, design 
and CAD courses.
3. Engineering Product Development Project I & II (Course Nos.: AA 395 and AA 396): These two curses with 4 
credits each have been designed to give opportunity to students and teachers to work on development of 
Philosophy of Our Curriculum
7
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
real hardware or software products from 3rd Year B. Tech onwards. A student is expected to work under the 
supervision of a faculty member on a project whose details are announced by the latter and approved by the 
Departmental Academic Committee in advance. During the semester, the student is expected to do in depth 
study, design, fabrication and testing, maintaining accurate record of his work for continuous mid-semester and 
end- semester evaluation. The student is expected to put in similar, if not higher, amount of scholastic effort as 
in another theory course of the same credit value. Success of the product is desirable, but not essential to get a 
good grade. The same product may be developed by the same student(s) over 4 semesters (Vth – VIth semesters 
under these courses and VIIth – VIIIth semesters under Research Projects (AA 491 and AA 492) and/or by other 
students in the same or in different semesters. 
4. Research Project I & II (AA 491 and AA 492): Undergraduate research is receiving increasing emphasis in 
institutions of higher learning. It is an important component of NIT Rourkela’s curriculum. The total credits shall 
be 10 which may be split as 6+4 or 4+6 credits at the discretion of the department. Other details are given in the 
regulations. 
Undergraduate projects also constitute important components of the R&D programmes of the departments. 
Students carry out the research ideas of their supervisors, and in the process learn the techniques of research. It 
is essential that they become proficient on computer assisted literature search, patent search, experimental and 
computational techniques, systematic recording of data, writing of thesis and presentation before a scholastic 
audience. Needless to say, original scientific concepts and their effective exploration shall get due credit in 
evaluation of the projects.
Normally, thesis evaluation shall be based on 3 components – (a) evaluation by supervisor based on day to day 
work by the student, (b) that by departmental committees that will lay emphasis on proper research methodology 
and maintenance of records, and (c) that by institute level committees which will strive to ensure that students 
have demonstrated effective use of institutional resources such as computer aided literature search, patent 
search, use of advanced fabrication and characterization equipment, industrially relevant R&D problems and 
the like that bring glory to the institute. The Senate, at its discretion, may delegate this responsibility to the 
department concerned or to a committee of teachers.
All theses of NIT Rourkela shall be made available to scientific workers around the globe. Any dishonest practice 
or plagiarism will lead to severe academic penalty to the student and appropriate administrative steps against 
the supervisors. The Project record book shall be the key element of the exercise. Continuous discussions and 
signatures by supervisors on the record book, and faithful reproduction of record books on the thesis will ensure 
an honest scholastic environment in the Institute. 
5. Seminar & Technical Writing (AA 493, AA 494): These two subjects are introduced in the final year of B. Tech. and 
M. Sc. Courses to: 
a. Give students exposure to variety of topics through the medium of attending seminars, and 
b. Teach them the skill of writing technical articles, concepts of abstract, Introduction, material and methods, 
conclusion, references, acknowledgement etc. 
The students shall not be required to present seminars; they will attend seminars presented by others, as per 
recommendation of the teacher. These will include seminars by faculty and research students in the department 
and by invited experts in the same or related departments. Every student will be required to write a brief (1/2 
page) report on what he learnt in the seminar. The technical writing shall cover writing of scientific articles on 
any subject chosen jointly by the student and the teacher. The article may be presented either as a printed 
document, a poster, a recorded video/audio presentation or as combinations of more than one media.
In a semester, a student shall be required to attend 6 – 10 seminars and write 2 scientific (including popular 
science) articles or posters. The record books, articles and posters will be on display in departmental libraries, 
web sites or in any other media for public benefit. Copies shall be made freely available on demand. The teacher 
will announce his plan of activities at the beginning of the semester and make it continuously available to 
students through the institute’s intranet site. 
Evaluation shall normally be made solely by the teacher, but may be moderated by committees appointed by the 
Senate as per Institute rules.
6. Short Term Industrial and Research Experience (SIRE) [AA 495]
Summer industrial training has been a part of engineering education for a long time. NIT Rourkela insists on an 
Philosophy of Our Curriculum
8
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
eight week summer internship either in industry or in an R&D organization, including educational institutes with 
excellent research culture. The student is expected to submit a formal report at the end of the programme. This 
requirement is applicable to both B. Tech and M. Sc students. In exceptional cases, a project may be carried out 
within the Institute; but that is discouraged.
7. Comprehensive Viva-Voce [AA 496]
Graduates and postgraduates of NIT study many theory and laboratory courses. While resource constraints force 
the institute to adopt a credit and subject based curriculum. It appreciates the value of holistic learning. The 
comprehensive viva-voce aims to test the holistic comprehension of the student covering all the subjects taught. 
The questions in the oral examination will, generally, be such as to use contents of two or more subjects for 
framing an answer. 
8. Emphasis on Quantitative Approach
Quantitative analysis is often considered the corner stone of engineering education. In fact, in our country, 
universities often offer both B. Tech. and M. Sc. degrees in the same subject such as Biotechnology, Materials 
Science and Electronics, the distinction between the two streams being the degree of quantitative and numerical 
approach. All branches of engineering shall make a conscious effort to introduce quantitative analysis and 
numerical problem solving in most theory papers. Examination questions will also reflect this spirit. Basic science 
courses offered to engineering students will also inculcate the quantitative approach.
9. Use of Computers and Modern Educational Technology Tools
The faculty shall make a conscious effort to exploit the massive computational and data handling capacity of 
modern day computers (hardware and software) and related devices. They will specifically include equation 
solving tools (e.g. EES, MALTLAB), simulation software etc. Technology Enhanced Learning may be used in theory 
subjects, design courses, laboratories, projects, examination and evaluation. Innovative and creative approaches 
shall, in general, be encouraged as long as they do not compromise on academic standards. 
10. Multi Disciplinary Approach 
Unlike our counterparts in developed countries, many colleges and universities in India draw a bold line between 
science and engineering. At NIT Rourkela, while the line is quite bold at organization level, it almost vanishes in 
research and teaching. There is no distinction between courses offered by Science and Engineering Departments; 
a student can take courses from any department oblivious of its character, as long as he is within the curricular 
constraints prescribed by the department. 
11. Maintenance of Curricular Standards  
Creating an ambitious curriculum is one thing, but following the prescriptions is another. In a scholastic 
environment, it is neither feasible nor desirable to have a policing system imposed from outside.  Compliance to 
curricular requirements must be voluntary, at best dictated by peer pressure. Faculty students, technicians and 
the administration ― all are stake holders. The Senate, the ultimate guardian of academic standards shall monitor 
compliance by the faculty and students. There will be a Academic Programme Monitoring Committee which will 
routinely examine the activities in the departments and report to the Senate. It will also give suggestions for 
continuous improvement of standards and greater compliance by all concerned.
Occasionally the Senate may prescribe repetition of a curricular activity or additional work to compensate for 
activities not done. Such prescriptions shall be binding on all – faculty, students and technicians. Stake holders 
who silently encouraged missed classes or similar failures without drawing attention of concerned authorities 
should gladly accept such additional assignment. The best way, however, will be to maintain high standards as a 
matter of habit.
Excerpts From Regulations
9
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
REGULATIONS FOR THE B.TECH. PROGRAMME 
The B.Tech. programme of NIT Rourkela is governed by the undergraduate regulations approved by the Senate and the 
Board of Governors. In this chapter, some important sections of this document are reproduced for ready reference 
by the students and the faculty. Students are advised to consult the original book of regulations and amendments 
issued from time to time for complete guidance. This section ans subsection numbers given in this chapter refer to 
the corresponding section numbers in the original document.
3. Academic Calendar
3.1. The academic session is divided into two semesters each of approximately 17 weeks duration: An Autumn 
/ Odd semester (July – November) and a Spring / Even semester (January – May). In addition, a summer 
session (May – July) may be offered at the discretion of the Senate under special circumstances.
3.2. The Senate will approve the academic calendar consisting of schedule of activities for a session inclusive 
of dates for registration, Mid-semester and End-semester examinations; inter-semester breaks etc. well in 
advance of start of a semester.  The academic calendar shall usually provide for at least 80 working days 
(including examination dates) in each semester, excluding holidays and days when classes are suspended.
3.3. The academic calendar will also reflect the scheduled holidays. Classes lost in holidays need not be 
compensated. In addition to holidays, the Director, in capacity of Chairman Senate, may announce suspension 
of classes when the situation so demands. Such suspended classes may or may not be compensated on a 
weekend/holiday as per decision of the Director.
3.4. Unlike many traditional universities in India, NIT Rourkela’s academic programme is based on a direct 
contact between the teacher and the student. The teacher enjoys considerable freedom in deciding the 
contents and method of instruction, evaluation and grading. The printed syllabus is a guideline, rather than 
a legally enforced constraint. It is mandatory for the class (teacher and students) to conduct all scheduled 
classes. There is no concept of “finishing a course” because the syllabi are flexible, and permit instruction 
and practice till the last day of the semester.
4. Course Structure
4.1. The duration of the course leading to B.Tech. Degree will ordinarily be four years. A student may, however, 
opt for the slow pace programme if he does not feel comfortable with the work load. Under certain cases, 
e.g., poor grades, he is required to proceed in slow pace to minimize the time required to complete the 
programme.
4.2. The curricula for the different degree programmes as proposed by the respective departments and 
recommended by the Under-graduate Programme and Evaluation Committee (UGPEC) shall have the 
approval of the Senate.  The departments will also prepare the syllabus of each subject containing the scope 
of studies and instructions to be imparted which must have the approval of the Senate.
4.3. i. All subjects will have Lecture – Tutorial – Laboratory / Design components (L–T–P) to indicate the contact 
hours. Theory courses will have 3-0-0 (3 credits) or 3-1-0 (4 credits) structure. Design or laboratory 
courses will be offered as distinct (0 – 0 – P) courses without being mixed with lecture components. 
There may be a few special courses of structure 0-0-2 (1 credit). Some courses may have pre– and co-
requisites. Co-requisite courses may be taken in the same or different semesters. 
ii. Normally, subjects based on engineering or scientific principles or on thought - provoking information, 
where it is possible to conduct a closed book examination, will be taught as theory courses, whereas 
those based on applications and practice (conceptual, computational or experimental) will be covered 
under Design or Practical courses. The dividing line between the two, however, is fuzzy and will be 
decided by Departmental Academic Committees.
iii.  All subjects will have a credit count ‘C’.  Teaching of subjects will be reckoned in terms of credits.
iv.  Every course, identified by a single course identifier, shall be taught by a single teacher, who may be 
assisted by adjunct faculty, teaching assistants, postgraduate and research students, and by other 
faculty members. The administrative responsibility including decision on contents of instruction and 
examination as well as submission of grades shall rest solely on the subject teacher. The academic office 
will recognize only one teacher per course, who will be a regular member of the Institute faculty unless 
otherwise arranged with approval of Director.
Excerpts From Regulations
10
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
v. Large classes, e.g., those of first year courses, will be divided into several sections, each section being 
taught by one teacher. [A single teacher may handle more than one section of the same course.] Teachers 
of all sections of a subject will form the coordination committee for the course which will collectively 
take all decisions on the course. The Head of the Department will choose one of the members as the 
Chairman of the Committee.
vi. Student feedback on courses assists a teacher to improve the contents and delivery. It is the duty of 
every student to give his thoughtful response to the questions.
4.4. The prescribed coursework shall be grouped under 3 heads – core courses, professional electives and open 
electives. The core courses, not to exceed 50% of the course load will cover all essential skills associated 
with a given department. Professional electives will be taken from a list prescribed by the department, 
covering courses from the same and allied disciplines. These courses shall reflect the different specialized 
topics in a field including the latest developments taking place around the world. Open electives shall cover 
courses from any department of the Institute. They will generally be, but not limited to, broad based courses 
that will widen the knowledge horizon of the students. 
 There shall be no batch-wise segregation of students in any course. All courses will be open to students of all 
years if they satisfy the pre- and co- requisites. In particular, open electives and departmental electives shall 
have students from many batches. A given course may be a core subject for one department and an elective 
for another. Final and pre-final year UG students may take PG (MTech and MSc) courses as electives where 
the departmental curriculum so permits.
4.5. In each of the first two semesters, there shall be two credits for Extra Academic Activity (EAA) / Physical 
Education consisting of at least 3 hours activity per week.  The EAA may be N.S.S., N.C.C., Sports or any 
other physical activity.  The detailed instructions will be imparted and practice supervised by the concerned 
faculty and/or officers. EAA course shall have syllabi, instruction and examination like any other course. The 
class timing of the EAA courses will be chosen differently from academic courses, depending on weather 
conditions. 
 The Senate may, at its discretion, recommend EAA courses as electives in higher semesters. Higher semester 
EAA activities may be NSS, NCC, sports or cultural activity of superior standard. Only those students who 
have shown special aptitude or leadership in a particular extra academic activity will be permitted by Dean 
(AA) / Director to register in an EAA course in a higher semester.
4.6. The curricula to be followed in the first two semesters by the students of all disciplines shall be almost 
common. The Senate may alter the contents of 1st year curriculum for any branch keeping the total 
academic (credit) load unchanged.
4.7. The curricula for B.Tech. course will include a programme of “Short term Industrial or Research Experience 
(SIRE)” of 8 weeks duration after the 6th semester.  The experience may be obtained in any reputed industry, 
research laboratory, IIT, NIT and any other organization of comparable repute.  The place of work has to get 
prior approval of the Department. On completion of the programme, the student shall submit a report to 
the department, which will earn 4 credits in the 7th semester. For certain branches of study, the Senate may 
prescribe additional practical work and study tours. Detailed procedure for administration of SIRE is given 
in the regulations.
 In special circumstances (e.g., a 6th semester student who needs to write a supplementary examination or 
attend a summer course), the total period of 8 weeks may be split into 2 parts to be completed during the 
same or different vacation (including summer vacation after 8th semester) periods.
4.8. Under special circumstances, a student may be permitted by the Senate, or by the Chairman Senate on 
behalf of the Senate, to carry out a mini-project of 8 weeks duration at NIT Rourkela in lieu of the external 
experience. Such a project, should preferably be based on a real life industrial or social problem, under the 
supervision of a faculty member.
4.9. In addition to regular course work and SIRE, a B. Tech. student must carry out a major project in final year 
under the guidance of one or two supervisors. The Project work will carry a total of 10 credits between 7th& 
8th Semesters, the distribution being 4 & 6 ( or 6 & 4 ) credits respectively.
4.10. Every programme shall provide a “Seminar and Technical Writing” course [2 credits] during the 7th and 8th 
semesters where the students shall learn and practice essential writing and presentation skills, and attend 
seminars by reputed engineers and scientists organized by the Departments. Each student will also present 
Excerpts From Regulations
11
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
1 or 2 seminars and/or poster presentations before his class. Evaluation will be based on attendance in 
departmental and Institute seminars, presentation in seminars, poster presentations and technical writing 
supervised by the course teacher.
4.11. When circumstances so permit, it will be possible for a student to spend a semester or more in another NIT, 
IIT or another reputed institute of comparable standing and transfer the credits to NIT Rourkela. The core 
(compulsory) courses need to have a one-to-one correspondence between the participating institutions. 
The Senate shall constitute a course equivalence committee to establish the adequacy of the education 
received in another institution.
4.12. Summer Course: If the number of F or UR grades in a subject taught in autumn or spring semester is 
significant, a department may offer the course during the summer vacation. When a summer course is 
offered, it will be compulsory for all students who have secured an ‘F’ grade in that subject. There will be 
no alternative mid semester or supplementary examination in that course. Students who need to sit for 
supplementary or alternative mid semester exams on medical, family calamity or any other reason except 
poor academic performance may sit in the corresponding exams of the summer course, without attending 
classes if they satisfy the attendance requirement.
 The summer courses will be identical in scope and manner of execution to the corresponding courses of 
regular semesters, except that the number of class hours per week may be higher. Attendance requirement 
will also be identical. The examinations will be conducted by the Academic section in the usual manner.
 Summer courses will be announced around the middle of the spring semester. Registration for the courses 
will be done towards the end of the spring semester. Students securing F grades in Spring semester courses 
may be permitted to register within one week of starting of classes.
 Teachers of spring semester courses in which summer courses have been announced will make an effort 
to publish the grades early, particularly for students who have secured less than 25 out of the 50 points 
already examined (Mid semester + Teacher’s assessment). For the benefit of the students, the grades 
may be displayed on doors of teacher’s rooms and announced on Institute’s web site or communicated to 
students by any other means.
 It is the student’s responsibility to enquire about grades of courses in which he has performed poorly. No 
separate examination will be arranged for students who miss the summer course, or any other examination.
4.13. All instructions, practices and examinations will use the SI system of units or any unit system recognized by 
Government of India.
5. Registration
5.1. Every student in undergraduate programme is required to be present and register at the commencement of 
each semester on the date fixed and notified in the Academic Calendar. 
 The registration process has 3 components:
i. Physical presence of the student in campus on the first day of semester, 
ii. Payment of semester fees including any unpaid dues of past semesters, and 
iii. Selection of courses to be studied during the semester.
 For selection of courses, a “Pre-Registration” process may be organized during the previous semester. Based 
on pre-registration data, low demand courses may be dropped, student strength in high-demand courses 
may be limited and sections may be formed. If courses of a student’s choice are not available, he may be 
given alternative courses with approval of Faculty Advisor.
5.2. A student who does not register on the day announced for the purpose may be permitted by Dean (AA), 
in consideration of any compelling reason, late registration within next 5 working days on payment of an 
additional fee as prescribed by the Institute.  Normally no late registration shall be permitted after the 
fifth working day from the scheduled date, except in special cases like those directed by MHRD or MHRD 
approved authorities in 1st semester, a serious medical problem, a family calamity or participation in a 
national event, to be approved by the Director on recommendation of Dean (AA). However, under no 
circumstances late registration after 45 calendar days from the scheduled date of registration is allowed. 
A student must repeat the semester in the following year. The percentage of attendance (if applicable) of 
students registering late will be calculated from the date of their joining. However no special allowance may 
be claimed in the matter of assessment / evaluation or grading. 
Excerpts From Regulations
12
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5.3. Only those students will be permitted to register who have
i. Cleared all Institute and Hall dues of the previous semesters,
ii. Paid all required prescribed fees for the current semester,
iii. Not been debarred from registering for a specified period on disciplinary or any other ground,
iv. Satisfied the academic requirements outlined in Clause 5.8.
v. Not been struck off from the rolls of the Institute.
5.4. To be able to register in the 2nd year (3rd semester) and continue his/her study in the Institute at the end 
of 1st year, a student must
i. Complete satisfactorily at least 40 credits of courses prescribed for the two semesters, i.e., secure ‘P’ or 
higher grade in at least 40 credits of prescribed courses,
ii. Obtain a Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) of not lower than 5.70 (considering all courses including 
those in which the student has secured an F grade).
 The method for calculating SGPA and CGPA is illustrated in Appendix–II of the regulations.
 If the CGPA at the end of the First year is between 5.00 and 5.69, the student may be permitted to suspend 
his studies and resume it in the following year along with the next batch of students. In the repeat year, he 
must attend classes and be treated at par with fresh students, with no memory of grades in the previous 
year. The B.Tech.programme must be completed within 6 years of the original admission. However, if the 
CGPA is less than 6.00 in the repeat year, the student must leave the Institute.
5.5. While registering for 3rd, 5th or 7th semester, a student may register for backlog papers of 1st, 3rd or 5th 
semester respectively and while registering for 4th, 6th or 8th semester, he/she may register for backlog 
papers of 2nd, 4th or 6th semester respectively. A student need not attend classes in papers registered as 
“backlog papers”. He has to sit for both mid-semester and end-semester examinations and the grade will 
be awarded based on the scores of the latest examinations.  The Teacher’s assessment component will be 
same as that given by the instructor in the original semester, when he attended classes. The registration 
for backlog papers must be done at the time of semester registration. In all such cases of “backlog paper”, 
the grade awarded will be one step lower than what the student actually obtained, except for the grade ‘P’ 
which remains unchanged.
 Alternatively, a student may opt to repeat a course afresh, in which case he will attend classes, and there 
will be no reduction of grade awarded. He will, however, be ineligible for awards of medals and prizes which 
are based on academic performance. If regulations and examination schedule otherwise permit, a student 
may register for an even semester elective in odd semester and vice versa. A student may change an elective 
course if he satisfies the pre-requisites and if the timetable permits.
 If a student has completed 8 semesters of study but has a few F grades still left, he must register for them as 
full time courses and attend classes if time table permits, instead of only writing exams as backlog papers. 
The entire programme must be completed within 6 years. 
5.6. A student can register for a full suite of courses of the 5th, 6th, 7th or 8th semester provided he/she has 
obtained at least Pass (P) Grade in all subjects of 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th semester respectively; i.e., for registering 
in the full list of courses of any semester beyond 4th semester, a student must have cleared ALL courses 
studied two years earlier. If he still does not clear papers due 2 years earlier he has to formally register for 
the courses and attend classes. In such a case he gets full credits for the course as per his performance 
without the penalty of 1 step in grade as applicable to supplementary exams and backlog papers. He will, 
however, be ineligible for medals and prizes, which are based on academic performance. In case of elective 
courses, he may change the courses if he so desires. The Faculty adviser will help him in selecting courses 
for registration considering the students’ academic ability and possible timetable conflicts.  Starting with the 
lowest level courses (due two or more years earlier) he may take courses up to the current semester, the 
total credit load being lower than that of a normal student. The student and his faculty advisor must check 
the time table before deciding the courses.
 If a student gets a CGPA less than 6.00 in three consecutive semesters, he must leave the Institute. Therefore, 
it is in a student’s interest to estimate his own capability and register under a slow pace mode from third 
semester onwards, or even from the First semester. Faculty Advisors will help students in choosing the 
course load that is just right for each student separately.
Excerpts From Regulations
13
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5.7. (i)  It is necessary for a student to maintain a CGPA equal to or above 6.00 at all times. If the CGPA falls below 
6.00 he should enter a slow pace programme in his own interest. The following procedure will be used to 
make “slow pace” mandatory for a student with poor performance.
 A modified grade point average called MGPA will be computed by replacing all F and X grades by P grades. If 
the MGPA equals or exceeds 6.00, he may be permitted to register for a full suite of higher semester courses 
at the discretion of Faculty Advisor. If the MGPA remains below 6.00 the student must enter a slow pace 
programme.
 (ii) If a student scores CGPA (Not MGPA) below 6.00 in three consecutive semesters, he must leave the 
Institute.
 (iii) In case of a First Year student, if the CGPA is between 5.00 and 5.69, he will re-register in the First 
Semester and start the programme afresh. The CGPA in the repeat year must exceed 6.00, else the student 
has to leave the Institute.
 (iv) If CGPA is less than 5.00, a student must leave the Institute.
Grade At the end of First Year For Higher Year Students
MGPA >= 6.00 To register in 3
rd semester with full 
suite of courses. 
To register in higher semester with 
full suite of courses
5.70 <= CGPA < 6.00 and 
MGPA < 6.00
To register in 3rd semester in slow 
pace.
To register in higher semester in slow 
pace, the number of courses being 
decided by Faculty Advisor. To leave 
the Institute if CGPA falls below 6.00 
in three consecutive semesters.
5.00 <= CGPA <= 5.69 To get readmitted to First Year.
CGPA < 5.00 To leave the Institute
5.8. Ordinarily a student is not permitted to re-register in a course when he has secured a “P” or higher grade. 
But it is allowed for students who have secured a CGPA below 6.00 and need to improve their score. It is 
not possible to improve the score in a course by writing examinations only. This clause can help a student to 
avoid the possibility of leaving the Institute under provisions of Clause 5.9 (ii).
 There shall be no reduction of grade when a student registers for a course and attends classes, even if it 
is a repeat course. The student, however, becomes ineligible for medals and prizes, which are based on 
academic performance.
5.9. The provisions of sections 5.7 and 5.9 will continue to be valid even after a student has attended classes for 
8 semesters.
5.10. A student must pay full semester fees till he clears all courses even if he is registered for no course or one 
course only in a particular semester, or the number of semesters he has registered in exceeds 8. [A situation 
of “zero course” registration shall arise when a student has cleared all courses except some belonging to 
the even semester.]
5.11. The classes of all semesters will start from the day following the registration, or any other date decided by 
the Senate.
5.12. A student who has been debarred from appearing at an examination either (i) as a measure of disciplinary 
action or (ii) for adopting malpractice at an examination and consequently awarded a grade ‘X’, may register 
for the subject(s) as backlog papers in the following semester. Those who have been awarded grade UR 
(“unregistered”) because of poor attendance or for any other reason need to register for the course and 
attend classes as per rules.
6. Attendance	and	Leave
6.1. a. Unlike many examining universities, NIT Rourkela’s academic programme is based primarily on the 
teaching-learning process. Attendance in classes, participating in classroom discussions and participating 
in the continuous evaluation process are the most essential components of the academic programme. 
All teachers and students must appreciate that the number of classes scheduled for a course under the 
approved academic calendar and time table must be held during the semester. 
b. If because of personal leave or official duty, or on student request, a teacher is unable to hold a class on 
the scheduled hour, he will hold the compensating classes at a mutually convenient hour. A teacher may 
Excerpts From Regulations
14
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
communicate with his class by announcing in the class, through messages on Institute and hostel notice 
boards or through e-mail. Attendance in these compensatory classes is mandatory for every student. 
c.  Under special situations, when a teacher is unable to communicate with the students in advance about 
his absence from a scheduled class, the students present may mark their attendance in the Academic 
Section. If the class is compensated by the teacher on a later date, this attendance sheet will be replaced 
by the attendance record provided by the teacher.
d.  A teacher, at his discretion, may hold additional classes beyond what is originally scheduled, particularly 
when several classes are lost due to holidays or suspension of classes. Attendance in these classes are 
also mandatory for the students
6.2. Attendance in all classes (Lectures, Tutorials, Laboratories, and Seminars etc.) is compulsory.  A student shall 
be debarred from appearing at an examination or, if he has already written the examination, the grades will 
be rejected on ground of unsatisfactory attendance, if the attendance is below what is prescribed in clause 
6.3, or if in the opinion of the course teacher the student has not participated effectively in the class in terms 
of home assignments, class tests etc.
 In such a case a student shall be given UR grade, and the student will need to register for the course once 
again and attend classes with seriousness.
a. Considering that attendance in classes, participating in the teaching-learning process is the basic 
foundation of our academic programme, a student is expected to attend all classes conducted as per 
Institute calendar and time table.
. However, to provide for exigencies, absence to the extent of 15% (approximate) of scheduled number of 
classes in every course will be condoned as a matter of routine.
b. In deserving cases, a further relaxation of 15% (approximate) (i.e., 30% of scheduled number of classes) 
may be made by Dean(AA); but the student’s grade will be reduced by one step. A ‘P’ grade will be 
reduced to ‘F’, and the student will be permitted to write supplementary examination if offered or 
register as a backlog paper in the following year.
c.  The following table gives the number of classes that a student may miss with or without penalty in 
grade.
L-T-P Without penalty With reduction of one step in grade
3-0-0 6 12
3-1-0 8 16
0-0-3 2 4
. It may be noted that missed classes are of 1 hour duration in theory courses and of 3 hour sessions in 
lab (0-0-3) courses.
d. If a student has attendance lower than that prescribed under item (c), he will get UR grade. He may 
register in a summer course if offered or register for the course in a subsequent semester. In the latter 
case he may not be able to complete the programme in two years. 
e. The Institute will fix a cut off date before every examination to compute the missed classes.
f. In case there are truly exceptional circumstances, the Senate or the Director as Chairman Senate, may 
relax attendance requirements (with reduction of grade) as they think fit.
g. If a student is engaged officially outside the classroom, e.g, in a placement programme, an institute level 
meeting or in a specially approved SAC activity, his attendance will be marked by the concerned faculty 
or officer and communicated to the academic section. It is the student’s responsibility to ensure that the 
attendance is marked and sent to the Academic Section.
6.3. It is possible for a student to get leave of absence from classes in deserving cases [Use Form AC/110 to 
apply for leave]. Dean (AA) may sanction leave up to a maximum of 10 working days total per semester on 
recommendation of Faculty Advisor and Head of the Department on one of the following grounds :
i. Illness of the student based on prescription of “unfit for class” by institute Medical Officer or 
on hospitalization and post-hospitalization rest approved by attending physician of the hospital, 
countersigned by Institute Medical Officer. The medical rest recommended by Institute Medical Officer 
must be on the student’s medical record book, and that of external hospitals on the discharge certificate. 
Advice of rest must be dated prior to the rest period, not later, except under special circumstances. It 
may be noted that such advice of rest is not sufficient for missing examinations, for which a specific 
recommendation must be obtained on Form AC/112. Because the 15 % relaxation in attendance includes 
Excerpts From Regulations
15
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
some days for short illnesses, the first five days of recommended medical rest in a semester shall not 
qualify for medical leave.
ii. A family calamity demanding absence of the student. [Documentary proof is to be submitted by the 
student if asked for.]
iii. Participation in inter-NIT or other national level student competitions inside or outside the Institute. To 
avail such leave of absence from classes, a student should be selected by SAC to represent the Institute 
through a process of open competition. A copy of appropriate office order of SAC must be enclosed with 
the application. (Limited to 5 working days in a semester.)
iv. For academic work or presentation of papers related to final year project, if the project involves visit to 
Industry or other Institutes or to participate in a Conference. The application must be recommended by 
the Project Guide and relevant documents are to be enclosed. (Limited to 5 working days in a semester.)
v. For officially arranged placement programmes on recommendation of Professor, T & P. (Limited to 5 
working days in a semester.)
 The Director, as Chairman Senate may approve leave beyond this period upto 40 working days on ground 
of prolonged illness or unusually serious circumstances. Consideration will be given to students who give 
prior and continuous information either directly or through parents, project guide or faculty advisor. Family 
functions (social or religious), illness of family members, participation in student activities such as organizing 
functions or raising money, preparing for other examinations or searching of jobs are not adequate grounds 
for leave of absence from classes (including project work).
 It should also be appreciated that a single student is unlikely to require all the categories of leave listed above 
during all the semesters. The Dean (AA) or Director will sanction leave under any of the above categories 
only when he is convinced that the leave will not adversely affect the student’s academic programme.
7. Assessment of Performance
7.1. There will be continuous assessment of a student’s performance throughout the semester and grades will 
be awarded by the Subject Teacher / Coordination Committee formed for this purpose.  
7.2. In general, there is no strict marks-to-grade linkage.  The following should be taken as a guideline to ensure 
uniformity of grading among all courses.
i. For arriving at a grade obtained by a student for a particular subject, initially a numeric marks obtained 
by the student out of 100 (hundred) is to be determined and then, the same is to be converted to letter 
grade following the guidelines given in Appendix–I of the regulations.
ii. For theory subjects, the subcomponents and the respective weights assigned to these are given below.
    Subcomponent   Weight
    Teacher’s Assessment (T.A.)  20% 
    Mid-Semester Examination  30% 
    End-Semester Examination  50%
iii. For assigning marks in Teacher’s Assessment (T.A.), performance in home assignments, class tests, 
tutorials, viva-voce, attendance etc. are to be considered.  It is recommended that at least two class 
tests for 4 credit theory courses and 1 test for 3 credit theory courses are to be conducted for a subject. 
The weights of different subcomponents of T.A. may be announced to the students by the teacher at the 
beginning of the Semester.
iv. In case of students given an F, I or X grade, the teacher must submit the marks under T.A. head to the 
Department Office for use in future.
v. For assignment of marks in the laboratory component (P – component) the relevant subcomponents 
that are to be considered are: day-to-day work, regularity, tests (recommended): one test in 2 credit 
practical course) assignments, viva-voce etc.  Percentage weights of the different subcomponents in 
deciding the final marks are to be announced at the beginning of the Semester. The evaluation process 
must be completed before the beginning of end semester examination.
 Unlike purely examining universities, design and laboratory courses at NIT Rourkela will put greater emphasis 
on day to day work than on end semester examinations. To the extent possible, laboratory work should be 
completed and evaluated every class thus ensuring continuous evaluation. Final examination and/or viva 
voce, if any, may not carry more than 20% marks. No external examiner shall be associated with evaluation 
of laboratory or theory courses.
Excerpts From Regulations
16
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7.1. The eight-week programme on industrial or R&D experience (SIRE) undergone by the students in the 
summer vacation will be assessed in the 7th semester.  The students are required to submit written reports 
on the programme and give a seminar, on the basis of which a grade will be awarded.  The students are 
also required to submit to the Head of the Department or to the faculty member in-charge, a completion 
certificate in the prescribed form from the competent authority of the organization where the work was 
done, without which he/she will not be assessed.
 SIRE shall also include credit for industrial tours organized by the Institute during the first seven semesters 
of a student’s career. The marks will be distributed in the ratio: 75% for summer work and 25% for industrial 
tours.
8. Examinations
8.1. a. The Examination office of the Academic Section will centrally conduct the Mid-semester and End-
semester Examinations in respect of theory subjects unless otherwise arranged. The Institute shall 
provide sick room facility inside the Institute building or in a nearby hospital as deemed convenient by 
the Institute to assist students who may fall sick during the examinations.
 The examinations will normally be “closed book type”, where the students are not permitted to bring 
any material from home or hostel. All necessary charts & tables will be provided by the Institute. It 
is the course teacher’s responsibility to recommend the material to be provided, and to check with 
the Examination office that the arrangement has indeed been done. While normal scientific calculators 
are permitted, other electronic devices such as programmable calculators and calculators containing 
communication devices are forbidden. Any exception to these provisions must be specially approved by 
the Senate.
 All question papers submitted by the teachers will be treated as “confidential documents” till the end 
of the examination of the subject concerned. It is an open document after the examination is over. The 
institute will archive question papers in physical and electronic form, and make them available to future 
students.
b.  The answer scripts will be dispatched by the examination office to the Subject Teacher (Examiner) on 
the same day or on the immediate next working day of the examination.  If the concerned examiner is 
not available on that day, the copies will be handed over to the respective Heads of the Department (or 
Department office) who will pass on the copies to the concerned examiners at the earliest.  It is the joint 
responsibility of the subject teacher (examiner) and the HOD to ensure that the scripts are examined 
and the grades submitted before the due date.
c. In order to provide an additional opportunity to the students who failed (obtained an ‘F’ grade) in one 
or more subjects in the Autumn and/or the Spring Semester in a year, Supplementary Examinations 
equivalent to the End-Semester Examination arranged centrally by the Examination Office will be 
conducted (before commencement of the next session) every year.  Regulations relating to the 
Supplementary Examination are given in Appendix–XII. Supplementary examination will be offered only 
if there are at least 5 students appearing or if there is some other compelling reason.
8.2. a.  A student will be permitted to appear in an examination, only if he/she has:
i. Attendance record as per section 6 of these regulations in theory and laboratory classes and has 
completed the assignment works given.
ii. Paid all Institute and Hall dues of the semester.
iii. Not been debarred from appearing in the examination as a result of disciplinary proceedings or on 
recommendation of the subject teacher or Chairman coordination committee.
b.  A student may be debarred from appearing at the Mid-Semester or End-Semester Examination in the 
subject on the report of Subject Teacher / Chairman, Coordination Committee, if his/her
i. Attendance at lecture/tutorial/laboratory classes in that subject has not been satisfactory during the 
period, and/or,
ii. Performance in the assignment works in that subject during the semester has not been satisfactory.
8.3. A student will be permitted to appear in the examinations in only those subjects for which he/she has 
registered at the beginning of the semester and has not been debarred.
Excerpts From Regulations
17
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
8.4. i. Class tests, assignments, tutorials, viva-voce, laboratory assignments, etc., are the constituent 
components of continuous assessment process, and a student must fulfill all these requirements as 
prescribed by the teacher / coordination committee of the subject. If due to any compelling reason 
(such as participation in national / international events with due approval of the institute, his/her illness, 
calamity in the family, etc.) a student fails to meet any of the requirements within/on the scheduled 
date and time, the teacher/coordination committee may take such steps (including conduction of 
compensatory tests/examinations) as are deemed fit.
ii. a. Appearing   both   at   the   Mid-Semester  and  End-Semester Examination of theory courses is 
compulsory. Normally, if a student fails to appear in the Mid-Semester Examination without any valid 
reason he/she should get zero for that component.  If his case is examined and cleared as per 
Clause 8.4 (ii) (c), the student will be permitted to sit for Alternative Mid-Semester examination in the 
same or following year. In such cases, the grade will be reduced by one step, but not below the 
grade P. In deserving cases, the student may be given full credit only if he has a 95% attendance in 
the course. 
b. If a student misses the End-Semester Examination due to compelling reason like participation in 
an national / international event with due approval of the Institute, serious illness of himself or a 
calamity in the family, he may appeal to the Dean, Academic Affairs, through his faculty advisor 
and Head of the Department for permitting him to appear at the Supplementary Examination(s) if 
offered subject to fulfilling if attendance requirement. [See Appendix XII of the regulations for rules 
on supplementary exams]
c. A student must apply in Form AC/113 to appear in an alternative mid semester or supplementary 
end semester examination.
 If it is medical ground, the student has to submit the medical certificate from the Institute Doctor or the 
recommendation of the Institute Doctor for treatment elsewhere. In case of treatment outside the Institute 
(including hospitals referred by the Institute), the student must produce all medical documents (discharge 
certificate, prescriptions, visit slips, pathological reports, medicine purchase receipts etc.) in original.  The 
reason for leaving the campus must also be genuine and with permission of competent authority. In case of 
family calamity the student’s application must be supported by a letter from the parent/guardian along with 
copies of documents such as medical records, death certificates (if that happens). 
 The student will be given an ‘I’ grade (Incomplete) till the alternative mid semester and supplementary 
examinations are conducted. On availability of the grades from the teacher, the Examination office will 
reduce the grades by 1 step, except for those students who have a 95% attendance record. Full credit 
is admissible only in case of students having 95% attendance in the subject and writing supplementary 
examination after missing the end semester examination.
 In case of prolonged illness of a student, if he/she misses both the End-Semester Examination and its 
Supplementary if any, the student must register for the courses as backing papers. In that case the student 
shall be awarded I grade till he clears the papers.
8.5. For the benefit of and as a process of learning by the students, the scripts after correction of all class tests, 
Mid-semester Examinations, assignments etc. will be shown to the students within 3 weeks from the date 
of Tests / Examinations.  The evaluated scripts of the End-Semester Examinations are to be shown to the 
students at the beginning of the next semester, but not later than 2 weeks from the starting of classes. There 
is no limit on how early a teacher can show the evaluated scripts to the students.
9. Project Work
9.1. The project is an important component of the Institute’s B.Tech. Programme.  It gives an opportunity to the 
student to express his/her creative talents and prepare for his future career.
9.2. The Departmental Academic Committee will invite research topics for U.G. projects from its own faculty 
(including adjunct faculty) and from other departments across the Institute at the beginning of the 6th 
semester.  One member of the faculty may be designated to coordinate this activity.  Faculty members may 
propose project topics, singly or in collaboration with a colleague from the same or another department. A 
co-supervisor from other departments, industry or other institutions may also be accepted.
9.3. The Departmental Academic Committee will assign research topics to students towards the middle of 
the sixth semester (preferably before January 31), after taking into consideration the requirements of the 
projects and choice of the students.
Excerpts From Regulations
18
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
9.4. Each topic may be taken by a single student or a team of two students.  In case of specially challenging 
problems, larger teams may work on a single problem, with prior approval of Dean(AA).
9.5. B.Tech. projects may be analytical, computational, experimental or developmental or combinations thereof. 
The department will make the necessary resources available to the students, including access to laboratory 
and computing facilities outside normal working hours. It will be the moral and legal responsibility of 
the supervisor (s) to arrange the facilities. Students are encouraged to discuss such matters with their 
supervisors, and if not satisfied, with HODs and higher authorities.
9.6. Each team of students, consisting of one or more members and working on a single problem, will be given 
an official “Project Record Book” by the Institute. Guidelines for Project Book are given in Appendix-III of 
the regulations. All concepts, drawings, formulas, derivations, experimental observations, graphs, charts, 
photographs, computer flow charts and pseudo codes must be recorded by the student on this note book, 
which must be produced before all evaluation boards. There shall no blank pages in between the writings.
9.7. The student is required to submit formal project reports at the end of 7th and 8th semesters; that submitted 
at the end of the 8th semester, being in the form of a well bound thesis.  The Departmental Academic 
Committee will constitute one or more evaluation boards, for continuous monitoring of the projects.  The 
Boards will examine the day to day records and conduct viva-voce and/or oral presentations by the students 
at least twice in each semester. The departments, at the discretion, may invite external members to viva 
voice Boards.
9.8. For the purpose of assignment of a grade, the following will be weightage of the different components in 
each semester.
  Mid Semester assessment by Supervisors  = 20% 
  (Based on day to day work and record book)
  Mid Semester assessment by Evaluation Boards = 20% 
  (Based on record book only)
  End Semester assessment by Supervisors  = 20% 
  (Based on day to day work and record book)
  End Semester Assessment by Evaluation board  = 20% 
  (Through oral presentation, viva-voce, and record book)   
  Project Report (assessed by Evaluation Board) = 20%
9.9. On completion of evaluation, the Departmental Academic Committee or its subcommittee constituted for 
the purpose shall decide the grade awarded. If the performance of a student is unsatisfactory, the Committee 
may recommend one of the following:
a. Rewriting of report and submission for evaluation,
b. Extension of time for completion of the work (the time duration is to be specified),
c. Complete repetition of the project in the following year.
d. The resubmitted thesis will be evaluated by the Committee and the grade will be sent to the 
examination office.
9.10. Students are encouraged to work on research topics with a potential for creation of new technologies and 
issue of patents. Forms IP/3 and IP/4 may be filled up by the students.
 Rights to all intellectual property generated in project shall be distributed equally among the students, 
technicians and the supervisors, except where the concerned workers mutually settle on a distribution 
formula.  If a project is supported by a sponsor, the sponsoring organization will be given IPR as per the 
contract, and the balance divided among the faculty, students and technicians.
10. Graduation	Requirement
10.1. In order to qualify for a B.Tech. degree of the Institute covered under these Regulations, a student must:
a. Complete all the credit requirements for the degree, as laid down in the prescribed curriculum of the 
discipline, with a minimum grade ‘P’ scored in every subject.
Excerpts From Regulations
19
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
b. Obtain a CGPA of 6.00 or higher at the end of the semester in which he/she completes all the 
requirements for the degree.
c. Have cleared all dues of the Institute, the Hall of Residence, the Library, the Department, NCC, NSS 
and Student Activity Centre.
10.2. The minimum total credit requirements that has to be satisfactorily completed for the award of B.Tech. 
degree will vary between 210 – 215 depending on the course structure of various departments or as decided 
by the Senate from time to time.
10.3. Normally a student should complete all the requirements consecutively in eight semesters for B.Tech. 
degree. Academically weaker students may be granted time up to 6 years (12 semesters) to complete all 
the requirements for the degree.  However, in special cases the Senate may further extend this limit for 
completion of all requirements for the degree to 7 years (14 semesters), depending upon the merit of 
the case, particularly for students with superior attendance record and/or record of contributing to the 
Institute’s academic or cultural life.
Excerpts From Regulations
20
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Curricula
21
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
laCU
RR
IC
UL
UM
Curricula
22
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Curricula
23
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
 CURRICULA OF B.TECH. & M.TECH. DUAL DEGREE PROGRAMME
Sl. No Dept.	Code Department	Name Page No.
1 BM Biotechnology and Medical Engineering 25
2 CE Civil Engineering 37
3 CH Chemical Engineering 51
4 CR Ceramic Engineering 59
5 CS Computer Science and Engineering 67
6 EC Electronics and Communication Engineering 79
7 EE Electrical Engineering 93
8 ID Industrial Design 107
9 ME Mechanical Engineering 113
10 MM Metallurgical and Materials Engineering 123
11 MN Mining Engineering 133
Curricula
24
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Curricula
25
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B.Tech. (Medical Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 ME 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics - III 3-1-0 4
2 BM 201 Anatomy and Physiology 3-0-0 3
3 LS 201 Biochemistry 3-1-0 4
4 EE 243 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
26
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Electives – I 3-0-0 3
6
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
7
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory
8 BM 271 Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 LS 271 Biochemistry Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics-IV 3-1-0 4
2 EC 202 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
3 BM 202 Clinical Science 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective - I 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory
7
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
8 BM 282 Clinical Science Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 EC 276 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 BM 311 Medical Signal and Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
2 BM 321 Biomaterials 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – II 3-1-0 3/4
4 Professional Elective – III 3-1-0 3
5 HS &Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 BM 381 Biomaterial Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 383 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory - I 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 BM 312 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
2 BM314 Biomedical Image processing 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective- IV 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective- V 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
27
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS &Open Elective- IV 3-0-0 3
6 BM 382 Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 384 Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Laboratory – III 0-0-3 2
Elective Laboratory – IV 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 BM 421 Tissue Engineering 3-1-0 3
2 Professional Elective - VI 3-1-0 3/4
3 Professional Elective – VII 3-1-0 3
4 HS &Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 BM 481 Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 BM 483 Computational Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 471 Bioprocess Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 BM 491 Research Project– I 0-0-6 4
9 BM 493 Seminar and Technical Writing– I 0-0-3 2
10 BM 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26/27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective–VIII 3-0-0 3/4
2 Professional Elective–IX 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective–X 3-0-0 3
4 HS &Open Elective–VI 3-0-0 3
5 BM 472 Biomicrofluidics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 BM 482 Computer Aided Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 492 Research Project–II 0-0-9 6
8 BM 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 BM 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 26/27
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
28
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B.Tech. (Biotechnology Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 ME 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics– III 3-1-0 4
2 BM 201 Anatomy and Physiology 3-0-0 3
3 LS 201 Biochemistry 3-1-0 4
4 LS 203 Microbiology 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
29
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & OpenElective–I 3-0-0 3
6
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
7
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory
8 LS 271 Biochemistry Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 LS 273 Microbiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics–IV 3-1-0 4
2 BM 232 Biofluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
3 BM 244 Cell and Molecular Biology 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective–I 3-0-0 3
5 HS &OpenElective–II 3-0-0 3
6
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
7
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory
8 BM 272 Biofluid MechanicsLaboratory 0-0-3 2
9 BM 274 Analytical Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 BM 331 Bioheat and Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4
2 BM 341 Genetic Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective– II 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective– III 3-0-0 3
5 HS & OpenElective–III 3-0-0 3
6 BM 375 Bioheat and Mass transfer Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 371 Cell and Molecular Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 BM 352 Biochemical Engineering 3-1-0 4
2 BM 354 Bioseparation 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – IV 3/4
4 Professional Elective – V 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
30
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 BM 372 Bioseparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 374 Biochemical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/26
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 BM 441 Protein Engineering 3-0-0 3
2 Professional Elective – VI 3/4
3 Professional Elective – VII 3-0-0 3
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 BM 471 Bioprocess design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 BM 473 Food Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 481 Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 BM 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
9 BM 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 BM 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26/27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – VIII 3/4
2 Professional Elective – IX 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – X 3-0-0 3
4 HS &Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 BM 472 Biomicrofluidics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 BM 484 Structural Biology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 BM 492 Research Project– II 0-0-9 6
8 BM 494 Seminar and Technical Writing - II 0-0-3 2
9 BM 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 26/27
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits Offered	to*
1 BM 202 Clinical Science 3-1-0 4 BT
2 BM 203 Clinical Biochemistry 3-0-0 3 #
3 BM 205 Clinical Microbiology 3-0-0 3 #
4 BM 232 Biofluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 BM
5 BM 234 Biothermodynamics 3-0-0 3 #
6 BM 242 Immunology 3-0-0 3 #
7 BM 244 Cell and Molecular Biology 3-0-0 3 BM
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
31
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
8 BM 252 Bioenergetics & Metabolism 3-0-0 3 BT
9 BM 254 Bioprocess Calculation 3-0-0 3 #
10 BM 256 Enzymology 3-0-0 3 #
11 BM 271 Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BT
12 BM 272 Biofluid Mechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
13 BM 273 Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
14 BM 274 Analytical Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
15 BM 275 Clinical Microbiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
16 BM 311 Medical Signal and Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 BT
17 BM 312 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 BT
18 BM 313 Biological Control System 3-0-0 3 #
19 BM 314 Biomedical Image Processing 3-1-0 4 BT
20 BM 315 Laser & Fiber Optics in Medicine 3-0-0 3 #
21 BM 316 Biosensors and Biotransducers 3-0-0 3 #
22 BM 321 Biomaterials 3-1-0 4 BT
23 BM 322 Biopolymers 3-0-0 3 #
24 BM 324 Surface Engineering of Biomaterials 3-0-0 3 #
25 BM 331 Bioheat and Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4 BM
26 BM 332 Biomechanics 3-0-0 3 #
27 BM 341 Genetic Engineering 3-1-0 4 BM
28 BM 342 Applied Cell Biology 3-0-0 3 #
29 BM 343 Bioinformatics 3-0-0 3 #
30 BM 345 Animal Tissue Culture 3-0-0 3 #
31 BM 352 Biochemical Engineering 3-1-0 4 BM
32 BM 353 Pharmaceutical Technology 3-0-0 3 #
33 BM 354 Bioseparation 3-1-0 4 BM
34 BM 356 Bioinstrumentation and Process Control 3-1-0 4 #
35 BM 358 Bioreactor Analysis andDesign 3-0-0 3 #
36 BM 361 Agricultural Biotechnology 3-0-0 3 #
37 BM 362 Plant Tissue Culture 3-0-0 3 #
38 BM 370 Bioinformatics Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
39 BM 371 Cell and Molecular Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
40 BM 372 Bioseparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
41 BM 373 Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
42 BM 374 Biochemical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
43 BM 375 Bioheat and Mass Transfer Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
44 BM 376 Bioprocess Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
45 BM 378 Animal Cell Culture and Immuno technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
46 BM 381 Biomaterial Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BT
47 BM 382 Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BT
48 BM 383 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2 BT
49 BM 384 Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BT
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Curricula
32
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
50 BM 385 Medical Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
51 BM 386 Experimental Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
52 BM 387 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory - II 0-0-3 2 #
53 BM 391 Special Topics in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–I 3/4 #
54 BM 392 Special Topics in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–II 3/4 #
55 BM 393 Special Laboratory in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–I 0-0-3 2 #
56 BM 394 Special Laboratory in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–II 0-0-3 2 #
57 BM 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
58 BM 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
59 BM 401 Hospital Management 3-0-0 3 #
60 BM 402 Health Informatics 3-0-0 3 #
61 BM 403 Hospital Engineering and Information system 3-0-0 3 #
62 BM 405 Telemedicine 3-0-0 3 #
63 BM 411 Medical Embedded system 3-0-0 3 #
64 BM 413 Medical Imaging 3-0-0 3 #
65 BM 421 Tissue engineering 3-0-0 3 BT
66 BM 422 Computer Application in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
67 BM 423 Nanotechnology in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
68 BM 424 Artificial Organs and Rehabilitation Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
69 BM 425 Biomaterials in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
70 BM 427 BioComposites 3-0-0 3 #
71 BM 428 Nanotechnology in Biomedical Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
72 BM 431 Physiological system modeling 3-0-0 3 #
73 BM 432 Biomicrofluidics 3-0-0 3 #
74 BM 433 Biotransport 3-0-0 3 #
75 BM 441 Protein Engineering 3-0-0 3 BM
76 BM 442 Cancer Biology 3-0-0 3 #
77 BM 444 Structural Biology 3-0-0 3 #
78 BM 452 Fermentation Technology 3-0-0 3 #
79 BM 463 Food Technology 3-0-0 3 #
80 BM 465 Biological waste treatment 3-0-0 3 #
81 BM 483 Computational Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BT
82 BM 484 Structural Biology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 BM
83 BM 252 Bioenergetics & Metabolism 3-0-0 3 BM
Note:  #   for both BM & BT Engineering Curriculum
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub.Code Subject L-T-P Credit
1 CH 224 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3
2 CH 311 Heat Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
3 CH 315 Mass Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
4 CH 322 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering
Curricula
33
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 CH 425 Environmental Engineering 3-0-0 3
6 CR 325 Computational Materials Science 3-0-0 3
7 CR 433 Sensor Technology 3-0-0 3
8 CR 435 Functional Materials & Devices 3-0-0 3
9 CR 415 Bio-ceramics 3-0-0 3
11 CS 222 Data Base Management 3-0-0 3
12 CS 314 Simulation and Modeling 3-0-0 3
13 CS 341 Microprocessor and Micro-controllers 3-1-0 4
14 CS 373 Microprocessor Laboratory 0-0-3 2
15 CS 421 Computer Networks 3-0-0 3
16 CS 474 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
17 CS 477 Soft Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
18 CS 638 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4
19 CY 303 Introduction to Nano-biotechnology 3-0-0 3
20 CY 517 Chemistry of Natural Products. 3-1-0 4
21 CY 602 Industrial Waste Management 3-1-0 4
22 EC 322 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
23 EC 331 Control System Engineering 3-1-0 4
26 EC 421 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4
27 EC 423 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4
29 EC 442 Advanced Techniques in Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
30 EC 444 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
31 EC 446 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
34 EE 336 Advanced Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
35 EE 356 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
36 EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling & Control 3-0-0 3
37 EE 427 Soft computing 3-0-0 3
38 EE 445 Data communication and Networks 3-0-0 3
39 EE 456 Robotics and Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
40 MA 524 Statistical Methods 3-1-0 4
41 MA 553 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4
42 ME 416 Robotics 3-0-0 3
43 ME 434 Computer Graphics for CAD/CAM 3-0-0 3
44 MM 359 Engineering Polymers and Composites 3-1-0 4
45 MM 449 Nano Structure of Materials 3-0-0 3
46 MN 436 Environmental Pollution and Control in Mines 3-1-0 4
47 PH 555 Physics of Material Synthesis and Characterization 3-1-0 4
48 PH 640 Physics of Macromolecules 3-1-0 4
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering
Curricula
34
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
LIST OF OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to student of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering)
Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits Non Eligible Branches
BM 317 Biomedical Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
BM 318 Medical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 -
BM 415 Electronic devices for Rehabilitation Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
BM 429 Materials in medical science 3-0-0 3 -
BM 443 Introduction to Biotechnology 3-0-0 3 -
SUMMARY OF COURSES (B.Tech.)
Sub Discipline: Miscellaneous Topics
BM 201 Anatomy and Physiology 3-0-0 3
BM 202 Clinical Science 3-1-0 4
BM 203 Clinical Biochemistry 3-0-0 3
BM 205 Clinical Microbiology 3-0-0 3
BM 401 Hospital Management 3-0-0 3
BM 402 Health Informatics 3-0-0 3
BM 403 Hospital Engineering and Information system 3-0-0 3
BM 405 Telemedicine 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Medical Electronics and Instrumentation
BM 311 Medical Signal and Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
BM 312 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
BM 313 Biological Control System 3-0-0 3
BM 314 Biomedical Image Processing 3-1-0 4
BM 315 Laser & Fiber Optics in Medicine 3-0-0 3
BM 316 Biosensors and Biotransducers 3-0-0 3
BM 317 Biomedical Engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 318 Medical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
BM 411 Medical Embedded system 3-0-0 3
BM 413 Medical Imaging 3-0-0 3
BM 415 Electronic devices for Rehabilitation Engineering 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Tissue Engineering and Biomaterials
BM 321 Biomaterials 3-1-0 4
BM 322 Biopolymers 3-0-0 3
BM 324 Surface Engineering of Biomaterials 3-0-0 3
BM 421 Tissue engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 422 Computer Application in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 423 Nanotechnology in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 424 Artificial Organs and Rehabilitation Engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 425 Biomaterials in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering
Curricula
35
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 427 BioComposites 3-0-0 3
BM 428 Nanotechnology in Biomedical Engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 429 Materials in medical science 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Bio-transport and Biomechanics
BM 232 Biofluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
BM 234 Biothermodynamics 3-0-0 3
BM 331 Bioheat and Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4
BM 332 Biomechanics 3-0-0 3
BM 431 Physiological system modeling 3-0-0 3
BM 432 Biomicrofluidics 3-0-0 3
BM 433 Biotransport 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Cell and Molecular Engineering
BM 242 Immunology 3-0-0 3
BM 244 Cell and Molecular Biology 3-0-0 3
BM 341 Genetic Engineering 3-1-0 4
BM 342 Applied Cell Biology 3-0-0 3
BM 343 Bioinformatics 3-0-0 3
BM 345 Animal Tissue Culture 3-0-0 3
BM 441 Protein Engineering 3-0-0 3
BM 442 Cancer Biology 3-0-0 3
BM 443 Introduction to Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
BM 444 Structural Biology 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline:Bioprocess Engineering
BM 252 Bioenergetics & Metabolism 3-0-0 3
BM 254 Bioprocess Calculation 3-0-0 3
BM 256 Enzymology 3-0-0 3
BM 352 Biochemical Engineering 3-1-0 4
BM 353 Pharmaceutical Technology 3-0-0 3
BM 354 Bioseparation 3-1-0 4
BM 356 Bioinstrumentation and Process Control 3-1-0 4
BM 358 Bioreactor Analysis & Design 3-0-0 3
BM 452 Fermentation Technology 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Agricultural and Environmental Biotechnology
BM 361 Agricultural Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
BM 362 Plant Tissue Culture 3-0-0 3
BM 463 Food Technology 3-0-0 3
BM 465 Biological waste treatment 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
BM 271 Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 272 Biofluid Mechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering
Curricula
36
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 273 Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 274 Analytical Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 275 Clinical Microbiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 282 Clinical Science Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 370 Bioinformatics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 371 Cell and Molecular Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 372 Bioseparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 373 Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 374 Biochemical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 375 Bioheat and Mass transfer Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 376 Bioprocess Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 378 Animal Cell Culture and Immunotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 381 Biomaterial Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 382 Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 383 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
BM 384 Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 385 Medical Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 386 Experimental Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 387 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
BM 471 Bioprocess Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 472 Biomicrofluidics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 473 Food Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 481 Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 482 Computer Aided Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 483 Computational Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
BM 484 Structural Biology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
BM 391 Special Topics in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–I 3/4
BM 392 Special Topics in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–II 3/4
BM 393 Special Laboratory in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–I 0-0-3 2
BM 394 Special Laboratory in Biotechnology & Medical Engg.–II 0-0-3 2
BM 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
BM 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
BM 491 Research Project–I 0-0-6 4
BM 492 Research Project–II 0-0-9 6
BM 493 Seminar and Technical Writing–I 0-0-3 2
BM 494 Seminar and Technical Writing–II 0-0-3 2
BM 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
BM 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedical Engineering
Curricula
37
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Civil Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environment and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Engineering
5
CE 130 Environment and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 CE 201 Civil Engineering Materials and Construction 3-0-0 3
3 CE 203 Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – I 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
38
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective 3-0-0 3
6
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
7
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
8 CE 271 Building Drawing Practice 0-0-3 2
9 CE 273 Mechanics of Solids Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 CE 202 Surveying 3-0-0 3
3 CE 212 Structural Analysis 3-0-0 3
4 CE 252 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
7
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
8 CE 272 Highway Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CE 274 Surveying Field Work 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 311 Structural Design 3-0-0 3
2 CE 321 Mechanics of Soil 3-0-0 3
3 CE 331 Environment Engineering 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – II 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 CE 371 Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CE 373 Advanced Surveying Field Work 0-0-3 2
8 CE 375 Structural Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
9 CE 377 Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 24
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 312 Design of Steel Structures 3-0-0 3
2 CE 322 Geotechnical Engineering 3-0-0 3
3 CE 342 Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – III 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
39
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 CE 372 Steel Structures Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 374 Transportation Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
8 CE 376 Environmental Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
9 CE 378 Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 24
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 401 Estimation & Construction Management 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – V 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
6 CE 471 Computer Aided Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 473 Geotechnical Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
8 CE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
9 CE 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CE 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 28
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 452 Water Resources Engineering 3-0-0 3
2 Professional Elective – VII 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – VIII 3-0-0 3
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 CE 472 Structural Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 CE 474 Water Resources Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
8 CE 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 CE 496 Comprehensive Viva-Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 26
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Geotechnical Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Civil Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CE 621 Advanced Soil Mechanics 3-1-0 4
2 CE 625 Soil Exploration and Analysis of Foundations 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – IV (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Electives – V (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Electives – VI (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
40
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 CE 673 Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CE 681 Computational Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 CE 685 Seminar & Technical Writing - I 0-0-3 2
10 CE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-5-12 30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CE 620 Ground Improvement Techniques 3-1-0 4
2 CE 622 Stability Analysis of Slopes, Dams and Embankments 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Electives – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Electives – IX (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 CE 672 Geotechnical Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 682 Computer Aided Foundation Engineering Design 0-0-3 2
8 CE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 CE 686 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Electives – IX (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Electives – X (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 CE 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CE 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CE 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CE 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
3 CE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Structural Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Civil Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 611 Advanced Structural Analysis 3-1-0 4
2 CE 613 Analysis & Design of Plates and Shells 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
41
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3 Professional Elective – III (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 CE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
7 CE 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 671 Structural Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CE 681 Computational Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
10 CE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 604 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4
2 CE 612 Stability of Structures 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 CE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
7 CE 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
8 CE 670 Structural Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
9 CE 680 Computational Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – I (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – II (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 CE 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CE 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CE 692 Comprehensive Viva – Voce 0-0-0 4
3 CE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
42
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Transportation Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Civil Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CE 641 Transportation Systems Planning 3-1-0 4
2 CE 643 Highway and Airport Pavement Materials 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
6 CE 677 Transportation Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CE 681 Computational Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 CE 685 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-5-12 30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CE 640 Analysis and Structural Design and Pavements 3-1-0 4
2 CE 642 Traffic Engineering & Traffic Flow 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – IX (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 CE 674 Transportation Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 676 Traffic & Transportation Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 CE 686 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – IX (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – X (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 CE 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CE 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CE 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CE 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
43
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3 CE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Water Resources Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Civil Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CE 609 Estimation & Construction Management 3-1-0 4
2 CE 637 Irrigation Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – IV (B. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – V (B. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – VI (B. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
6 CE 471 Computer Aided Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
9 CE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-5-9 28
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CE 658 Water Resources Engineering 3-0-0 3
2 CE 652 Open Channel Flow 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VII (B. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – VIII (B. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – IX (B. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
6 CE 474 Water resources Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
7 CE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
8 CE 686 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – X (I of M. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – XI (II of M. Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XII (III of M. Tech) 3-1-0 4
4 CE 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CE 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 34
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
44
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 CE 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CE 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
3 CE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. 
No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits Offerred	to
1 CE 205 Architecture & Town Planning 3-1-0 4 #
2 CE 207 Cost Effective Housing 3-1-0 4 #
3 CE 209 Concrete Technology 3-1-0 4 #
4 CE 301 Advanced Surveying 3-1-0 4 #
5 CE 313 Advanced structural analysis 3-1-0 4 #
6 CE 314 Structural Dynamics 3-1-0 4 #
7 CE 316 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 #
8 CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4 #
9 CE 333 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-1-0 4 #
10 CE 334 Air Quality Management 3-1-0 4 #
11 CE 336 Advanced Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4 #
12 CE 351 Hydraulics and Hydraulic Machines 3-1-0 4 #
13 CE 352 Advanced Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 #
14 CE 391 Special Topic in Civil Engineering – I 3/4 #
15 CE 392 Special Topic in Civil Engineering – II 3/4 #
16 CE 393 Special Laboratory in Civil Engineering - I 0-0-3 2 #
17 CE 394 Special Laboratory in Civil Engineering - II 0-0-3 2 #
18 CE 395 Engineering Product Development Project - I 0-0-6 4 #
19 CE 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4 #
20 CE 405 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3 #
21 CE 407 Optimization Methods and Its Applications in Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3
#
22 CE 411 Plate and Shell Structures 3-0-0 3 #
23 CE 412 Pre-stressed Concrete 3-0-0 3 #
24 CE 413 Advanced Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures 3-0-0 3
#
25 CE 415 Earthquake and Wind Resistant Design of Structures 3-0-0 3
#
26 CE 418 Probability and Reliability Methods in Civil Engineering 3-1-0 4
#
27 CE 421 Ground Improvement Techniques 3-0-0 3 #
28 CE 423 Advanced Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
45
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
29 CE 424 Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
30 CE 425 Environmental Geotechnics 3-0-0 3 #
31 CE 426 Soil Structure Interaction 3-0-0 3 #
32 CE 428 Soil Dynamics and Industrial Foundations 3-0-0 3 #
33 CE 432 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3 #
34 CE 441 Advanced Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
35 CE 442 Traffic Engineering & Transportation Planning 3-0-0 3 #
36 CE 443 Pavement Design 3-0-0 3 #
37 CE 444 Pavement Materials 3-0-0 3 #
38 CE 445 Design of Airports and Hill Roads 3-0-0 3 #
39 CE 451 Irrigation Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
40 CE 453 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-0-0 3 #
41 CE 454 Ground Water Hydrology 3-0-0 3 #
42 CE 455 Open Channel Flow 3-0-0 3 #
43 CE 456 Water Resources Planning and Management 3-0-0 3 #
44 CE 601 Material Technology 3-1-0 4 $
45 CE 603 Applied Elasticity and Plasicity 3-1-0 4 $
46 CE 615 Advanced  Steel Design 3-1-0 4 $
47 CE 617 Bridge Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
48 CE 619 Composite Structure 3-1-0 4 $
49 CE 626 Rock Mechanics 3-1-0 4 $
50 CE 627 Dynamics of Soils and Foundations 3-1-0 4 $
51 CE 628 Earth Retaining Structures 3-1-0 4 $
52 CE 629 Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
53 CE 635 Environmental Impact & Risk Assessment 3-1-0 4 $
54 CE 638 Environmental Legislation & Policy 3-1-0 4 $
55 CE 645 Geometric Design of Highways 3-1-0 4 $
56 CE 646 Evaluation and Strengthening of Pavements 3-1-0 4 $
57 CE 647 Transportation & Environment 3-1-0 4 $
58 CE 648 Transportation Systems, Analysis & Modelling 3-1-0 4 $
59 CE 649 Advanced Railway Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
60 CE 660 High Rise Structures 3-1-0 4 $
6 CE 661 Strength & Deformation Behaviour of Soils 3-1-0 4 $
62 CE 662 Environmental Geotechniques 3-1-0 4 $
63 CE 663 Mass Transit Systems 3-1-0 4 $
64 CE 666 Analytical and Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engg. 3-1-0 4
$
65 CE 667 Soil Elasticity and Plasticity 3-1-0 4 $
Note:  # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $ (only for dual degree courses)
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
46
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code. Subject L-T-P Credits
1 BM 352 Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
2 CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3
3 EE 356 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
4 MM 357 Corrosion & Degradation of Materials & Prevention 3-1-0 4
5 MM 359 Engineering Polymers & Composites 3-1-0 4
6 MN 207 Mining Geology 3-0-0 3
7 MN 208 Geostatistics 3-0-0 3
8 MN 322 Geomechanics 3-1-0 4
LIST OF OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Civil Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code. Subject L-T-P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1 CE 204 Elements of Architecture & Town Planning 3-0-0 3 -
2 CE 214 Theory of Elasticity 3-0-0 3 ME, MN
3 CE 261 Elements of Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
4 CE 302 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3 -
5 CE 303 Remote Sensing and Geographical Information System 3-0-0 3 -
8 CE 341 Basic Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
6 CE 403 Optimization Methods in Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
9 CE 404 Quality Management 3-0-0 3 -
7 CE 436 Environmental Management in Industry 3-0-0 3 -
 SUMMARY OF COURSES
Sub Discipline: Non Specific Subjects
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics 3-1-0 4
CE 201 Civil Engineering Materials and Construction 3-0-0 3
CE 202 Surveying 3-0-0 3
CE 203 Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
CE 204 Elements of Architecture & Town Planning 3-0-0 3
CE 205 Architecture & Town Planning 3-1-0 4
CE 207 Cost Effective Housing 3-1-0 4
CE 209 Concrete Technology 3-1-0 4
CE 261 Elements of Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 301 Advanced Surveying 3-1-0 4
CE 302 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3
CE 303 Remote Sensing and Geographical Information System 3-0-0 3
CE 305 Remote Sensing and Geographical Information System applications in Civil Engineering 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
47
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 403 Optimization Methods in Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 404 Quality Management 3-0-0 3
CE 405 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3
CE 407 Optimization Methods and Its Applications in Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 603 Applied Elasticity and Plasticity 3-1-0 3
CE 609 Estimation & Construction Management 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Structural Engineering
CE 212 Structural Analysis 3-0-0 3
CE 214 Theory of Elasticity 3-0-0 3
CE 311 Structural Design 3-0-0 3
CE 312 Design of Steel Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 313 Advanced structural analysis 3-1-0 4
CE 314 Structural Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CE 316 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4
CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4
CE 411 Plate and Shell Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 412 Pre-stressed Concrete 3-0-0 3
CE 413 Advanced Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 415 Earthquake and Wind Resistant Design of Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 418 Probability and Reliability Methods in Civil Engineering
CE 601 Material Technology 3-1-0 4
CE 604 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4
CE 611 Advanced Structural Analysis 3-1-0 4
CE 612 Stability of Structures 3-1-0 4
CE 613 Analysis & Design of Plate and Shells 3-1-0 4
CE 615 Advanced Steel Design 3-1-0 4
CE 617 Bridge Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 619 Composite Structure 3-1-0 4
CE 660 High Rise Structures 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Geotechnical Engineering
CE 321 Mechanics of Soil 3-0-0 3
CE 322 Geotechnical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 421 Ground Improvement Techniques 3-0-0 3
CE 423 Advanced Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 424 Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 425 Environmental Geotechnics 3-0-0 3
CE 426 Soil Structure Interaction 3-0-0 3
CE 428 Soil Dynamics and Industrial Foundations 3-0-0 3
CE 620 Ground Improvement Techniques 3-1-0 4
CE 621 Advanced Soil Mechanics 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
48
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 622 Stability Analysis of Slopes, Dams and Embankments 3-1-0 4
CE 625 Soil Exploration and Analysis of Foundations 3-1-0 4
CE 626 Rock Mechanics 3-1-0 4
CE 627 Dynamics of Soils and Foundations 3-1-0 4
CE 628 Earth Retaining Structures 3-1-0 4
CE 629 Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 661 Strength & Deformation Behaviour of Soil 3-1-0 4
CE 662 Environmental Geotechnics 3-1-0 4
CE 666 Analytical and Numerical Methods in Geotechnical Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 667 Soil Elasticity and Plasticity 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Environmental Engineering
CE 130 Environment and Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 331 Environment Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 333 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-1-0 4
CE 334 Air Quality Management 3-1-0 4
CE 336 Advanced Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 432 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
CE 436 Environmental Management in Industries 3-0-0 3
CE 635 Environmental Impact & Risk Assessment 3-1-0 4
CE 638 Environmental Legislation & Policy 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Transportation Engineering
CE 341 Basic Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 342 Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 441 Advanced Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 442 Traffic Engineering & Transportation Planning 3-0-0 3
CE 443 Pavement Design 3-0-0 3
CE 444 Pavement Materials 3-0-0 3
CE 445 Design of Airports and Hill Roads 3-0-0 3
CE 640 Analysis and Structural Design and Pavements 3-1-0 4
CE 641 Transportation Systems Planning 3-1-0 4
CE 642 Traffic Engineering & Traffic Flow 3-1-0 4
CE 643 Highway and Airport Pavement Materials 3-1-0 4
CE 645 Geometric Design of Highways 3-1-0 4
CE 646 Evaluation and Strengthening of Pavements 3-1-0 4
CE 647 Transportation & Environment 3-1-0 4
CE 648 TransportationSystems, Analysis & Modelling 3-1-0 4
CE 649 Advanced Railway Engineering 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Water Resource Engineering
CE 252 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
49
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 351 Hydraulics and Hydraulic Machines 3-1-0 4
CE 352 Advanced Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
CE 453 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-0-0 3
CE 454 Ground Water Hydrology 3-0-0 3
CE 455 Open Channel Flow 3-0-0 3
CE 456 Water Resources Planning and Management 3-0-0 3
CE 637 Irrigation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 652 Open Channel Flow 3-1-0 4
CE 658 Water Resources Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 660 High Rise Structures 3-1-0 4
CE 661 Strength & Deformation Behaviour of Soils 3-1-0 4
CE 662 Environmental Geotechniques 3-1-0 4
CE 663 Mass Transit Systems 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
CE 271 Building Drawing Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 272 Highway Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 273 Mechanics of Solids Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 274 Surveying Field Work 0-0-3 2
CE 371 Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 372 Steel Structures Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 373 Advanced Surveying Field Work 0-0-3 2
CE 374 Transportation Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 375 Structural Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 376 Environment Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 377 Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines Lab. 0-0-3 2
CE 378 Environment Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 471 Computer Aided Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 472 Structural Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 473 Geotechnical Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 474 Water Resources Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 670 Structural Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 671 Structural Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 672 Geotechnical Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 673 Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 674 Transportation Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 676 Traffic & Transportation Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 677 Transportation Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
CE 391 Special Topic in Civil Engineering – I 3/4
CE 392 Special Topic in Civil Engineering – II 3/4
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
50
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 393 Special Laboratory in Civil Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
CE 394 Special Laboratory in Civil Engineering – II 0-0-3 2
CE 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
CE 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
CE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
CE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
CE 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
CE 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
CE 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
CE 496 Comprehensive Viva – Voce 0-0-0 2
CE 680 Computational Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
CE 681 Computational Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
CE 682 Computer Aided Foundation Engineering Design 0-0-3 2
CE 685 Seminar & Technical Writing - I 0-0-3 2
CE 686 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
CE 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
CE 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
CE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 4
CE 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
CE 693 Research Project – III 0-0-15 10
CE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
CE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
Department of Civil Engineering
Curricula
51
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Chemical Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering 
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory - II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice - II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity - II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 CH 211 Processing and Handling of Materials 3-0-0 3
3 CH 223 Chemical Process Technology 3-0-0 3
4 CH 225 Chemical Process Calculations 3-1-0 4
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
52
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
7
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
8 CH 271 Process Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CH 273 Fuels and Combustion Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 CH 212 Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
3 CH 220 Chemical Engg. Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – I 3/4
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Electronics Laboratory
7
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
8 CH 270 Materials Handling Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
9 CH 272 Fluid Dynamics Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26/27
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 311 Heat Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
2 CH 315 Mass Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
3 CH 337 Equipment Design (Mech. Aspects) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 CH 371 Heat Transfer Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CH 373 Mass Transfer Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CH 375 Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CH 377 Fluid Dynamics Applications Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 312 Transport Phenomena 3-1-0 4
2 CH 334 Process Dynamics and Control 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III 3/4
4 Professional Elective – IV 3/4
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
53
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 CH 370 Computer Aided Design Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
7 CH 372 Heat Transfer Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CH 374 Mass Transfer Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CH 376 Process Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/26
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 421 Reaction Kinetics and Catalysis 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – V 3
3 Professional Elective – VI 3
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 CH 471 Chemical Reaction Engg. Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 CH 473 Computer Aided Design Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
7 CH 475 Process Dynamics and Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CH 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
9 CH 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CH 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 422 Simulation, Modeling and optimization of Chemical Process 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – VII 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – VIII 3-0-0 3
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 CH 470 Process Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 CH 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 CH 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
8 CH 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 25
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Chemical Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Chemical Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 611 Advanced Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
2 CH 613 Advanced Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
54
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 CH 671 Chemical Engineering Lab – I 0-0-3 2
7 CH 673 Chemical Engineering Lab – II 0-0-3 2
8 CH 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 CH 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CH 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 638 Advanced Reaction Engineering & Reactor Design 3-1-0 4
2 CH 632 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – IX (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – X (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 CH 670 Chemical Engineering Lab – III 0-0-3 2
7 CH 672 Chemical Engineering Lab – IV 0-0-3 2
8 CH 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 CH 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – XII (M.Tech) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XIII (M.Tech) 3-1-0 4
4 CH 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CH 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CH 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CH 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CH 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
3 CH 695 Research Project - V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits Offered	to
1. CH 224 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3 #
2. CH 226 Fuels and Combustion 3-0-0 3 #
3. CH 227 Fertilizer Technology 3-0-0 3 #
4. CH 312 Transport Phenomena 3-1-0 4 $
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
55
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5. CH 321 Fundamentals of Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
6. CH 322 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3 #
7. CH 323 Energy Conservation and Renewable sources of Energy 3-0-0 3
#
8. CH 324 Particulate Science and Technology 3-0-0 3 #
9. CH 330 Petroleum Refinery Engineering and Petrochemicals 3-0-0 3
#
10. CH 331 Process Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 #
11. CH 335 Applied Statistics for Chemical Engineers 3-0-0 3 #
12. CH 336 Chemical Engineering Mathematics 3-1-0 4 #
13. CH 391 Special Topic in Chemical Engineering – I 3/4 #
14. CH 392 Special Topic in Chemical Engineering – II 3/4 #
15. CH 393 Special Laboratory in Chemical Engg – I 0-0-3 2 #
16. CH 394 Special Laboratory in Chemical Engg – II 0-0-3 2 #
17. CH 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
18. CH 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
19. CH 414 Nanotechnology in Catalysis 3-0-0 3 #
20. CH 415 Fluidization Engineering 3-1-0 4 #
21. CH 417 Modern Separation Processes in Chemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
#
22. CH 419 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4 #
23. CH 425 Environmental Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
24. CH 426 Coal Processing Technology 3-0-0 3 #
25. CH 427 Colloid and Interfacial Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
26. CH 428 Disaster Management in Chemical Industries 3-0-0 3 #
27. CH 432 Optimization Techniques in Process Design 3-0-0 3 #
28. CH 434 Project Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
29. CH 615 Advanced Heat Transfer 3-1-0 4 $
30. CH 621 Bioenergy Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
31. CH 623 Environmental Management System 3-1-0 4 $
32. CH 625 Bioprocess Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
33. CH 629 Interfacial Science and Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
34. CH 631 Process Plant Simulation 3-1-0 4 $
35. CH 681 Special Topics in Chemical Engineering – I 3/4 $
Note: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 BM 321 Biomaterials 3-1-0 4
2 BM 358 Bioreactor Analysis & Design 3-0-0 3
3 CE 318 Finite Element method 3-1-0 4
4 CR 244 Introduction to Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3
5 CR 335 Instrumental Characterization 3-1-0 4
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
56
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 CY 518 Polymer Chemistry 3-1-0 4
7 EE 427 Artificial Neural Network 3-0-0 3
8 ME 356 Turbo Machinery 3-0-0 3
9 MM 357 Corrosion & Degradation of Materials & Prevention 3-1-0 4
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Chemical Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1 CH 228 Treatment of Industrial Effluents 3-0-0 3 -
2 CH 229 Basic Chemical Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
3 CH 329 Process Plant Safety 3-0-0 3 -
4 CH 338 Industrial Instrumentation and Process Control 3-0-0 3 EE,EC,EI CS, ME
5 CH 418 Recent Separation Technologies 3-0-0 3 -
6 CH 439 Non-Traditional Optimization Techniques 3-0-0 3 -
SUMMARY OF COURSES 
Sub discipline: Transfer Operation
CH 211 Processing and Handling of Materials 3-0-0 3
CH 212 Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 311 Heat Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
CH 312 Transport Phenomena 3-1-0 4
CH 315 Mass Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
CH 323 Energy Conservation and Renewable sources of Energy 3-0-0 3
CH 414 Nanotechnology in Catalysis 3-0-0 3
CH 415 Fluidization Engineering 3-1-0 4
CH 417 Modern Separation Processes in Chemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 418 Recent Separation Technologies 3-0-0 3
CH 419 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 427 Colloid and Interfacial Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 611 Advanced Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 613 Advanced Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4
CH 615 Advanced Heat Transfer 3-1-0 4
Sub discipline: Process Engineering & Technology
CH 220 Chemical Engg. Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 221 Fundamentals of Biochemical Engg 3-0-0 3
CH 223 Chemical Process Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 224 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 225 Chemical Process Calculations 3-1-0 4
CH 226 Fuels and Combustion 3-0-0 4
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
57
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 227 Fertilizer Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 228 Treatment of Industrial Effluents 3-0-0 3
CH 229 Basic Chemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 321 Fundamentals of Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 322 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
CH 323 Energy Conservation and Renewable sources of Energy 3-0-0 3
CH 324 Particulate Science and Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 329 Process Plant Safety 3-0-0 3
CH 330 Petroleum Refinery Engg. and Petrochemicals 3-0-0 3
CH 414 Nanotechnology in Catalysis 3-0-0 3
CH 421 Reaction Kinetics and Catalysis 3-1-0 4
CH 422 Simulation, Modeling and Optimisation of Chemical Process 3-1-0 4
CH 425 Environmental Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 426 Coal Processing Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 427 Colloid and Interfacial Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 428 Disaster Management in Chemical Industries 3-0-0 3
CH 621 Bioenergy Engineering 3-1-0 4
CH 623 Environmental Management System 3-1-0 4
CH 625 Bioprocess Engineering 3-1-0 4
CH 629 Interfacial Science and Engineering 3-1-0 4
Sub discipline: Design and Simulation
CH 330 Petroleum Refinery Engineering and Petrochemicals 3-0-0 3
CH 331 Process Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
CH 332 Process Equipment Design 3-1-0 4
CH 334 Process Dynamics and Control 3-1-0 4
CH 335 Applied Statistics for Chemical Engineers 3-0-0 3
CH 336 Chemical Engineering Mathematics 3-1-0 4
CH 337 Equipment Design (Mech. Aspects) 3-1-0 4
CH 432 Optimization Techniques in Process Design 3-0-0 3
CH 434 Project Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 439 Non-Traditional Optimization Techniques 3-0-0 3
CH 631 Process Plant Simulation 3-1-0 4
CH 632 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4
CH 638 Advanced Reaction Engineering & Reactor Design 3-1-0 4
Sub discipline: Laboratory Courses
CH 270 Materials Handling Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 271 Process Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 272 Fluid Dynamics Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 273 Fuels and Combustion Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 370 Computer Aided Design Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
CH 371 Heat Transfer Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
58
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 372 Heat Transfer Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 373 Mass Transfer Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 374 Mass Transfer Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 375 Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 376 Process Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 377 Fluid Dynamics Applications Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 470 Process Simulation Laboratory. 0-0-3 2
CH 471 Chemical Reaction Engg. Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 473 Computer Aided Design Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
CH 475 Process Dynamics and Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 670 Chemical Engineering Lab – III 0-0-3 2
CH 671 Chemical Engineering Lab – I 0-0-3 2
CH 672 Chemical Engineering Lab – IV 0-0-3 2
CH 673 Chemical Engineering Lab – II 0-0-3 2
Sub discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses (M.Tech)
CH 391 Special Topic in Chemical Engineering – I 3/4
CH 392 Special Topic in Chemical Engineering – II 3/4
CH 393 Special Laboratory in Chemical Engg – I 0-0-3 2
CH 394 Special Laboratory in Chemical Engg – II 0-0-3 2
CH 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
CH 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
CH 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
CH 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
CH 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
CH 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
CH 495 Short Term Industrial/ Research Experience 0-0-0 2
CH 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
CH 681 Special Topics in Chemical Engineering – I 3/4
CH 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
CH 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
CH 691 Summer Research/Industrial Project 0-0-0 4
CH 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
CH 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
CH 694 Research Project Work – IV 0-0-0 10
CH 695 Research Project Work – V 0-0-30 20
Department of Chemical Engineering
Curricula
59
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF CERAMIC ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Ceramic Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics - I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics - I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory - I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice - I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity - I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics - II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics - II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering 
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory - II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice - II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity - II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 CR 211 Unit Operations in Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
3 CR 223 Materials Thermodynamics 3-0-0 3
4 CR 231 Properties of Ceramic Raw Materials 3-1-0 4
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
60
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – I 3-1-0 3
6 MA 270 HS 270
Numerical Methods Laboratory 
Language Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
7
EE 270 
EC 270
Electrical Engineering Laboratory– I 
Electronics Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
8 CR 271 Raw Materials Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CR 273 Ceramic Workshop 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 CR 212 Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
3 CR 230 Science of Ceramic Materials 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – I 3
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6 EC 270 EE 270
Basic Electronics Laboratory  
Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I OR 0-0-3 2
7 HS 270 MA 270
Language Laboratory 
Numerical Methods Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
8 CR 272 Drawing of Refractory Lining and Joints 0-0-3 2
9 CR 274 Ceramic Fabrication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CR 331 White ware Technology 3-0-0 3
2 CR 341 Physical Ceramics 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – II 3/4
4 Professional Elective – III 3/4
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 CR 371 High Temperature Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CR 373 Whiteware Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CR 375 Ceramic Characterization Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CR 377 Ceramic Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CR 310 Refractories or Refractory 3-0-0 3
2 CR 322 Glass Technology 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – IV 3/4
4 Professional Elective – V 3/4
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
61
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 CR 370 Refractories Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CR 372 Glass Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CR 374 Ceramic Product Development Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CR 376 Cement Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CR 411 Advanced Ceramics 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – VI 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VII 3-1-0 4
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 CR 471 Advanced Ceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 CR 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
7 CR 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
8 CR 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – VIII 4
2 Professional Elective – IX 3/4
3 Professional Elective – X 3/4
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 CR 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
6 CR 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
7 CR 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 23/25
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Ceramic Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CR 631 Structure & Properties of Engineering Ceramics 3-1-0 4
2 CR 611 Principles of Ceramic Processing & Fabrication 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 CR 671 Instrumental Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CR 673 Characterization of Ceramic Products Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CR 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 CR 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CR 691 Short Term Industrial /Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 26
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
62
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CR 632 Advances in Phase Diagrams 3-1-0 4
2 CR 641 Nanomaterials 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – IX (B.Tech.) 3/4
5 Professional Elective – X (B.Tech.) 3/4
6 CR 672 Electroceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CR 674 Process Ceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CR 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 CR 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26/28
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Electives – I (M.Tech) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Electives – II (M.Tech) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – III (M.Tech) 3-1-0 4
4 CR 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CR 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CR 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 CR 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CR 692 Comprehensive Viva – Voce 0-0-0 4
3 CR 695 Research Project - V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Offered	to
1. CR 226 Pollution & Waste Management in Ceramic Industry 3-0-0 3 #
2. CR 244 Introduction to Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3 #
3. CR 248 Fuels, Furnace and Stoichiometry 3-0-0 3 #
4. CR 320 Science of Sintering 3-1-0 4 #
5. CR 325 Computational Materials Science 3-0-0 3 #
6. CR 327 Interface Science & Sol- Gel Processing 3-1-0 4 #
7. CR 330 Fuel Cell & Batteries 3-1-0 4 #
8. CR 333 Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow 3-1-0 4 #
9. CR 335 Instrumental Characterization 3-1-0 4 #
10. CR 336 Cement Technology 3-1-0 4 #
11. CR 346 Nanoceramics 3-1-0 4 #
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
63
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
12. CR 391 Special Topic in Ceramic Engineering – I 3/4 #
13. CR 392 Special Topic in Ceramic Engineering – II 3/4 #
14. CR 393 Special Laboratory in Ceramic Engg – I 0-0-3 2 #
15. CR 394 Special Laboratory in Ceramic Engg – II 0-0-3 2 #
16. CR 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
17. CR 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
18. CR 415 Bio-ceramics 3-0-0 3 #
19. CR 416 Application of Refractories 3-1-0 4 #
20. CR 417 Unshaped Refractories 3-1-0 4 #
21. CR 420 Glass Ceramic Technology 3-1-0 4 #
22. CR 421 Glasses for Advanced Technical Application 3-1-0 4 #
23. CR 422 Ceramic Equipment Design 3-0-0 3 #
24. CR 424 Composite Materials 3-0-0 3 #
25. CR 426 Tribology of Materials 3-0-0 3 #
26. CR 433 Sensor Technology 3-0-0 3 #
27. CR 435 Functional Materials & Devices 3-0-0 3 #
28. CR 441 Electrical and Magnetic Ceramics 3-1-0 4 #
29. CR 445 Application of Phase Diagrams 3-1-0 4 #
30. CR 446 Thin Film and Coating 3-0-0 3 #
31. CR 610 Shaped and Unshaped Refractories 3-1-0 4 $
32. CR 612 Refractories for Metallurgical & Allied Processes 3-1-0 4 $
33. CR 614 Advanced Structural Ceramics 3-1-0 4 $
34. CR 617 Advances in Bio-ceramics 3-1-0 4 $
35. CR 621 Energetics 3-1-0 4 $
36. CR 624 Advanced Composites 3-1-0 4 $
37. CR 633 Advanced Electro ceramics 3-1-0 4 $
38. CR 635 High Temperature Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4 $
39. CR 636 Science of Sol-Gel Processing 3-1-0 4 $
40. CR 643 Techniques of Materials Characterization 3-1-0 4 $
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits
1 MM 606 X-Ray & Electron Microscopy 3-1-0 4
2 MM 646 Composite Materials 3-1-0 4
3 BM 321 Biomaterials 3-0-0 3
4 CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4
5 CH 427 Colloid and Interfacial Engineering 3-0-0 3
6 CS 213 Principles of Programming Language 3-0-0 3
7 CY 413 Spectroscopic Methods of Analysis 3-0-0 3
8 CY 518 Polymer Chemistry 3-1-0 4
9 CY 531 Thermodynamics and Chemical Equilibra 3-1-0 4
10 CY 536 Colloids & Surface Chemistry 3-0-0 3
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
64
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
11 CY 537 Advanced Solid State Chemistry 3-0-0 3
12 MA 522 Operations Research 3-1-0 4
13 ME 410 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
14 ME 440 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3
15 MM 256 Transport Phenomena 3-0-0 3
16 MM 356 Pollution in Metallurgical Industry & its Control 3-0-0 3
17 MM 359 Engineering Polymers & Composites 3-1-0 4
18 PH 351 Science of Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Ceramic Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1 CR 219 Introduction to Ceramics 3-0-0 3 -
2 CR 249 Materials Science & Engineering 3-0-0 3 MM
3 CR 339 Ceramics in Electronic Applications 3-0-0 3 -
4 CR 348 Introduction to Engineering Ceramics 3-0-0 3 -
5 CR 418 Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3 PH
6 CR 419 Biomatters for Artificial Implants 3-0-0 3 BM, BT
SUMMARY OF COURSES
Sub Discipline: Industrial Ceramics
CR 211 Unit Operations in Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 212 Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 219 Introduction to Ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 310 Refractories or Refractory 3-0-0 3
CR 411 Advanced Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 415 Bio-ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 416 Application of Refractories 3-1-0 4
CR 417 Unshaped Refractories 3-1-0 4
CR 418 Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3
CR 419 Biomaterials for Artificial Implants 3-0-0 3
CR 610 Shaped and Unshaped Refractories 3-1-0 4
CR 611 Principles of Ceramic Processing & Fabrication 3-1-0 4
CR 612 Refractories for Metallurgical & Allied Processes 3-1-0 4
CR 614 Advanced Structural Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 617 Advances in Bio-ceramics 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Structural and Advanced Ceramics
CR 223 Materials Thermodynamics 3-0-0 3
CR 226 Pollution & Waste Management in Ceramic Industry 3-0-0 3
CR 320 Science of Sintering 3-1-0 4
CR 322 Glass Technology 3-0-0 3
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
65
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CR 325 Computational Materials Science 3-0-0 3
CR 327 Interface Science & Sol- Gel Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 420 Glass Ceramic Technology 3-1-0 4
CR 421 Glasses for Advanced Technical Application 3-1-0 4
CR 422 Ceramic Equipment Design 3-0-0 3
CR 424 Composite Materials 3-0-0 3
CR 426 Tribology of Materials 3-0-0 3
CR 621 Energetics 3-1-0 4
CR 624 Advanced Composites 3-1-0 4
CR 426 Tribology of Materials 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Electroceramics
CR 230 Science of Ceramic Materials 3-1-0 4
CR 231 Properties of Ceramic Raw Materials 3-1-0 4
CR 330 Fuel Cell & Batteries 3-1-0 4
CR 331 Whiteware Technology 3-0-0 3
CR 333 Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow 3-1-0 4
CR 335 Instrumental Characterization 3-1-0 4
CR 336 Cement Technology 3-1-0 4
CR 433 Sensor Technology 3-0-0 3
CR 435 Functional Materials & Devices 3-0-0 3
CR 631 Structure & Properties of Engineering Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 632 Advances in Phase Diagrams 3-1-0 4
CR 633 Advanced Electro ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 635 High Temperature Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 636 Science of Sol-Gel Processing 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Nano and Bioceramics
CR 244 Introduction to Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3
CR 248 Fuels, Furnace and Stoichiometry 3-0-0 3
CR 341 Physical Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 344 Microstructural Design in Ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 346 Nanoceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 348 Introduction to Engineering Ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 441 Electrical and Magnetic Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 445 Application of Phase Diagrams 3-1-0 4
CR 446 Thin Film and Coating 3-0-0 3
CR 641 Nanomaterials 3-1-0 4
CR 643 Techniques of Materials Characterization 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
CR 271 Raw Materials Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 272 Drawing of Refractory Lining and Joints 0-0-3 2
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
66
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CR 273 Ceramic Workshop 0-0-3 2
CR 274 Ceramic Fabrication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 370 Refractories Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 371 High Temperature Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 372 Glass Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 373 Whiteware Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 374 Ceramic Product Development Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 375 Ceramic Characterization Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 376 Cement Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 377 Ceramic Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 471 Advanced Ceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 671 Instrumental Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 672 Electroceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 673 Characterization of Ceramic Products Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 674 Process Ceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
CR 271 Raw Materials Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 272 Drawing of Refractory Lining and Joints 0-0-3 2
CR 273 Ceramic Workshop 0-0-3 2
CR 274 Ceramic Fabrication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 370 RefractoriesTechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 371 High Temperature Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 372 Glass Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 373 Whiteware Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 374 Ceramic Product Development Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 375 Ceramic Characterization Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 376 Cement Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 377 Ceramic Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 391 Special Topic in Ceramic Engineering – I 3/4
CR 392 Special Topic in Ceramic Engineering – II 3/4
CR 393 Special Laboratory in Ceramic Engg – I 0-0-3 2
CR 394 Special Laboratory in Ceramic Engg – II 0-0-3 2
CR 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
CR 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
CR 471 Advanced Ceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
CR 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
CR 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
CR 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
CR 495 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
CR 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Curricula
67
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE & ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B.Tech (Computer Science and Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 ME 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
 THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 CS 211 Discrete Mathematics 3-1-0 4
3 CS 241 Analog Electronics 3-0-0 3
4 CS 243 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
68
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS and Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6 CS 271 Data Structure Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
8
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
9 CS 273 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 CS 222 Database Management Systems 3-0-0 3
3 CS 242 Computer Organization and Architecture 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
5 HS and Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6 CS 272 Database Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
8 MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
9 CS 274 VHDL Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 321 Data Communication 3-0-0 3
2 CS 331 Theory of Computation 3-1-0 4
3 CS 341 Microprocessors and Microcontrollers 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
5 HS and Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 CS 371 Data Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CS 373 Microprocessor Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 312 Systems Analysis and Design 3-0-0 3
2 CS 334 Operating Systems Design 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – III 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – IV 3-1-0 4
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
69
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS and Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 CS 372 Systems Analysis and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CS 374 Operating Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Laboratory – III 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – IV 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 421 Computer Networks 3-0-0 3
2 Professional Elective – V 3/4
3 Professional Elective – VI 3/4
4 Professional Elective – VII 3/4
5 HS and Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
6 CS 471 Network Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 CS 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
8 CS 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
9 CS 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/28
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 412 Software Engineering 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – VIII 3/4
3 Professional Elective – IX 3/4
4 HS and Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 CS 472 Software Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 CS 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 CS 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
8 CS 496 Comprehensive Viva – Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 25/27
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Computer Science & Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Computer Science & Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 616 Algorithm Design 3-1-0 4
2 CS 625 Data Mining and Data Warehousing 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective –V (B.Tech.) 3/4
4 Professional Elective –VI (B.Tech.) 3/4
5 Professional Elective –VII (B.Tech.) 3/4
6 Data Mining Laboratory– I (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
70
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7 Data Mining Laboratory – II (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
8 CS 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 CS 685 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CS 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27/30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 612 Software Engineering 3-1-0 4
2 CS 622 Design of Computer Networks 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective –VIII (B.Tech.) 3/4
4 Professional Elective – IX (B.Tech.) 3/4
5 Professional Elective –X (B.Tech.) 3/4
6 CS 670 Computer Programming Lab – II 0-0-3 2
7 CS 672 Software Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 CS 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 CS 686 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/28
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – XII (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XIII (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 CS 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CS 693 Research Project– III 0-0-0 10
6 CS 693 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-18 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CS 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
3 CS 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Information Security)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Computer Science & Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 621 Cryptographic Foundations 3-1-0 4
2 CS 631 Information Theory Coding 3-1-0 4
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
71
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3 Professional Elective –V (B. Tech.) 3/4
4 Professional Elective – VI (B. Tech.) 3/4
5 Professional Elective – VII (B. Tech.) 3/4
6 CS 676 Cryptography Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
7 CS 680 Cryptography Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 CS 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 CS 685 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 CS 691 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27/30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 629 Network Security 3-1-0 4
2 CS 626 Intrusion Detection Systems 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective –VIII (B.Tech.) 3/4
4 Professional Elective – IX (B.Tech.) 3/4
5 Professional Elective –X (B.Tech.) 3/4
6 CS 678 OS and Database Security Laboratory [Lab 3 (M.Tech.)] 0-0-3 2
7 Elective Lab – VI [Lab 4 (M.Tech.)] 0-0-3 2
8 CS 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 CS 686 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/28
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – XII (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XIII (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 CS 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 CS 693 Research Project –III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 CS 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 CS 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 CS 692 Comprehensive Viva-Voce 0-0-0 4
3 CS 695 Research Project – IV 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits Offered	to
1 CS 213 Principles of Programming Languages 3-1-0 4 #
2 CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
72
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3 CS 325 Cryptographic Foundation 3-0-0 3 @
4 CS 332 Algorithm Analysis and Design 3-1-0 4 #
5 CS 335 Computer Graphics & Multimedia 3-0-0 3 #
6 CS 336 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 @
7 CS 338 System Software 3-1-0 4 #
8 CS 375 Computer Graphics Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
9 CS 376 Digital Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
10 CS 377 Computational Statistics Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
11 CS 378 Systems Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
12 CS 379 Network Design and Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
13 CS 380 Simulation and Modeling Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
14 CS 384 Algorithm Analysis Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
15 CS 391 Special Topics in Computer Science – I 3-1-0 4 #
16 CS 392 Special Topics in Computer Science – II 3-1-0 4 #
17 CS 393 Special Laboratory in Comp. Sc. Engg– I 0-0-3 2 #
18 CS 394 Special Laboratory in Comp. Sc. Engg– II 0-0-3 2 #
19 CS 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
20 CS 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
21 CS 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4 @
22 CS 414 Software Project, Process and Quality Management 3-1-0 4
@
23 CS 416 Bioinformatics 3-1-0 4 @
24 CS 417 Graph Theory and Network Algorithms 3-0-0 3 $
25 CS 418 Real Time Systems 3-1-0 4 @
26 CS 423 Ad-hoc and Wireless Networks 3-1-0 4 @
27 CS 425 Data Warehousing and Mining 3-1-0 4 @
28 CS 427 Network Security 3-1-0 4 #
29 CS 430 Information Theory and Coding 3-1-0 4 @
30 CS 431 Compiler Design 3-0-0 3 #
31 CS 432 Distributed Operating Systems 3-1-0 4 @
32 CS 434 Image Processing 3-0-0 3 #
33 CS 435 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 #
34 CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3 $
35 CS 438 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4 @
36 CS 439 Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 $
37 CS 441 Advanced Computer Architecture 3-1-0 4 @
38 CS 443 Embedded Systems 3-1-0 4 @
39 CS 444 Cluster and Grid Computing 3-1-0 4 @
40 CS 445 Parallel Algorithms 3-1-0 4 @
41 CS 449 VLSI System Design 3-1-0 4 @
42 CS 473 Real Time Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
43 CS 474 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
44 CS 477 Soft Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
73
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
45 CS 478 Parallel Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
46 CS 479 Advanced Linux Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
47 CS 481 Compiler Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
48 CS 482 Distributed Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
49 CS 485 Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
50 CS 489 Computer Vision Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
51 CS 614 Software Project, Process and Quality Management 3-1-0 4
$
52 CS 618 Real Time Systems Design 3-1-0 4 $
53 CS 623 Ad-hoc and Wireless Networks 3-1-0 4 $
54 CS 625 Data Mining and Data Warehousing 3-1-0 4 $
55 CS 632 Distributed Operating Systems 3-1-0 4 $
56 CS 633 Game Theory 3-1-0 4 $
57 CS 634 Bioinformatics 3-1-0 4 $
58 CS 636 Image Processing 3-1-0 4 $
59 CS 637 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
60 CS 638 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4 $
61 CS 641 Advanced Computer Architecture 3-1-0 4 $
62 CS 642 Cluster and Grid Computing 3-1-0 4 $
63 CS 643 Embedded Systems 3-1-0 4 $
64 CS 645 Parallel Algorithms 3-1-0 4 $
65 CS 649 VLSI System Design 3-1-0 4 $
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1. BM 368 Bioinformatics 3-0-0 3
2. EC 314 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3
3. EC 322 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
4. EC 370 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
5. EC 411 Coding Theory and Secure Communication 3-0-0 3
6. EC 413 Optical Communication 3-1-0 4
7. EC 414 Information Theory and Coding 3-1-0 4
8. EC 415 Mobile Communication 3-1-0 4
9. EC 419 Computer Communication and Network 3-1-0 4
10. EC 421 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4
11. EC 423 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4
12. EC 442 Advanced Techniques in Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
13. EC 443 Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3
14. EC 444 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
15. EC 446 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
16. EC 448 Evolutionary Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
74
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
17. EC 471 Optical communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
18. EC 472 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
19. EC 473 High Level VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2
20. EC 475 VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2
21. EC 477 Mobile Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
22. EE 456 Robotics and Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
23. MA 517 Lie Algebra 3-1-0 4
24. MA 518 Advanced Complex Analysis 3-1-0 4
25. MA 521 Combinatorics 3-1-0 4
26. MA 523 Discrete Mathematics 3-1-0 4
27. MA 524 Statistical Methods 3-1-0 4
28. MA 525 Ergodic Theory 3-1-0 4
29. MA 527 Fractals 3-1-0 4
30. MA 529 Information Theory 3-1-0 4
31. MA 534 Geometry of Robotics 3-1-0 4
32. MA 548 Field Theory 3-1-0 4
33. MA 550 Coding Theory 3-1-0 4
34. MA 552 Fuzzy logic and Set Theory 3-1-0 4
35. MA 553 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4
36. MA 555 Stochastic Processes 3-1-0 4
37. MA 556 Number Theory 3-1-0 4
38. ME 434 Computer Graphics for CAD/CAM 3-0-0 3
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to the students of Computer Science & Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1. CS 212 Object Oriented Programming and Web Applications using C# 3-0-0 3 -
2. CS 314 Simulation and Modeling 3-0-0 3 -
3. CS 326 Data Communication and Computer Networks 3-0-0 3 EC
4. CS 327 Relational Database management Systems 3-0-0 3 -
5. CS 333 Operating Systems 3-0-0 3 -
6. CS 343 Digital Logic Design 3-0-0 3 EC, EE
7. CS 413 Advanced Programming Skills 3-0-0 3 -
8. CS 433 Algorithm Design 3-0-0 3 -
9. CS 436 Soft Computing Techniques 3-0-0 3 EC, EE
10. CS 440 Cryptographic Foundations 3-0-0 3 -
11. CS 442 Computer System Architecture 3-0-0 3 EC, EE
12. CS 446 Graph Theory 3-0-0 3 -
13. CS 448 Artificial Intelligence & Neural Network 3-0-0 3 -
14. CS 450 Multimedia & Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 -
15. CS 451 Image Processing 3-0-0 3 -
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
75
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
SUMMARY OF COURSES
Sub-Discipline: Software Engineering
CS 211 Discrete Mathematics 3-1-0 4
CS 212 Object Oriented Programming and Web Application using C# 3-0-0 3
CS 213 Principles of Programming Languages 3-1-0 4
CS 312 Systems Analysis and Design 3-0-0 3
CS 314 Simulation and Modeling 3-0-0 3
CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4
CS 412 Software Engineering 3-1-0 4
CS 413 Advanced Programming Skills 3-0-0 3
CS 414 Software Project, Process and Quality Management 3-1-0 4
CS 416 Bioinformatics 3-1-0 4
CS 417 Graph Theory and Network Algorithms 3-0-0 3
CS 418 Real Time Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 612 Software Engineering 3-1-0 4
CS 614 Software Project, Process and Quality Management 3-1-0 4
CS 616 Algorithm Design 3-1-0 4
CS 618 Real Time Systems Design 3-1-0 4
Sub-Discipline: Network and Secured Computing
CS 222 Database Management Systems 3-0-0 3
CS 321 Data Communication 3-0-0 3
CS 325 Cryptographic Foundation 3-0-0 3
CS 326 Data Communication and Computer Networks 3-0-0 3
CS 327 Relational Database Management Systems 3-0-0 3
CS 421 Computer Networks 3-0-0 3
CS 423 Ad-hoc and Wireless Networks 3-1-0 4
CS 425 Data Warehousing and Mining 3-1-0 4
CS 427 Network Security 3-1-0 4
CS 621 Cryptographic Foundations 3-1-0 4
CS 622 Design of Computer Networks 3-1-0 4
CS 623 Ad-hoc and Wireless Networks 3-1-0 4
CS 625 Data Mining and Data Warehousing 3-1-0 4
CS 629 Network Security 3-1-0 4
Sub-Discipline: Intelligent Computing and Computer Vision
CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-1-0 4
CS 331 Theory of Computation 3-1-0 4
CS 332 Algorithm Analysis and Design 3-1-0 4
CS 333 Operating Systems 3-0-0 3
CS 334 Operating Systems Design 3-0-0 3
CS 335 Computer Graphics and Multimedia 3-0-0 3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
76
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 336 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
CS 338 Systems Software 3-1-0 4
CS 430 Information Theory and Coding 3-1-0 4
CS 431 Compiler Design 3-0-0 3
CS 432 Distributed Operating Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 433 Algorithm Design 3-0-0 3
CS 434 Image Processing 3-0-0 3
CS 435 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3
CS 436 Soft Computing Techniques 3-0-0 3
CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3
CS 438 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4
CS 439 Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
CS 440 Cryptographic Foundations 3-0-0 3
CS 450 Multimedia & Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
CS 451 Image Processing 3-0-0 3
CS 631 Information Theory and Coding 3-1-0 4
CS 632 Distributed Operating Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 633 Game Theory 3-1-0 4
CS 634 Bioinformatics 3-1-0 4
CS 635 Biometric Security 3-1-0 4
CS 636 Image Processing 3-1-0 4
CS 637 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
CS 638 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4
Sub-Discipline: Computer Hardware
CS 241 Analog Electronics 3-0-0 3
CS 242 Computer Organization and Architecture 3-1-0 4
CS 243 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
CS 341 Microprocessors and Microcontrollers 3-1-0 4
CS 343 Digital Logic Design 3-0-0 3
CS 440 Cryptographic Foundations 3-0-0 3
CS 441 Advanced Computer Architecture 3-1-0 4
CS 442 Computer System Architecture 3-0-0 3
CS 443 Embedded Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 444 Cluster and Grid Computing 3-1-0 4
CS 445 Parallel Algorithms 3-1-0 4
CS 446 Graph Theory 3-0-0 3
CS448 Artificial Intelligence & Neural Networks 3-0-0 3
CS 449 VLSI System Design 3-1-0 4
CS 641 Advanced Computer Architecture 3-1-0 4
CS 642 Cluster and Grid Computing 3-1-0 4
CS 643 Embedded Systems 3-1-0 4
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
77
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 645 Parallel Algorithms 3-1-0 4
CS 649 VLSI System Design 3-1-0 4
Sub-Discipline: Laboratory Courses
CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
CS 270 Analog Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 271 Data Structure Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 272 Database Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 273 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 274 VHDL Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 371 Data Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 372 Systems Analysis and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 373 Microprocessor Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 374 Operating Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 375 Computer Graphics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 376 Digital Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 377 Computational Statistics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 378 Systems Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 379 Network Design and Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 380 Simulation & Modeling Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 384 Algorithm Analysis and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 471 Network  Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 472 Software Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 473 Real Time Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 474 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 477 Soft Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 478 Parallel Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 479 Advanced Linux Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 481 Compiler Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 482 Distributed Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 485 Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 489 Computer Vision Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 670 Computer Programming Lab – II 0-0-3 2
CS 672 Software Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 676 Cryptography Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
CS 678 OS and Database Security Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub-Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
CS 391 Special Topics in Computer Science - I 3-1-0 4
CS 392 Special Topics in Computer Science - II 3-1-0 4
CS 393 Special Laboratory in Comp. Sc. Engg - I 0-0-3 2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
78
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 394 Special Laboratory in Comp. Sc. Engg - II 0-0-3 2
CS 395 Engineering Product Development Project - I 0-0-6 4
CS 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4
CS 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
CS 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
CS 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
CS 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
CS 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
CS 496 Comprehensive Viva – Voce 0-0-0 2
CS 680 Cryptography Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
CS 685 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
CS 686 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
CS 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
CS 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
CS 691 Summer Research / Industrial Project 0-0-0 4
CS 692 Comprehensive Viva-Voce 0-0-0 4
CS 693 Research Project – III 0-0-15 10
CS 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-30 20
CS 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Curricula
79
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS & COMMUNICATION ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Electronics & Communication Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 ME 250 Thermal Engineering 3-0-0 3
3 EC 201 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
80
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
4 EC 203 Networks 3-1-0 4
5 HS and Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6 MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 ME 271 Thermal Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 EC 273 Circuit Simulation Lab 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 EE 202 Electrical Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 EC 202 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
5 HS and Open Elective – II (Management) 3-0-0 3
6 EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
7 EC 274 Analog Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EC 276 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 HS 270 Language Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 EC 301 Microprocessors 3-0-0 3
2 EC 311 Analog Communication Systems 3-1-0 4
3 EC 331 Control System Engineering 3-1-0 4
4 EC 341 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 EC 371 Microprocessors Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EC 373 Analog Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EC 375 DSP Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 EC 312 Electromagnetic Theory 3-0-0 3
2 EC 314 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – II 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – III 3-0-0 3
5 HS and Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 EC 372 Digital Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 Elective Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
81
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
8 Elective Laboratory – III 0-0-3 2
9 EC 382 Communication System Design Lab 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 24
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – IV 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – V 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI 3-1-0 4
4 HS and Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 Elective Lab – IV 0-0-3 2
6 EC 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
7 EC 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
8 EC 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – VIII 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – IX 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – X 3-1-0 4
4 HS and Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 Elective Laboratory – V 0-0-3 2
6 EC 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 EC 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
8 EC 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27
Curriculum of B. Tech (Electronics & Instrumentation Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
82
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 ME 250 Thermal Engineering 3-0-0 3
3 EC 201 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
4 EC 203 Networks 3-1-0 4
5 HS and Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6 MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 ME 271 Thermal Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 EC 273 Circuit Simulation Lab 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 EE 202 Electrical Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 EC 202 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
5 HS and Open Elective – II (Management) 3-0-0 3
6 EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
7 EC 274 Analog Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
83
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
8 EC 276 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 HS 270 Language Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 EC 301 Microprocessors 3-0-0 3
2 EC 311 Analog Communication Systems 3-1-0 4
3 EC 331 Control System Engineering 3-1-0 4
4 EC 341 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 EC 371 Microprocessors Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EC 373 Analog Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EC 375 DSP Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EC 332 Electronic Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
2 EC 334 Instrumentation Devices 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – II 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – III 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective-IV 3-0-0 3
6 EC 374 Instrumentation Device Lab 0-0-3 2
7 EC 380 Control System Lab 0-0-3 2
8 Elective Lab – II 0-0-3 2
9 Elective Lab – III 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject LTP Credits
1 Professional Elective – IV 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – V 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI 3-1-0 4
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 Elective Lab – IV 0-0-3 2
6 EC 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
7 EC 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
8 EC 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
84
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject LTP Credits
1 Professional Elective – VIII 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – IX 3-0-0 4
3 Professional Elective – X 3-0-0 4
4 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
5 Elective Lab – V 0-0-3 2
6 EC 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 EC 494 Seminar and Technical Writing - II 0-0-3 2
8 EC 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Spec: Communication & Signal Processing)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Electronics 
&Communication Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 EC 615 Mobile Communication 3-1-0 4
2 EC 651 Digital Filter Design 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – III (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Electives – IV (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Electives – V (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 Laboratory – I (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
7 Laboratory – II (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
8 EC 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
9 EC 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 EC 691 Short term industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-2-15 29
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 EC 646 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
2 EC 644 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 Laboratory – III (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
7 Laboratory – IV (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
8 EC 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
9 EC 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 29
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
85
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Electives – I (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Electives – II (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – III (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 EC 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 EC 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 EC 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 EC 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 EC 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
3 EC 695 Research Project - V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Spec: VLSI & Embedded Systems)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Electronics & 
Instrumentation Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EC 631 Analytical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
2 EC 633 PC based Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 Laboratory – I (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
7 Laboratory – II (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
8 EC 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 EC 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 EC 691 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EC 630 Industrial Electronics and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
2 EC 639 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 Laboratory – III (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
86
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7 Laboratory – IV (M.Tech.) 0-0-3 2
8 EC 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 EC 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – I (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – II (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 EC 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 EC 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 EC 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EC 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 EC 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
3 EC 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits Offered	to
1 EC 204 Semiconductor Devices 3-0-0 3 #
2 EC 232 Electrical and Electronic Measurement 3-0-0 3 #
3 EC 312 Electromagnetic Theory 3-0-0 3 #
4 EC 314 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3 #
5 EC 322 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3 #
6 EC 332 Electronic Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 #
7 EC 390 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Comm Engg – I 0-0-3 2 #
8 EC 391 Special Topic in Electronics & Instrumentation 
Engg – I
3/4 #
9 EC 392 Special Topic in Electronics & Instrumentation Engg – II
3/4 #
10 EC 393 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Instrumentation Engg – I 0-0-3 2
#
11 EC 394 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Instrumentation  Engg – II 0-0-3 2
#
12 EC 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
13 EC 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
14 EC 397 Special Topic in Electronics & Communication Engg – I 3/4 #
15 EC 398 Special Topic in Electronics & Communication Engg – II 3/4 #
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
87
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
16 EC 399 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Communication Engg – II 0-0-3 2 #
17 EC 410 Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
18 EC 411 Coding Theory and Secured Communication 3-0-0 3 #
19 EC 412 Antenna Analysis and Synthesis 3-1-0 4 #
20 EC 413 Optical Communication 3-0-0 3 #
21 EC 414 Information Theory and Coding 3-0-0 3 #
22 EC 415 Mobile Communication 3-0-0 3 #
23 EC 416 Microwave Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
24 EC 417 Satellite Communication 3-1-0 4 #
25 EC 419 Computer Communication Network 3-1-0 4 #
26 EC 421 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4 #
27 EC 423 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4 @
28 EC 424 Embedded Computing System 3-1-0 4 #
29 EC 426 Low Power VLSI Design 3-1-0 4 $
30 EC 427 VLSI Technology 3-1-0 4 $
31 EC 430 Industrial Electronics & Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 @
32 EC 433 Process Control & Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 #
33 EC 436 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 #
34 EC 438 Virtual Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 $
35 EC 439 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4 @
36 EC 442 Advanced Techniques in Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 #
37 EC 443 Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3 #
38 EC 444 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4 #
39 EC 446 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 #
40 EC 448 Evolutionary Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
41 EC 619 Computer Communication Networks 3-1-0 4 $
42 EC 620 MCS VLSI Systems 3-1-0 4 $
43 EC 623 HDL and High level VLSI 3-1-0 4 $
44 EC 640 Pattern Recognition Application 3-1-0 4 $
45 EC 644 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3 $
46 EC 653 Image Processing & Computer Vision 3-1-0 4 $
47 EC 655 Transformation Domain Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
48 EE 665 Digital Speech Processing 3-1-0 4 $
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degrees), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits
1. EE 336 Advanced Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
2. EE 355 Computer Organization and Operating Systems 3-0-0 3
3. EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling and Control 3-0-0 3
4. EE 427 Artificial Neural Network 3-0-0 3
5. EE 445 Data Communication and Networking 3-0-0 3
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
88
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
LIST OF ELECTIVE LAB COURSES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Offered	to
1 CS 471 Networks Laboratory 0-0-3 2 @
2 EC 370 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
3 EC 374 Instrumentation Device Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
4 EC 377 Electronics Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
5 EC 378 Microwave Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
6 EC 379 PCB Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
7 EC 380 Control System Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
8 EC 471 Optical communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
9 EC 472 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
10 EC 473 High Level VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
11 EC 474 DSP Processor Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
12 EC 475 VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
13 EC 476 Biomedical Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
14 EC 477 Mobile Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
15 EC 478 Antenna Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
16 EC 479 Process Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2 #
17 EC 670 Mobile Communication Lab 0-0-3 2 $
18 EC 671 Digital Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
19 EC 674 Soft Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
20 EC 675 High Level VLSI Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
21 EC 677 VLSI Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
22 EC 678 Embedded Computing System Lab 0-0-3 2 $
23 EC 773 Advanced Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
24 EC 774 Digital Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
25 EC 776 Advanced Process Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
26 EC 777 Digital Filter Design Lab 0-0-3 2 $
27 EC 778 Adaptive Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 $
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Electronics & Communication Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1 EC 200 Fundamentals of Communication Systems 3-0-0 3 EE, CS
2 EC 300 Microprocessor 3-0-0 3 EE, CS
3 EC 320 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3 EE, CS
4 EC 330 Process Control and Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 -
5 EC 340 Fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 EE, CS
6 EC 432 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 -
7 EC 440 Soft Computing Techniques 3-0-0 3 -
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
89
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
8 EC 450 Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3 -
SUMMARY OF COURSES 
Sub Discipline: Circuit and Systems
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering 3-1-0 4
EC 200 Fundamentals of Communication Systems 3-0-0 3
EC 201 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
EC 202 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
EC 203 Networks 3-1-0 4
EC 204 Semiconductor Devices 3-0-0 3
EC 300 Microprocessors 3-0-0 3
EC 301 Microprocessors 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Communications
EC 311 Analog Communication Systems 3-1-0 4
EC 312 Electromagnetic Theory 3-0-0 3
EC 314 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3
EC 316 Microwave Engineering 3-0-0 3
EC 410 Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3
EC 411 Coding Theory and Secured Communication 3-0-0 3
EC 412 Antenna Analysis and Synthesis 3-1-0 4
EC 413 Optical Communication 3-0-0 3
EC 414 Information Theory and Coding 3-0-0 3
EC 415 Mobile Communication 3-0-0 3
EC 416 Microwave Engineering 3-0-0 3
EC 417 Satellite Communication 3-1-0 4
EC 419 Computer Communication Network 3-1-0 4
EC 611 Digital Communication 3-1-0 4
EC 615 Mobile Communication 3-1-0 4
EC 619 Computer Communication Network 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: VLSI and Embedded Systems
EC 320 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
EC 322 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
EC 421 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4
EC 423 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4
EC 424 Embedded Computing System 3-1-0 4
EC 426 Low Power VLSI Design 3-1-0 4
EC 427 VLSI Technology 3-1-0 4
EC 620 MCS VLSI Systems 3-1-0 4
EC 623 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
90
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Sub Discipline: Instrumentation Systems
EC 232 Electrical and Electronic Measurement 3-0-0 3
EC 330 Process Control and Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 331 Control System Engineering 3-1-0 4
EC 332 Electronic Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 334 Instrumentation Devices 3-1-0 4
EC 336 Industrial Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 338 Virtual Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 430 Industrial Electronics and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 431 PC based Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 432 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 433 Process Control and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 434 Analytical Instrumentation 3-0-0 4
EC 436 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 437 Radar Engineering 3-0-0 3
EC 438 Virtual Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 439 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4
EC 630 Industrial Electronics and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 631 Analytical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 633 PC based Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 639 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Signal Processing
EC 340 Fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
EC 341 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 440 Soft Computing Techniques 3-0-0 3
EC 442 Advanced Techniques in Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 443 Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3
EC 444 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
EC 446 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 448 Evolutionary Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4
EC 450 Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3
EC 640 Pattern Recognition Application 3-1-0 4
EC 641 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 642 Advanced Techniques in DSP 3-1-0 4
EC 644 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
EC 646 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC651 Digital Filter Design 3-1-0 4
EC 653 Image Processing & Computer Vision 3-1-0 4
EC 655 Transform Domain Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
91
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 273 Circuit Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 274 Analog Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 276 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 370 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 371 Microprocessors Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 372 Digital Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 373 Analog Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 374 Instrumentation Device Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 375 DSP Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 377 Electronics Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 378 Microwave Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 379 PCB Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 380 Control System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 382 Communication system Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 471 Optical communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 472 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 473 High Level VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 474 DSP Processor Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 475 VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 476 Biomedical Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 477 Mobile Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 478 Antenna Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 479 Process Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 670 Mobile Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 671 Digital Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 674 Soft Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 675 High Level VLSI Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 677 VLSI Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 678 Embedded Computing System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 773 Advanced Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 774 Digital Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 776 Advanced Process Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 777 Digital Filter Design Lab 0-0-3 2
EC 778 Adaptive Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
EC 390 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Communication Engg – I 0-0-3 2
EC 391 Special Topic in Electronics & Instrumentation Engg – I 3/4
EC 392 Special Topic in Electronics & Instrumentation Engg – II 3/4
EC 393 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Instrumentation Engg – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
92
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 394 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Instrumentation Engg – II 0-0-3 2
EC 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
EC 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
EC 397 Special Topic in Electronics & Communication  Engg - I 3/4
EC 398 Special Topic in Electronics & Communication  Engg – II 3/4
EC 399 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Communication Engg - II 0-0-3 2
EC 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
EC 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
EC 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
EC 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
EC 495 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-3 2
EC 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
EC 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
EC 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
EC 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
EC 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
EC 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
EC 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
EC 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Curricula
93
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B.Tech (Electrical Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub.Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environment and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub.Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Engineering
5
CE 130 Environment and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 203 Electrical Machines - I 3-1-0 4
2 EE 241 Network Theory 3-1-0 4
3 EE 243 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
94
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
4 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6 EE 271 Network Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EE 277 Electrical Machines Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
9
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
TOTAL 27
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 204 Electro Magnetic Fields 3-1-0 4
2 EE 240 Measurement and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
3 EE 242 Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 3-1-0 4
4 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6 EE 272 Measurement Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 274 Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
9 ME 272 Mechanical Engg. Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 27
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 301 Electrical Machines – II 3-1-0 4
2 EE 311 Transmission & Distribution of Electric Power 3-1-0 4
3 EE 341 Embedded Systems 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 EE 371 Communication System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 373 Electrical Machines Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 EE 375 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 EE 377 Electrical Machine Design 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 322 Control System – I 3-1-0 4
2 EE 312 Switch Gear & Protective Devices 3-1-0 4
3 EE 324 Power Electronics 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
95
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 EE 370 Power Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 372 Control System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EE 374 Electrical Systems Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 EE 376 Power Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – III 3/4
2 Professional Elective – IV 3/4
3 Professional Elective – V 3/4
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 EE 471 Electric Drives Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 EE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
7 EE 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
8 EE 495 Short Term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 22/25
EIGHT SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – VI 3/4
2 Professional Elective – VII 3/4
3 Professional Elective – VIII 3/4
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 EE 472 Control & Electrical System Design 0-0-3 2
6 EE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 EE 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
8 EE 496 Comprehensive Viva-Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 24/27
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Control & Automation)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Electrical Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 625 Systems and Control Theory 3-1-0 4
2 EE 629 Digital Control 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
6 EE 673 Modeling and Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 679 Control Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 EE 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
96
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
10 EE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-5-12 30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 628 Industrial Process Automation 3-1-0 4
2 EE 636 System Identification and Adaptive Control 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 EE 670 Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 674 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 EE 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective –IX (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – X (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 EE 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
6 EE 693 Research Project – III 0-0-0 10
7 EE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 EE 692 Comprehensive Viva-Voce 0-0-0 4
3 EE 695 Research Project Work – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Electronic Systems & Communication)
[1st Semester to 6th Semester is common to B.Tech. Electrical Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 641 Digital Communication 3-1-0 4
2 EE 643 Microwave & Antenna Systems 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
8 EE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
97
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
9 EE 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
6 EE 671 Microwave & Antenna Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 673 Modeling & Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-5-12 30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 642 Wireless Communication 3-1-0 4
2 EE 654 Satellite Communication 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
9 EE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
8 EE 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
6 EE 672 Advanced Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 EE 674 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective –IX (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – X (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 EE 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 EE 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 EE 694 Research Project Work – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 EE 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
3 EE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 26
Curriculum of M.Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Power Control & Drives)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Electrial Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 611 Machine Analysis 3-1-0 4
2 EE 621 Power Electronic Converters & Machine Drives 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
98
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
4 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
6 EE 675 Power Electronics and Drives Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
7 EE 677 Machines and Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 EE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 EE 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 EE 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-3-12 28
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 612 Advanced Machine Drives 3-1-0 4
2 EE 622 Advanced Power Electronic Converters 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 EE 676 Power Electronics and Drives Lab – II 0-0-3 2
7 EE 678 Power Electronics and Drives Simulation Lab 0-0-3 2
8 EE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 EE 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – IX (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – X (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XI (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 EE 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 EE 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 EE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-18 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 EE 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 EE 692 Comprehensive Viva –Voce 0-0-0 4
3 EE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits Offered	to
1 EE 336 Advanced Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 @
2 EE 345 Communication Systems Principles 3-0-0 3 @
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
99
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3 EE 355 Computer Organization & Operating Systems 3-0-0 3 @
4 EE 356 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 @
5 EE 391 Special Topic in Electrical Engineering – I 3/4 @
6 EE 392 Special Topic in Electrical Engineering – II 3/4 @
7 EE 393 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – I 0-0-3 2 @
8 EE 394 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – II 0-0-3 2 @
9 EE 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 @
10 EE 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 @
11 EE 401 Power System Operation & Control 3-1-0 4 #
12 EE 404 Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 3 #
13 EE 405 Utilization of Electrical Energy & Drives 3-1-0 4 #
14 EE 406 High Voltage DC Transmission 3-0-0 3 #
15 EE 407 Electric Drives 3-1-0 4 #
16 EE 408 Electromagnetic Theory & Application 3-0-0 3 @
17 EE 416 Power System Transients 3-0-0 3 #
18 EE 417 High Voltage Engineering 3-1-0 4 #
19 EE 425 Control System – II 3-1-0 4 #
20 EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling & Control 3-0-0 3 #
21 EE 427 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4 #
22 EE 429 Advanced Control Theory 3-0-0 3 @
23 EE 436 Adaptive Control and System Identification 3-0-0 3 #
24 EE 438 Industrial Automation & Control 3-0-0 3 #
25 EE 445 Data Communication & Networks 3-1-0 4 #
26 EE 454 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3 #
27 EE 455 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
28 EE 456 Robotics and Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 #
29 EE 604 Flexible AC Transmission Systems 3-1-0 4 $
30 EE 605 Power Plant Control and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 $
31 EE 606 Transient in Power Systems 3-1-0 4 $
32 EE 607 Extra High Voltage Transmission 3-1-0 4 $
33 EE 615 Power System Dynamics 3-1-0 4 $
34 EE 616 Electrical Energy Systems 3-1-0 4 $
35 EE 621 Power Electronics Converters and Machine Drives 3-1-0 4 $
36 EE 623 Control of Electric Drives 3-1-0 4 $
37 EE 624 Distributed Control & Communication Networks 3-1-0 4 $
38 EE 625 Systems and Control Theory 3-1-0 4 $
39 EE 626 Digital Control 3-1-0 4 $
40 EE 627 Optimal Control 3-1-0 4 $
41 EE 629 Digital Control 3-1-0 4 $
42 EE 630 Robust Control. 3-1-0 4 $
43 EE 631 Industrial Electronics 3-1-0 4 $
44 EE 633 Power Plant Control and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 $
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
100
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
45 EE 634 Robotics and Automation 3-1-0 4 $
46 EE 636 System Identification and Adaptive Control 3-1-0 4 $
47 EE 637 Soft Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4 $
48 EE 638 Intelligent Control 3-1-0 4 $
49 EE 641 Digital Communication 3-1-0 4 $
50 EE 643 Microwave & Antenna Systems 3-1-0 4 $
51 EE 645 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
52 EE 646 Estimation of Signal and Systems 3-1-0 4 $
53 EE 647 Wireless Networks & Protocols 3-1-0 4 $
54 EE 649 Wireless Sensor Networks 3-1-0 4 $
55 EE 651 Digital Speech Processing 3-1-0 4 $
56 EE 652 Ad-Hoc Networks 3-1-0 4 $
57 EE 653  Digital Image Processing 3-1-0 4 $
58 EE 654 Satellite Communication 3-1-0 4 $
59 EE 655 VLSI Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
60 EE 657 Optical communication 3-1-0 4 $
61 EE 659 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4 $
62 EE 661 Advanced Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
63 EE 663 Microprocessor and Microcontroller Systems 3-1-0 4 $
64 EE 664 Embedded Computing Systems 3-1-0 4 $
65 EE 667 Microelectronic Devices and Circuits 3-1-0 4 $
66 EE 668 Instrumentation and Sensors 3-1-0 4 $
67 EE 681 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering – I 3/4 $
68 EE 682 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering – II 3/4 $
69 EE 683 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – I 0-0-3 2 $
70 EE 684 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering –II 0-0-3 2 $
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES OFFERED BY OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits Offered	to
1 BM 223 Bioelectricity 3-1-0 4 $
2 BM 388 Biosensors and Diagnostics  3-0-0 3 $
3 BM 433 Medical Embedded system 3-0-0 3 #
4 CE 316 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 #
5 CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4 #
6 CH 224 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3 @
7 CH 331 Process Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 $
8 CR 335 Instrumental Characterization 3-1-0 4 @
9 CR 346 Nano ceramics 3-0-0 3 @
10 CR 433 Sensor Technology 3-0-0 3 #
11 CR 441 Electrical and Magnetic Ceramics 3-1-0 4 @
12 CS 213 Principles of Programming Languages 3-1-0 4 #
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
101
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
13 CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
14 CS 335 Computer Graphics & Multimedia 3-1-0 4 #
15 CS 425 Network Security 3-1-0 4 $
16 CS 427 Network Security 3-1-0 4 @
17 CS 439 Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 #
18 CS 633 Distributed Operating Systems 3-1-0 4 $
19 CS 634 Bioinformatics 3-1-0 4 $
20 CS 638 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4 $
21 CS 645 Parallel Algorithms 3-1-0 4 $
22 CS 649 VLSI System Design 3-1-0 4 $
23 EC 336 Industrial Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 #
24 EC 433 Process Control Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 #
25 EC 436 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 @
26 EC 623 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4 $
27 EC 640 Pattern Recognition Application 3-1-0 4 $
28 MA 512 Fourier Analysis 3-1-0 4 #
29 MA 522 Operation Research 3-1-0 4 #
30 MA 523 Discrete Mathematics 3-1-0 4 #
31 MA 524 Statistical Methods 3-1-0 4 #
32 MA 527 Fractals 3-1-0 4 #
33 MA 551 Numerical Analysis 3-1-0 4 #
34 MA 552 Fuzzy logic and Set Theory 3-1-0 4 #
35 MA 553 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
36 MA 554 Graph Theory 3-1-0 4 #
37 ME 414 Mechatronics 3-0-0 3 #
38 ME 416 Robotics 3-0-0 3 #
39 ME 418 Material Handling 3-0-0 3 #
40 ME 430 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3 #
41 ME 451 Power Plant Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
42 MM 359 Engineering Polymers and Composites 3-1-0 4 #
43 MN 325 Ground Control Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 #
44 PH 554 Physics of Thin Film Technology 3-1-0 4 @
45 PH 645 Non-linear dynamics, Chaos and its recent applications 3-1-0 4
#
46 PH 646 Synchronization and its recent applications in  Chaotic systems 3-1-0 4
#
47 PH 651 Dielectric & Magnetic Properties of Materials 3-1-0 4 #
48 PH 652 Electronics Ceramics 3-1-0 4 #
49 PH 652 Electronics Ceramics 3-1-0 4
50 PH 654 Physics of Material Synthesis and Characterization 3-1-0 4 #
51 PH 655 Physics of Thin film Technology 3-1-0 4 $
52 PH 663 Nano Structure of Materials #
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
102
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVE
(Normally not offered to students of Electrical Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1. EE 208 Advanced Electrical Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
2. EE 209 Network Analysis 3-0-0 3 CE, CR, MN, ME, MM, CH
3. EE 308 Utilization of Electrical Energy 3-0-0 3 CE, CR, BM
4. EE 309 Power Generation Systems 3-0-0 3 CE, CR, MN, MM, CS
5. EE 428 Electrical Drives Concepts & Applications 3-0-0 3 CE, CR, MN, MM, CH
6. EE 431 Control System Engineering 3-0-0 3 CE, CR
SUMMARY OF COURSES (M.Tech Dual Degree)
Sub Discipline:         Power System
EE 101 Basic Electrical Technology 3-1-0 4
EE 204 Electro Magnetic Fields 3-1-0 4
EE 208 Electrical Technology & Applications 3-0-0 3
EE 209 Network Analysis 3-0-0 3
EE 306 Electromagnetic Fields 3-0-0 3
EE 308 Utilization of Electrical Energy 3-0-0 3
EE 309 Power Generation Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 311 Transmission & Distribution of Electric Power 3-1-0 4
EE 312 Switch Gear & Protective Devices 3-1-0 4
EE 401 Power System Operation & Control 3-1-0 4
EE 404 Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 405 Utilization of Electrical Energy & Drives 3-1-0 4
EE 406 High Voltage DC Transmission 3-0-0 3
EE 416 Power System Transients 3-0-0 3
EE 417 High Voltage Engineering 3-1-0 4
EE 604 Flexible AC Transmission Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 605 Power Plant Control and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EE 606 Transient in Power Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 607 Extra High Voltage Transmission 3-1-0 4
EE 615 Power System Dynamics 3-1-0 4
EE 616 Electrical Energy Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 633 Power Plant Control and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Power Electronics, Machines and Drives
EE 203 Electrical Machines - I 3-1-0 4
EE 301 Electrical Machines - II 3-1-0 4
EE 324 Electric Devices 3-1-0 4
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
103
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 407 Renewable Energy Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 428 Electrical Drives 3-1-0 4
EE 611 Machine Analysis 3-1-0 4
EE 612 Advanced Machine Drives 3-1-0 4
EE 621 Power Electronic Converters & Machine Drives 3-1-0 4
EE 622 Advanced Power Electronic Converters 3-1-0 4
EE 631 Industrial Electronics 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Control and Automation
EE 322 Control System – I 3-1-0 4
EE 425 Control System – II 3-1-0 4
EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling & Control 3-0-0 3
EE 427 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
EE 436 Adaptive Control and System Identification 3-0-0 3
EE 438 Industrial Automation & Control 3-0-0 3
EE 625 Systems and Control Theory 3-1-0 4
EE 628 Industrial Process Automation 3-1-0 4
EE 629 Digital Control 3-1-0 4
EE 630 Robust Control. 3-1-0 4
EE 634 Robotics and Automation 3-1-0 4
EE 636 System Identification and Adaptive Control 3-1-0 4
EE 637 Soft Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4
EE 638 Intelligent Control 3-1-0 4
EE 646 Estimation of Signal and Systems 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline:            Communication and Signal Processing
EE 240 Measurement and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EE 241 Network Theory 3-1-0 4
EE 242 Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 3-1-0 4
EE 243 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
EE 244 Signals & Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 336 Advanced Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EE 341 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 345 Communication Systems Principles 3-0-0 3
EE 355 Computer Organization & Operating Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 356 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
EE 445 Data Communication & Networks 3-1-0 4
EE 454 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3
EE 455 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 456 Robotics & Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
EE 641 Digital Communication 3-1-0 4
EE 642 Wireless Communication 3-1-0 4
EE 643 Microwave & Antenna Systems 3-1-0 4
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
104
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 645 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 647 Wireless Networks & Protocols 3-1-0 4
EE 649 Wireless Sensor Networks 3-1-0 4
EE 651 Digital Speech Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 652 Ad-Hoc Networks 3-1-0 4
EE 653  Digital Image Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 654 Satellite Communication 3-1-0 4
EE 655 VLSI Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 657 Optical communication 3-1-0 4
EE 659 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4
EE 661 Advanced Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 663 Microprocessor and Microcontroller Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 664 Embedded Computing Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 667 Microelectronic Devices and Circuits 3-1-0 4
EE 668 Instrumentation and Sensors 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline:  Control and Automation
EE 322 Control System – I 3-1-0 4
EE 425 Control System – II 3-1-0 4
EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling & Control 3-0-0 3
EE 427 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
EE 429 Advanced Control Theory 3-1-0 4
EE 436 Adaptive Control and System Identification 3-0-0 3
EE438 Industrial	Automation	&	Control 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 271 Network Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 272 Measurement Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 274 Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 277 Electrical Machines Laboratory-I 0-0-3 2
EE 370 Power Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 371 Communication System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 372 Control System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 373 Electrical Machines Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
EE 374 Electrical System Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 375 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 376 Power System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 377 Electrical Machine Design 0-0-3 2
EE 471 Electrical Drives Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 472 Control & Electrical System Design 0-0-3 2
EE 671 Microwave & Antenna Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
105
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 672 Advanced Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 673 Modeling & Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 674 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 675 Power Electronics and Drives Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
EE 676 Power Electronics and Drives Lab – II 0-0-3 2
EE 677 Machines and Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 678 Power Electronics and Drives Simulation Lab 0-0-3 2
EE 679 Control Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
EE 391 Special Topic in Electrical Engineering – I ¾
EE 392 Special Topic in Electrical Engineering – II ¾
EE 393 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
EE 394 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – II 0-0-3 2
EE 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
EE 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
EE 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
EE 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
EE 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
EE 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
EE 495 Short Term Industrial/ Research Experience 0-0-3 2
EE 681 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering – I 3/4
EE 682 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering – II 3/4
EE 683 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
EE 684 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering –II 0-0-3 2
EE 687 Seminar & Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
EE 688 Seminar & Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
EE 691 Short Term Industrial/ Research Project 0-0-0 4
EE 692 Comprehensive Viva –Voce 0-0-0 4
EE 693 Research Project – III 0-0-0 10
EE 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
EE 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
Curriculum of B.Tech (Industrial Design)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
106
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Department of Electrical Engineering
Curricula
107
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics-I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics-I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory-I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice-I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity-I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics-II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics-II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory-II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice - II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity - II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics–III 3-1-0 4
2 ME 213 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4
3 ME 250 Thermal Engineering 3-0-0 4
4 ID 221 Mechanisms and Mechines 3-1-0 4
5 HS & Open Elective-I 3-0-0 3
6
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
Department of Industrial Design
Curricula
108
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
8 CE 271 Mechanics of Solids Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 ME 210 Design of Machine Elements 3-1-0 4
3 ID 222 Geometric and Solid Modeling 3-1-0 4
4 ID 232 Art and Aesthetic Design 3-1-0 4
HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
5
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
6
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
7 ME 280 Machine Element Design Practice -I 0-0-3 2
8 ID 272 Design workshop – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 27
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 ID 311 Product Design - I 3-1-0 4
2 ID 341 Manufacturing Processes 3-1-0 4
3 ID 351 Industrial Mechatronics 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 WS 371 Advanced Machining Practice 0-0-3 2
7 ID 371 Art,Design & Aesthetic Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 ID 373 Product Design Laboratory -I 0-0-3 2
9 ID 381 Industrial Design Project –I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 ID 312 Product Design - II 3-1-0 4
2 MM 314 Heat Treatment of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – III 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 ID 372 Design workshop - II 0-0-3 2
7 ID 374 Product Design Laboratory -II 0-0-3 2
8 ID 376 Creative Automation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 ID 382 Industrial Design Project –II 0-0-3 2
Department of Industrial Design
Curricula
109
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
TOTAL 25
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 ID 431 Ergonomics in Design 3-1-0 4
2 ID 441 Computer -Aided Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective –IV 3-0-0 3
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 ID 471 Ergonomics Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 ID 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
7 ID 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
8 ID 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 24
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Elective – V 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – VI 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VII 3-0-0 3
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 ID 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
6 ID 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
7 ID 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 24
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 ID 321 Thermal Considerations in Design 3-0-0 3
2 ID 333 Interaction Design snd Usability Engineering 3-0-0 3
3 ID 344 Design of Production Tooling 3-0-0 3
4 ID 352 Industrial Robotics 3-0-0 3
5 ID 354 Instrumentation and Control 3-0-0 3
6 ID 391 Special Topics in Industrial Design -- I 3/4
7 ID 392 Special Topics in Industrial Design -- II 3/4
8 ID 393 Special Laboratory in Industrial Design -- I 0-0-6 4
9 ID 394 Special Laboratory in Industrial Design – II 0-0-6 4
10 ID 432 System Design for Sustainability 3-1-0 4
11 ID 433 Visual Design 3-0-0 3
12 ID 434 Photo Communication 3-0-0 3
13 ID 442 Rapid Product Development Technologies 3-1-0 4
14 ID 444 Design for Manufacture and Assembly 3-1-0 4
15 ID 451 Industrial Automation 3-0-0 3
Department of Industrial Design
Curricula
110
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits
1 BM 320 Bio-Ceramic 3-0-0 3
2 BM 321 Bio-Materials 3-0-0 3
3 BM 322 Bio-Mechanics 3-0-0 3
4 BM 421 Bio-Composites 3-0-0 3
5 BM 423 Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
6 ME 333 Process Control and Assurance Science 3-0-0 3
7 ME 435 Concurrent Engineering 3-0-0 3
LIST OF OPEN ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1 ID 200 Design and Society 3-0-0 3 -
2 ID 220 Fundamentals of Computer Graphics and Solid Modeling 3-0-0 3 -
3 ID 230 Environmental and Experimental Design 3-0-0 3 -
4 ID 310 Value Engineering 3-0-0 3 -
5 ID 350 Robotics and Automation 3-0-0 3 -
6 ID 410 Project Management 3-0-0 3 -
7 ID 440 Rapid Prototyping 3-0-0 3 -
SUMMARY OF COURSES
Sub Discipline: Product Design
ID 310 Value Engineering 3-0-0 3
ID 311 Product Design - I 3-1-0 4
ID 312 Product Design - II 3-1-0 4
ID 410 Project Management 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Design and Analysis
ID220 Fundamentals of Computer Graphics and Solid Modeling 3-0-0 3
ID 221 Mechanism of Machines 3-1-0 4
ID 222 Geometric and Solid Modeling 3-1-0 4
ID 321 Thermal Considerations in Design 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Ergonomics and Aesthetic Design
ID 200 Design and Society 3-0-0 3
ID 230 Environmental and Experimental Design 3-0-0 3
ID 232 Art and Aesthetic Design 3-1-0 4
ID 333 Interaction Design and Usability Engineering 3-0-0 3
ID 431 Ergonomics in Design 3-1-0 4
ID 432 System Design for Sustainability 3-0-0 3
Department of Industrial Design
Curricula
111
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ID 433 Visual Design 3-0-0 3
ID 434 Photo Communication 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: Manufacturing
ID 341 Manufacturing Process 3-1-0 4
ID 344 Design of Production Tooling 3-0-0 3
ID 440 Rapid Prototyping 3-1-0 4
ID 441 Computer Aided Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
ID 442 Rapid Product Development Technologies 3-1-0 4
ID 444 Design for Manufacture and Assembly 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Automation & Control
ID 350 Robotics and Automation 3-0-0 3
ID 351 Industrial Mechatronics 3-1-0 4
ID 352 Industrial Robotics 3-0-0 3
ID 354 Insrumentation and Control 3-0-0 3
ID 451 Industrial Automation 3-0-0 3
Sub Discipline: LaboratoryCourses
ID 272 Design Workshop-I 0-0-3 2
ID 371 Art, Design & Aesthetic Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ID 372 Design workshop - II 0-0-3 2
ID 373 Product Design Laboratory - I 0-0-3 2
ID 374 Product Design Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
ID 376 Creative Automation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ID 471 Ergonomics Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar & Special Courses
ID 381 Industrial Design Project - I 0-0-3 2
ID 382 Industrial Design Project - II 0-0-3 2
ID 391 Special Topic in IndustrialDesign–I 3/4
ID 392 Special Topic in Industrial Design-II 3/4
ID 393 Special Laboratory in Industrial Design-  I 0-0-6 4
ID 394 Special Laboratory in Industrial Design - II 0-0-6 4
ID 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
ID 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
ID 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
ID 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
ID 495 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
ID 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
Department of Industrial Design
Curricula
112
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Department of Industrial Design
1 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD PROCESS ENGINEERING 
Vision 
To addresses the modern issues related to food processing and implement changes that incorporate 
cutting-edge research and technology to meet the challenges of today and the future food industry as 
well as to invigorate the program, and the profession at large, by redefining the practice of food process 
engineering for modern society. 
Mission 
I. To execute basic and applied research that advances the state of the profession. 
II. To educate the next generation of academic and industry leaders, and preparation of students 
for successful careers in professional practice.  
III. To contribute in selected services to institutions and government for assessing the technical re-
sources and promoting solutions to meet significant societal problems related to food security, 
safety and processing.  
 
B. Tech (Food Process Engineering) 
Program Educational Objectives (PEOs)   
1. To develop knowledge and understanding about systems in the production, processing and con-
sumption of food and an appreciation of their impact on society.  
 2. To impart knowledge about the nature of food and human nutrition and an appreciation of the im-
portance of food to health.  
 3. To build up skills in researching, analyzing and communicating issues related to food preservation, 
processing, storage and packaging. 
 4. To enhance skills in experimenting with and development of food products and equipment by apply-
ing theoretical concepts.  
 5. To develop skills in designing, implementing and evaluating solutions to food industry situations.  
 
Program Outcomes (POs)    
1. Students will develop ability to identify and discuss a range of historical and contemporary factors 
which influence the consumption of particular food product as well as accounts for individual and 
group food selection patterns in terms of physiological, psychological, social and economic factors.  
2. Students will develop ability to explain and understand manufacturing processes and technologies 
used in the production of food products, examine the nature and extent of the food industry, justi-
2 
 
fy processes of food product manufacturing and equipment design in terms of market, technologi-
cal and environmental considerations.  
3. Students will develop ability to evaluate the impact of the good manufacturing practices within the 
Indian food industry on the individual, society and environment. 
4. Students will develop ability to explain the role of nutrients in human health and develop, prepare 
and present food products using modern processing, preservation and packaging techniques. 
5. Students will develop ability to evaluate the relationship between food production, consumption, 
promotion and health. 
6. Students will develop skills in regulating food product manufacturing process, storage, distribution, 
sale and import to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. 
7. Students will be able to provide scientific advice and technical support to food industry covered 
under Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, US FDA regulations and other related food 
standards. 
Course Outcomes (COs): 
a) An ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science and engineering in food processing. 
b) An ability to design and conduct experiments, analyze and interpret data as well as prediction of 
data using mathematical modelling   
c) An ability to design a food product, system, component, or process to meet desired needs of 
food industry 
d) An ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams.  
e) An ability to identify, formulate and solve food engineering and food safety problems.  
f) An understanding of professional and ethical responsibilities.  
g) An ability to communicate effectively when practicing food engineering profession. 
h) Understanding the impact of engineering solutions in a global/societal context.  
i) Recognition of the need for and an ability to engage in life-long learning. 
j) Knowledge of contemporary issues of food processing and food safety. 
k) An ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for food engi-
neering practice.  
l) Ability to provide service to food industry for developing/ operating their manufacturing system 
in compliance with national and international food standards and regulations. 
4 
 
 
  DEPARTMENT OF FOOD PROCESS ENGINEERING 
  Curriculum of B.Tech. (Food Process Engineering) 
 FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES) 
 
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4 
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4 
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4 
4 EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology 
OR 3-1-0 4 
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering 
5 CE 100 Engineering Mechanics 
OR 3-1-0 4 
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering 
6 PH 170 Physics Laboratory 
OR 0-0-3 2 
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory 
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2 
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2 
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2 
10   Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2 
  Total  30 
 
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES) 
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4 
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4 
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-1-0 4 
4 
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering 
OR 
3-1-0 
4 
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology 3-1-0 
5 
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering 
OR 
3-1-0 
4 
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics 3-1-0 
6 
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory 
OR 0-0-3 2 
PH 170 Physics Laboratory 
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2 
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2 
9 ME 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2 
10   Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2 
Total  30 
 
5 
 
 
THIRD SEMESTER 
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4 
2 FP 201 Food Microbiology 3-1-0 4 
3 CH 213 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 
4 CH 215 Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4 
5  HS & Open Elective – I  3-0-0 3 
6 
MA 270 Numerical Methods  Laboratory 
OR 0-0-3 2 
HS 270 Language Laboratory 
7 
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory - I 
OR 0-0-3 2 
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 
8 FP 271 
Engineering Properties of Biological Materials 
Laboratory  
 1-0-2 2 
9 FP 273 Food Microbiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
Total  27 
 
FOURTH SEMESTER  
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4 
2 FP 210  Food Chemistry  3-1-0 4 
3 FP 212 Processing of Grains and Horticultural Products 3-1-0 4 
4 FP 224 Unit Operations in Food Processing 3-1-0 4 
5  HS & Open Elective – II  3-0-0 3 
 
6 
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory 
OR 0-0-3 2 
HS 270 Language Laboratory 
 
7 
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory- I 
OR 0-0-3 2 
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 
8 FP 272 Food Chemistry Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
9 FP 274 Food Grains Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
  Total  27 
 
 
6 
 
FIFTH SEMESTER  
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1 FP 331 Heat and Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4 
2 FP 333 Dairy Process Engineering   3-1-0 4 
3 FP 335 Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineering 3-1-0 4 
4 FP 337 Food Packaging and Storage Engineering  3-1-0 4 
5   HS & Open Elective – III   3-0-0 3 
6 FP 371 Heat and Mass Transfer Laboratory   0-0-3 2 
7 FP 373 Unit Operations in Food Processing Laboratory  0-0-3 2 
8 FP 375 Horticultural Processing Laboratory  0-0-3 2 
9 FP 377 Dairy Process Engineering Laboratory   0-0-3 2 
    Total  27 
 
SIXTH SEMESTER  
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1  Professional Elective – I  3-0-0 3 
2  Professional Elective –II  3-0-0 3 
3  Professional Elective –III 3-0-0 3 
4  Professional Elective – IV 3-0-0 3 
5  HS & Open Elective – IV  3-0-0 3 
6 FP 372 Food Process Equipment and Plant Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
7 FP374 Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
8 FP 376 Food Packaging and Storage Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
9 FP 378 Food Analysis and Quality Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
10 FP 390 Research Practice 0-0-0 2 
11 CH272 Fluid Dynamics Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2 
    Total  27 
 
SEVENTH SEMESTER  
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1  Professional Elective – V 3-0-0 3 
2  Professional Elective – VI 3-0-0 3 
3  Professional Elective – VII 3-0-0 3 
4  HS & Open Elective – V  3-0-0 3 
5 FP 471 Livestock, Fish and Marine Products Processing Laboratory  1-0-2 2 
6 FP 473 Food Process Modeling and Simulation Laboratory   1-0-2 2 
7 
 
7 FP 490 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2 
8 FP 493 Research Project – I  0-0-6 4 
9 FP 495 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2 
    Total  24 
 
EIGHTH SEMESTER  
 
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits 
1  Professional Elective – VIII 3-0-0 3 
2  Professional Elective – IX 3-0-0 3 
3  Professional Elective – X  3-0-0 3 
4  HS & Open Elective – VI  3-0-0 3 
5 FP 472 Experimental Design and Statistical Methods Laboratory 1-0-2 2 
6 FP 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2 
7 FP 496 Research Project – II  0-0-9 6 
8 FP 498 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2 
    Total  24 
 
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
     
Sr. No. Sub. 
Code Subject L-T-P Credits 
1.  FP 312 Processing of Spices, Condiments and Plantation crops 3-0-0 3 
2.  FP 332 Food Process Equipment and Plant Design 3-0-0 3 
3.  FP 334 Biochemistry and  Human Nutrition  3-0-0 3 
4.  FP 352 Emerging Technologies in Food Processing 3-0-0 3 
5.  FP 336 Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals 3-0-0 3 
6.  FP 338 Processing of Livestock, Fish and Marine Products 3-0-0 3 
7.  FP 323 Beverage Technology 3-0-0 3 
8.  FP 325 Food Analysis and Quality Control 3-0-0 3 
9.  FP 326 Food Product Development 3-0-0 3 
10.  FP 328 Food Industry by-product and Waste Management 3-0-0 3 
11.  FP 412 Food Laws, Regulations & Certifications   3-0-0 3 
12.  FP 414 Food Ingredients and Additives 3-0-0 3 
13.  FP 421 Bakery and Confectionary Technology 3-0-0 3 
14.  FP 424 IT Applications in Food Industry 3-0-0 3 
15.  FP 427 Food Business Management & Entrepreneurship Development 3-0-0 3 
16.  FP 430 Separation Techniques in Food Engineering 3-0-0 3 
17.  FP 433 Process Control and Instrumentation in Food Industry 3-0-0 3 
18.  FP 434 Food Process Modeling and Simulation 3-0-0 3 
8 
 
19.  FP 491 Special Topic in Food Engineering – I 3-0-0 3 
20.  FP 492 Special Topic in Food Engineering – II 3-0-0 3 
 
 
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sl. No. Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits 
1 CH 321 Fundamentals of Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3 
2 CH 323 Energy Conservation and Renewable sources of Energy 3-0-0 3 
3 PH 351 Science of Nano-materials 3-0-0 3 
4 CY 431 Chemistry of Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3 
5 CY 432 Introduction to Nanobiotechnology 3-0-0 3 
6 BM 452 Fermentation Technology 3-0-0 3 
7 MM 449 Nanostructured Materials 3-0-0 3 
8 SM 504 Production and Operations Management 3-0-0 3 
9 LS 542 Basic Biotechnology 3-0-0 3 
10 SM 616 Retail Management 3-0-0 3 
11 CH 625 Bioprocess Engineering 3-0-0 3 
12 BM 653 Bioprocess and Plant Design 3-0-0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Curricula
113
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Mechanical Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 ME 211 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery 3-1-0 4
3 ME 213 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4
4 ME 251 Engineering Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
114
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6
EE 270 
EC 270
Electrical Engineering Laboratory - I 
Basic Electronics Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
7 MA 270 HS 270
Numerical Methods Laboratory 
Language Laboratory  OR 0-0-3 2
8 CE 271 Mechanics of Solids Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 202 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 EE 202 Electrical Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 ME 210 Design of Machine Elements 3-1-0 4
4 ME 230 Primary Production Processes 3-1-0 4
5 HS &Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6 EC 270 EE 270
Basic Electronics Laboratory 
Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I OR 0-0-3 2
7
MA 270 
HS 270
Numerical Methods Laboratory 
Language Laboratory OR 0-0-3 2
8 WS 270 Advanced Manufacturing Practice – I 0-0-3 2
9 ME 280 Machine Element Design Practice – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 ME 331 Metal Machining and Automation 3-1-0 4
2 ME 351 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
5 HS &Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 WS 371 Advanced Manufacturing Practice – II 0-0-3 2
7 ME 373 Production Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 ME 375 Internal Combustion Engines and Automobile Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 ME 381 Machine Element Design Practice – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 ME 330 Metal Cutting and Tool Design 3-1-0 4
2 ME 350 Heat Transfer 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
5 HS &Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
115
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 ME 370 Heat Transfer and Refrigeration Lab. 0-0-3 2
7 ME 372 Fluid Mechanics & Fluid Machines Lab. 0-0-3 2
8 ME 374 Computational Fluid Dynamics Lab. 0-0-3 2
9 ME 380 Production Engineering Project 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – V 3-0-0 3
2 Professional Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – VII 3-0-0 3
4 HS &Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 ME 481 Mechanical System Design Project 0-0-3 2
6 ME 483 Industrial Engineering Project 0-0-3 2
7 ME 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
8 ME 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
9 ME 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 24
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – VIII 3-0-0 3
2 Professional Elective – IX 3-0-0 3
3 Professional Elective – X 3-0-0 3
4 HS &Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 ME 470 Design Engineering Lab. 0-0-3 2
6 ME 480 Thermal Engineering Design Project 0-0-3 2
7 ME 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
8 ME 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 ME 496 Comprehensive Viva – Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 26
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Mechatronics & Automation)
[1st Semester to 6th Semester is common to B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 ME 600 Applied Finite Element Analysis 3-1-0 4
2 ME 610 Analysis and Synthesis of Mechanism 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
5 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
6 Elective Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
116
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7 Elective Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 ME 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 ME 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 30
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 ME 601 Optimization Methods in Engg. Design 3-1-0 4
2 ME 604 Advanced Mechatronics 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – IX (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – X (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 Elective Laboratory – III 0-0-3 2
7 Elective Laboratory – IV 0-0-3 2
8 ME 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 ME 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – I (M. Tech.) 3/4
2 Professional Elective – II (M. Tech.) 3/4
3 Professional Elective – III (M. Tech.) 3/4
4 ME 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 ME 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 Me 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 31/34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 ME 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 ME 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
3 ME 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Offered	to
1 ME 313 Fundamentals of Ergonomics 3-0-0 3 @
2 ME 332 Advanced Manufacturing Process 3-0-0 3 #
3 ME 333 Process Control and Assurance Science 3-0-0 3 #
4 ME 334 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3 @
5 ME 335 Metrology and Computer Aided Inspection 3-0-0 3 #
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
117
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
6 ME 336 Plastic Part Manufacturing and Tool Design 3-0-0 3 @
7 ME 352 Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulic Machines 3-0-0 3 @
8 ME 353 Internal Combustion Engines 3-0-0 3 @
9 ME 354 Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning 3-0-0 3 @
10 ME 355 Aircraft and Rocket Propulsion 3-0-0 3 @
11 ME 356 Turbo-machinery 3-0-0 3 @
12 ME 357 Gas Dynamics 3-0-0 3 @
13 ME 391 Special Topic in Mechanical Engineering – I 3/4 @
14 ME 392 Special Topic in Mechanical Engineering – II 3/4 @
15 ME 393 Special Laboratory in Mechanical Engg – I 0-0-3 2 @
16 ME 394 Special Laboratory in Mechanical Engg – II 0-0-3 2 @
17 ME 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 @
18 ME 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 @
19 ME 410 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3 #
20 ME 411 Vibration and Noise Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
21 ME 412 Advanced Machine Dynamics 3-0-0 3 #
22 ME 413 Experimental Stress Analysis 3-0-0 3 #
23 ME 414 Mechatronics 3-0-0 3 #
24 ME 415 Fundamentals of Tribology 3-0-0 3 @
25 ME 416 Robotics 3-0-0 3 #
26 ME 418 Material Handling 3-0-0 3 #
27 ME 431 Decision Modeling 3-0-0 3 #
28 ME 432 Non-Conventional Machining Processes 3-0-0 3 #
29 ME 433 Advanced Manufacturing Systems 3-0-0 3 #
30 ME 434 Computer Graphics for CAD/CAM 3-0-0 3 #
31 ME 435 Concurrent Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
32 ME 437 Welding Technology 3-0-0 3 @
33 ME 440 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3 @
34 ME 451 Power Plant Engineering 3-0-0 3 @
35 ME 453 Energy Conservation & Waste Heat Recovery 3-0-0 3 @
36 ME 455 Nuclear Power Generation and Safety 3-0-0 3 @
37 ME 602 Robotics 3-1-0 4 $
38 ME 605 Advanced Decision Modeling Technique 3-1-0 4 $
39 ME 606 Neural Network & Artificial Intelligence 3-1-0 4 $
40 ME 607 Concurrent Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
41 ME 608 Control system Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
42 ME 611 Vibration Analysis & Diagnostics 3-1-0 4 $
43 ME 612 Non-Traditional Parameter in Design 3-1-0 4 $
44 ME 613 Design of Material Handling Equipment 3-1-0 4 $
45 ME 615 Computer Aided Design of Machines 3-1-0 4 $
46 ME 617 Intelligent System Control 3-1-0 4 $
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
118
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
47 ME 625 Intelligent Industrial Automation and its Application 3-1-0 4
$
48 ME 631 Production Technology 3-1-0 4 $
49 ME 635 Product Design for Manufacturing 3-1-0 4 $
50 ME 637 Production System & Computer Integrated Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
$
51 ME 641 Knowledge Based Systems in Manufacturing 3-1-0 4 $
52 ME 642 CNC Machine Tools and Automated Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
$
53 ME 645 Soft Computing for Intelligent Manufacturing 3-1-0 4 $
54 ME 681 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering – I 3-1-0 4 $
55 ME 682 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering – II 3-1-0 4 $
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES OFFERED BY OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub.Code Subject L-T-P Credits Offered	to
1 BM 388 Biosensors and Diagnostics 3-0-0 3 $
2 CE 316 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 #
3 CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4 $
4 CE 352 Advanced Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 @
5 CH 226 Fuels and Combustion 3-0-0 4 @
6 CH 415 Fluidization Engineering 3-1-0 4 @
7 CH 419 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4 @
8 CH 432 Optimization Techniques in Process Design 3-0-0 3 @
9 CR 433 Sensor Technology 3-0-0 3 $
10 CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 $
11 CS 335 Computer Graphics & Multimedia 3-1-0 4 $
12 CS 435 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 #
13 CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3 #
14 CS 439 Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 $
15 CS 637 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4 $
16 EC 433 Process Control Instrumentation 3-0-0 3 $
17 EC 443 Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3 $
18 EC 444 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4 $
19 EC 448 Evolutionary Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4 $
20 EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling and Control 3-0-0 3 $
21 EE 427 Artificial Neural Network 3-0-0 3 $
22 EE 445 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3 $
23 EE 454 Data Communication & Networks 3-0-0 3 $
24 EE 456 Robotics and Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 $
25 EE 634 Robotics & Automation 3-1-0 4 $
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
119
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
26 EE 636 Intelligent Control 3-1-0 4 $
27 EE 637 Soft Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4 $
28 EE 668 Instrumentation and Sensors 3-1-0 4 $
29 MA 512 Fourier Analysis 3-1-0 4 #
30 MA 530 Computational Methods in Boundary Value Problems 3-1-0 4
@
31 MA 531 Boundary Layer Theory 3-1-0 4 @
32 MA 532 Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations 3-1-0 4
@
33 MM 336 Mechanical Working of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4 @
34 MM 435 Fracture Mechanics and Failure Analysis 3-1-0 4 @
35 MM 449 Nanostructured Materials 3-0-0 3 @
*Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Mechanical Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits
1 ME 231 Total Quality Management 3-0-0 3
2 ME 253 Heat Transfer Problems in Electronics and Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
3 ME 254 Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
4 ME 256 The Quest for Absolute Zero 3-0-0 3
5 ME 300 Finite Element Analysis 3-0-0 3
6 ME 311 Composite Material 3-0-0 3
7 ME 417 Control System Engineering 3-0-0 3
8 ME 430 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3
9 ME 436 Entrepreneurship 3-0-0 3
10 ME 450 Computational Fluid Dynamics & Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3
11 ME 457 Cryogenic Engineering 3-0-0 3
SUMMARY OF COURSES
Sub discipline: Design Engineering Group
ME 210 Design of Machine Elements 3-1-0 4
ME 211 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery 3-1-0 4
ME 213 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4
ME 313 Fundamentals of Ergonomics 3-0-0 3
ME 410 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
ME 411 Vibration and Noise Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 412 Advanced Machine Dynamics 3-0-0 3
ME 413 Experimental Stress Analysis 3-0-0 3
ME 414 Mechatronics 3-0-0 3
ME 415 Fundamentals of Tribology 3-0-0 3
ME 416 Robotics 3-0-0 3
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
120
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 418 Material Handling 3-0-0 3
ME 600 Applied Finite Element Analysis 3-1-0 4
ME 601 Optimization Methods in Engg. Design 3-1-0 4
ME 602 Robotics 3-1-0 4
ME 604 Advanced Mechatronics 3-1-0 4
ME 605 Advanced Decision Modeling Technique 3-1-0 4
ME 606 Neural Network & Artificial Intelligence 3-1-0 4
ME 607 Concurrent Engineering 3-1-0 4
ME 608 Control system Engineering 3-1-0 4
ME 610 Analysis and Synthesis of Mechanism 3-1-0 4
ME 611 Vibration Analysis & Diagnostics 3-1-0 4
ME 612 Non-Traditional Parameter in Design 3-1-0 4
ME 613 Design of Material Handling Equipment 3-1-0 4
ME 615 Computer Aided Design of Machines 3-1-0 4
ME 617 Intelligent System Control 3-1-0 4
ME 625 Intelligent Industrial Automation and its Application 3-1-0 4
Sub discipline: Production Engineering Group
ME 230 Primary Production Processes 3-1-0 4
ME 231 Total Quality Management 3-0-0 3
ME 330 Metal Cutting and Tool Design 3-1-0 4
ME 331 Metal Machining and Automation 3-1-0 4
ME 332 Advanced Manufacturing Process 3-0-0 3
ME 333 Process Control and Assurance Science 3-0-0 3
ME 334 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 335 Metrology and Computer Aided Inspection 3-0-0 3
ME 336 Plastic Part Manufacturing and Tool Design 3-0-0 3
ME 430 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3
ME 431 Decision Modeling 3-0-0 3
ME 432 Non-Conventional Machining Processes 3-0-0 3
ME 433 Advanced Manufacturing Systems 3-0-0 3
ME 434 Computer Graphics for CAD/CAM 3-0-0 3
ME 435 Concurrent Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 436 Entrepreneurship 3-0-0 3
ME 437 Welding Technology 3-0-0 3
ME 440 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3
ME 631 Production Technology 3-1-0 4
ME 635 Product Design for Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
ME 637 Production System & Computer Integrated Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
ME 641 Knowledge Based Systems in Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
ME 642 CNC Machine Tools and Automated Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
ME 645 Soft Computing for Intelligent Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
121
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Sub discipline: Thermal Engineering Group
ME 250 Thermal Engineering 3-1-0 4
ME 251 Engineering Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4
ME 252 Thermal Problem in Electrical Systems 3-1-0 4
ME 253 Heat Transfer Problems in Electronics and Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
ME 254 Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
ME 351 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
ME 352 Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulic Machines 3-0-0 3
ME 353 Internal Combustion Engines 3-0-0 3
ME 354 Refrigeration and Air-conditioning 3-0-0 3
ME 355 Aircraft and Rocket Propulsion 3-0-0 3
ME 450 Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3
ME 455 Nuclear Power Generation and Safety 3-0-0 3
Sub discipline: Laboratory Courses
ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
ME 271 Thermal Engineering Lab 0-0-3 2
ME 272 Mechanical Engineering Lab 0-0-3 2
ME 370 Heat Transfer and Refrigeration Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 372 Fluid Mechanics & Fluid Machines Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 373 Production Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ME 374 Computational Fluid Dynamics Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 375 Internal Combustion Engines and Automobile Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ME 470 Design Engineering Lab. 0-0-3 2
Sub discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
ME 280 Machine Element Design Practice – I 0-0-3 2
ME 380 Production Engineering Project 0-0-3 2
ME 381 Machine Element Design Practice – II 0-0-3 2
ME 391 Special Topic in Mechanical Engineering – I 3/4
ME 392 Special Topic in Mechanical Engineering – II 3/4
ME 393 Special Laboratory in Mechanical Engg – I 0-0-3 2
ME 394 Special Laboratory in Mechanical Engg – II 0-0-3 2
ME 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
ME 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
ME 470 Design Engineering Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 480 Thermal Engineering Design Project 0-0-3 2
ME 481 Mechanical System Design Project 0-0-3 2
ME 483 Industrial Engineering Project 0-0-3 2
ME 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
ME 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
122
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
ME 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
ME 495 Short term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
ME 496 Comprehensive Viva-voce 0-0-0 2
ME 681 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering – I 3-1-0 4
ME 682 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering – II 3-1-0 4
ME 691 Short Term Industrial /Research Experience 0-0-0 2
ME 692 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 4
ME 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
ME 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
ME 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Curricula
123
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF METALLURGICAL & MATERIALS ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Metallurgical & Materials Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory - I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice - I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity - I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering 
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 MM 201 Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics 3-1-0 4
3 MM 211 Science and Technology of Materials 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – I ¾
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
124
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory  
7
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory - I
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory
8 MM 271 Mineral Dressing Laboratory. 0-0-3 2
9 MM 273 Polymer Laboratory. 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26/27
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 204 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 MM 212 Casting and Solidification of Materials 3-1-0 4
3 MM 220 Unit Process of Extraction 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6
HS 270 Language Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
MA 270 Numerical Methods Laboratory
7
EC 270 Electronics Laboratory 
OR 0-0-3 2
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory – I
8 MM 270 Electro Metallurgy & Corrosion Lab. 0-0-3 2
9 MM 272 Characterization of Material Lab. 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub.Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MM 311 Phase Transformation 3-1-0 4
2 MM 321 Ironmaking 3-1-0 4
3 MM 331 Deformation Theory of Metals 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – III 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 MM 371 Thermodynamics & Kinetics Lab. 0-0-3 2
7 MM 373 Mechanical Testing Lab. 0-0-3 2
8 MM 375 Metallography & Heat Treatment Lab. 0-0-3 2
9 WS 471 Advanced Welding and Foundry Practices 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MM 314 Heat Treatment of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
2 MM 324 Steelmaking 3-1-0 4
3 MM 352 Material Characterization Techniques 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – IV ¾
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
125
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 MM 370 Fuel Testing Lab. 0-0-3 2
7 MM 372 Thermal Analysis Lab. 0-0-3 2
8 MM 374 Structure Property Correlation project 0-0-3 2
9 MM 376 Computational Technique in Materials Engg. Lab. 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 26/27
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MM 431 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – V ¾
3 Professional Elective – VI ¾
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 MM 471 Composite Materials Lab. 0-0-3 2
6 MM 473 Design & Calculation Lab. 0-0-3 2
7 MM 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
8 MM 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
9 MM 495 Short Term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25/27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 Professional Elective – VII ¾
2 Professional Elective – VIII ¾
3 Professional Elective –IX ¾
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 MM 472 Modeling of Materials Processes 0-0-3 2
6 MM 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 MM 494 Seminar & Technical Writing - II 0-0-3 2
8 MM 496 Comprehensive  Viva- Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 24/27
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialization: Metallurgical & Materials Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Metallurgical & Materials Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MM 637 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-1-0 4
2 MM 665 Powder Technology 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – III (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – IV (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – V (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 MM 675 Process Metallurgy Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
126
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7 MM 673 Phase Transformation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 MM 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 MM 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 MM 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MM 634 Metallugical Failures: Detection and Analysis 3-1-0 4
2 MM 666 Computational Modeling of Materials 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – VII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 MM 672 Experimental Techniques in Materials Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 MM 674 Materials Science Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 MM 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
9 MM 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-2-12 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Electives – I (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Electives – II (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – III (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 MM 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 MM 693 Research  Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
6 MM 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 9-3-3 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MM 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 MM 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
3 MM 695 Research Project – V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 0-0-33 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub.Code Subject L-T-P Credits Offered	to
1 MM 215 Physics of Materials 3-1-0 4 #
2 MM 227 Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3 #
3 MM 256 Transport Phenomena 3-0-0 3 #
4 MM 257 Non – Metallic Materials 3-0-0 3 #
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
127
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 MM 258 Experimental Techniques 3-0-0 3 @
6 MM 268 Ceramic and Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0 3 #
7 MM 326 Non Ferrous Extraction 3-1-0 4 #
8 MM 336 Mechanical Working of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4 #
9 MM 345 Nuclear Metallurgy 3-0-0 3 #
10 MM 356 Pollution in Metallurgical Industries and its Control 3-0-0 3
#
11 MM 357 Corrosion and Degradation of Materials and their Prevention 3-1-0 4
#
12 MM 359 Engineering Polymers and Composites 3-0-0 3 #
13 MM 391 Special Topic in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering- I 3/4
#
14 MM 392 Special Topic in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering – II 3/4
#
15 MM 393 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
#
16 MM 394 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering – II 0-0-3 2
#
17 MM 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
18 MM 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
19 MM 416 Complex Ferrous & Non Ferrous Alloys 3-1-0 3 $
20 MM 426 Secondary Steelmaking 3-0-0 3 #
21 MM 427 Sponge Iron Technology 3-1-0 4 $
22 MM 428 Advances in Steelmaking 3-1-0 4 #
23 MM 435 Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue of Metals 3-1-0 4 #
24 MM 442 Advanced Materials 3-0-0 3 #
25 MM 446 Composite Materials 3-1-0 4 #
26 MM 449 Nanostructured Materials 3-0-0 3 #
27 MM 468 Joining of Metals 3-1-0 4 #
28 MM 606 X – Ray & Electron Microscopy 3-1-0 4 $
29 MM 615 Structure & Properties of Materials 3-1-0 4 $
30 MM 616 Alloy Steel Technology 3-1-0 4 $
31 MM 617 Physical Metallurgy of Advanced Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
$
32 MM 618 Joining of Materials 3-0-0 3 $
33 MM 619 Physical Metallurgy of Alloy Steels 3-1-0 4 $
34 MM 623 Iron & Steel Making 3-1-0 4 $
35 MM 624 Advanced Foundry Technology 3-0-0 3 $
36 MM 625 Ferro – Alloy Technology 3-0-0 3 $
37 MM 628 Advances in Steel Making 3-1-0 4 $
38 MM 629 Advanced Extraction Processes 3-0-0 3 $
39 MM 635 Fracture Mechanics & Failure Analysis 3-1-0 4 $
40 MM 636 Advanced Processing of Materials 3-0-0 3 $
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
128
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
41 MM 638 Mechanical Working of Materials 3-1-0 4 $
42 MM 642 Advances in Materials Science & Engineering 3-0-0 3 $
43 MM 646 Composite Materials 3-1-0 4 $
44 MM 655 Transport Phenomena 3-0-0 3 $
45 MM 656 Corrosion and Degradation of Materials and their Prevention 3-0-0 3
$
46 MM 657 Environmental Pollution in Metallurgical Industries 3-0-0 3
$
47 MM 658 Texture of Materials 3-0-0 3 $
48 MM 681 Special Topics in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 3/4
$
49 MM 682 Special Topics in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 3/4
$
50 MM 683 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
$
51 MM 684 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
$
52 MM 686 Thermal plasma applications in Metallurgy 3-0-0 3 $
53 MM 689 Ultra-high strength materials: Processing, properties and applications 3-0-0 3
$
54 MM 690 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3 $
Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree coursess), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES OFFERED BY OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits Offered	To
1 CE 336 Advanced Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4 #
2 CE 405 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3 #
3 CH 224 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3 @
4 CH 331 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3 $
5 CH 419 Transport Phenomena 3-1-0 4 #
6 CH 426 Coal Processing Technology 3-0-0 3 @
7 CH 432 Optimization Techniques in Processes Design 3-0-0 3 @
8 CR 325 Computational Materials Science 3-0-0 3 @
9 CR 416 Application of Refractories 3-1-0 4 @
10 CS 213 Principals of Programming Languages 3-1-0 4 #
11 CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
12 CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3 #
13 CY 542 Biochemistry 3-1-0 4 #
14 CY 551 Polymer Chemistry 3-1-0 3 #
15 CY 565 Advanced Solid State Chemistry 3-1-0 4 #
16 CY 567 Nano Biotechnology 3-1-0 4 #
17 MA 522 Operation Research 3-1-0 4 #
18 MA 529 Information Theory 3-1-0 4 #
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
129
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
19 MA 553 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
20 MA 556 Number Theory 3-1-0 4 #
21 ME 334 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
22 ME 356 Turbo - Machinery 3-0-0 3 #
23 ME 413 Experimental Stress Analysis 3-0-0 3 #
24 ME 415 Fundamentals of  Tribology 3-0-0 3 #
25 PH 653 Advanced X – Ray structure Analysis 3-1-0 4 #
Note: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering)
Sl. No Sub.Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 MM 317 Material Technology 3-0-0 3
2 MM 318 Principle and Practice of Heat Treatments 3-0-0 3
3 MM 325 Ironmaking and Steelmaking 3-0-0 3
4 MM 358 Expermental Techniques in Materials Engineering 3-0-0 3
5 MM 408 Energy, Environment and Recycling 3-0-0 3
6 MM 448 Advanced Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3
SUMMARY OF COURSES
Sub Discipline: Physical Metallurgy
MM 211 Science and Technology of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 212 Casting and Solidification of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 215 Physics of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 311 Phase Transformation 3-1-0 4
MM 314 Heat Treatment of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 317 Materials Technology 3-0-0 4
MM 318 Principles and Practice of Heat Treatment 3-0-0 4
MM 416 Complex Ferrous & Non Ferrous Alloys 3-1-0 3
MM 606 X – Ray & Electron Microscopy 3-1-0 4
MM 615 Structure & Properties of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 616 Alloy Steel Technology 3-1-0 4
MM 617 Physical Metallurgy of Advanced Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 618 Joining of Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 619 Physical Metallurgy of Alloy Steels 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Process Metallurgy
MM 201 Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics 3-1-0 4
MM 220 Unit Process of Extraction 3-1-0 4
MM 227 Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3
MM 321 Ironmaking 3-1-0 4
MM 324 Steelmaking 3-1-0 4
MM 325 Iron and Steel Making 3-1-0 4
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
130
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 326 Non Ferrous Extractions 3-1-0 4
MM 408 Energy, Environment and Recycling 3-0-0 3
MM 426 Secondary Steelmaking 3-0-0 3
MM 427 Sponge Iron Technology 3-1-0 4
MM 428 Advances in Steelmaking 3-1-0 4
MM 623 Iron & Steel Making 3-1-0 4
MM 624 Advanced Foundry Technology 3-0-0 3
MM 625 Ferro – Alloy Technology 3-0-0 3
MM 628 Advances in Steel Making 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Mechanical Metallurgy
MM 331 Deformation Theory of Metals 3-1-0 4
MM 336 Mechanical Working of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 431 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 435 Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue of Metals 3-1-0 4
MM 634 Metallugical Failures: Detection and Analysis 3-1-0 4
MM 635 Fracture Mechanics & Failure Analysis 3-1-0 4
MM 636 Advanced Processing of Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 637 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 638 Mechanical Working of Materials 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Advanced Materials
MM 345 Nuclear Metallurgy 3-0-0 3
MM 442 Advanced Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 446 Composite Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 448 Advanced Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 449 Nanostructured Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 642 Advances in Materials Science & Engineering 3-0-0 3
MM 646 Composite Materials 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Allied Courses
MM 256 Transport Phenomena 3-0-0 3
MM 257 Non – Metallic Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 268 Ceramic and Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0 3
MM 352 Material Characterization Techniques 3-1-0 4
MM266 Ceramic and Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0 3
MM 352 Material Characterization Techniques 3-1-0 4
MM 356 Pollution in Metallurgical Industries and its Control 3-0-0 3
MM 357 Corrosion and Degradation of Materials and their Prevention 3-1-0 4
MM 359 Engineering Polymers and Composites 3-0-0 3
MM 468 Joining of Metals 3-1-0 4
MM 655 Transport Phenomena 3-0-0 3
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
131
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 656 Corrosion and Degradation of Materials and their Prevention 3-0-0 3
MM 657 Environmental Pollution in Metallurgical Industries 3-0-0 3
MM 665 Powder Technology 3-1-0 4
MM 666 Computational Modeling of Materials 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
MM 270 Electro Metallurgy & Corrosion Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 271 Mineral Dressing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 272 Characterization of Material Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 273 Polymer Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 370 Fuel Testing Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 371 Thermodynamics & Kinetics Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 372 Thermal Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 373 Mechanical Testing Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 374 Structure Property Correlation project 0-0-3 2
MM 375 Metallography & Heat Treatment Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 376 Computational Technique in Materials Engg. Lab 0-0-3 2
MM 471 Composite Materials Lab. 3-0-0 2
MM 472 Modeling of Materials Processes. 0-0-3 2
MM 473 Design & Calculation Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 672 Experimental Techniques in Materials Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 673 Phase Transformation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 674 Materials Science Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 675 Process Metallurgy Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
MM 391 Special Topic in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - I 3/4
MM 392 Special Topic in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - II 3/4
MM 393 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - I 0-0-3 2
MM 394 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - II 0-0-3 2
MM 395 Engineering Product Development Project - I 0-0-6 4
MM 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4
MM 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
MM 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
MM 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
MM 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
MM 495 Short Term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-0 2
MM 496 Comprehensive  Viva- Voce 0-0-0 2
MM 681 Special Topics in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 3/4
MM 682 Special Topics in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 3/4
MM 683 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
132
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 684 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical and Material Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
MM 686 Thermal plasma applications in Metallurgy 3-0-0 3
MM 687 Texture of Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 688 Ultra-high Strength materials: Processing, properties and applications 3-0-0 3
MM 690 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3
MM 691 Short Term Industrial/ Research Experience 0-0-0 2
MM 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
MM 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
MM 694 Research Project - IV 0-0-0 10
MM 695 Research Project - V 0-0-30 20
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Curricula
133
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF MINING ENGINEERING
Curriculum of B. Tech (Mining Engineering)
FIRST SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 101 Mathematics – I 3-1-0 4
2 PH 101 Physics – I 3-1-0 4
3 CY 101 Chemistry 3-1-0 4
4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
OR 3-1-0 4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
5
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering
6
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
7 CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
8 CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
9 WS 171 Workshop Practice – I 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – I 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
SECOND SEMESTER (STRUCTURE COMMON TO ALL BRANCHES)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 102 Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4
2 PH 102 Physics – II 3-1-0 4
3 CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithm 3-1-0 4
4
EC 100 Basic Electronics Engineering
OR 3-1-0 4
EE 100 Basic Electrical Technology
5
CE 130 Environmental and Safety Engineering 
OR 3-1-0 4
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics
6
CY 170 Chemistry Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
PH 170 Physics Laboratory
7 CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
9 WS 172 Workshop Practice – II 0-0-3 2
10 Extra Academic Activity – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 15-5-15 30
THIRD SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 201 Mathematics – III 3-1-0 4
2 MN 201 Mine Development 3-1-0 4
3 CE 203 Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – I 3-0-0 3
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
134
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – I 3-0-0 3
6
MA 270 Mathematics – III Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
HS 270 Language Laboratory
7
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EC 270 Electronics Laboratory
8 MN 273 Mining Geology & Exploration Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 CE 273 Mechanics of Solids Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FOURTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MA 204 Mathematics – IV 3-1-0 4
2 MN 202 Mine Surveying 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – II 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – III 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – II 3-0-0 3
6
HS 270 Language Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
MA 270 Mathematics – III Laboratory
7
EC 270 Electronics Laboratory
OR 0-0-3 2
EE 270 Electrical Engineering Laboratory
8 MN 274 Mining Machinery Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 MN 271 Mine Surveying Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
FIFTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MN 311 Surface Mining Technology 3-1-0 4
2 MN 321 Rock Mechanics 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 HS & Open Elective – III 3-0-0 3
6 MN 371 Rock Mechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 MN 373 Mineral Processing Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 MN 375 Material Handling Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 MN 377 Solid Fuel Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
SIXTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MN 330 Mine Ventilation 3-1-0 4
2 MN 313 Underground Mining Technology 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VI 3-1-0 4
4 Professional Elective – VII 3-1-0 4
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
135
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
5 HS & Open Elective – IV 3-0-0 3
6 MN 370 Mine Ventilation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 MN 372 Computer Application in Mining Laboratory 0-0-3 2
8 MN 374 Geomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
9 MN 376 Model preparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 27
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MN 431 Mine Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4
2 MN 441 Mine Legislation and Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – VIII 3-1-0 4
4 HS & Open Elective – V 3-0-0 3
5 MN 471 Mine Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 MN 473 Simulation and Modeling of Mining systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 MN 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
8 MN 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
9 MN 495 Short Term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MN 400 Mine Planning 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Elective – IX 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – X 3-1-0 4
4 HS & Open Elective – VI 3-0-0 3
5 MN 472 Mine Planning and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
6 MN 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
7 MN 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
8 MN 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27
Curriculum of M. Tech Dual Degree (Specialisation: Mining Engineering)
[1st - 6th Semester curricula are common with B.Tech. Mining Engineering]
SEVENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MN 623 Advance Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4
2 MN 641 Mine Legislation & Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
3 Profession Elective – VIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Profession Electives – IX (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Profession Electives – X (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 MN 671 Rock Excavation Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 MN 673 Mine Engineering Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
136
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
8 MN 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
9 MN 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
10 MN 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
TOTAL 27
EIGHTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-	P Credits
1 MN 600 Mine Planning 3-1-0 4
2 MN 602 Mine Management 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Elective – XI (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
4 Professional Elective – XII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
5 Professional Elective – XIII (B.Tech.) 3-0-0 3
6 MN 672 Advance Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
7 MN 674 Mining Engineering Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
8 MN 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
9 MN 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
TOTAL 25
NINTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 Professional Electives – I (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
2 Professional Electives – II (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
3 Professional Electives – III (M.Tech.) 3-1-0 4
4 MN 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
5 MN 693 Research Project - III 0-0-0 10
6 MN 694 Research Project – IV 0-0-0 10
TOTAL 34
TENTH SEMESTER
Sl. No Sub. Code Subjects L-T-P Credits
1 MN 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
2 MN 692 Comprehensive Viva 0-0-0 4
3 MN 695 Research Project - V 0-0-30 20
TOTAL 26
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Offered	to
1 MN 204 Mining Machinery 3-0-0 3 #
2 MN 205 Mineral Exploration 3-0-0 3 #
3 MN 207 Mining Geology 3-0-0 3 #
4 MN 208 Geostatistics 3-0-0 3 #
5 MN 232 Solid Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3 #
6 MN 301 System Engineering 3-0-0 3 #
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
137
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
7 MN 302 Mine Economics 3-1-0 4 #
8 MN 303 Material Handling Systems 3-0-0 3 #
9 MN 304 Computer Application in Mining 3-1-0 4 #
10 MN 305 Mineral Processing Technology 3-0-0 3 #
11 MN 322 Geomechanics 3-1-0 4 #
12 MN 324 Strata Control Technology 3-1-0 4 #
13 MN 325 Ground Control Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 #
14 MN 332 Remote Sensing and Its Application 3-1-0 4 #
15 MN 391 Special Topic in Mining Engineering – I 3/4 #
16 MN 392 Special Topic in Mining Engineering – II 3/4 #
17 MN 393 Special Laboratory in Mining Engineering – I 0-0-3 2 #
18 MN 394 Special Laboratory in Mining Engineering – II 0-0-3 2 #
19 MN 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4 #
20 MN 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4 #
21 MN 410 Tunneling 3-1-0 4 #
22 MN 411 Advanced Surface Mining 3-1-0 4 #
23 MN 412 Mining of Deep Seated Deposits 3-1-0 4 #
24 MN 413 Advanced Coal Mining 3-1-0 4 #
25 MN 414 Rock Mechanics Application to Environmental Problems 3-0-0 3
#
26 MN 415 Advanced Metaliferrous Mining 3-1-0 4 #
27 MN 421 Rock Slope Technology 3-0-0 3 #
28 MN 435 Eco-friendly Mining 3-1-0 4 #
29 MN 436 Environmental Pollution and Control in Mines 3-1-0 4 #
30 MN 442 Mine Fires and spontaneous heating 3-1-0 4 #
31 MN 451 Mine Management 3-1-0 4 #
32 MN 603 Geo – aspects Management of low and high risk solid byproducts 3-0-0 3
$
33 MN 606 Strata Control Technology 3-1-0 4 $
34 MN 607 Ground Control Instrumentation 3-1-0 4 $
35 MN 608 Tunneling 3-1-0 4 $
36 MN 609 Advanced Surface Mining 3-1-0 4 $
37 MN 610 Mining of Deep Seated Deposits 3-1-0 4 $
38 MN 611 Advanced Coal Mining 3-1-0 4 $
39 MN 614 Rock Mechanics Application to Environmental Problems 3-1-0 4
$
40 MN 620 Application of Artificial Intelligence in Mining 3-1-0 4 $
41 MN 632 Environmental Management 3-1-0 4 $
42 MN 633 Mine Fires and spontaneous Heating 3-1-0 4 $
43 MN 635 Advanced Mine Ventilation 3-1-0 4 $
44 MN 637 Noise Impact Assessment And Control 3-1-0 4 $
45 MN 638 Hazardous Waste Management 3-1-0 4 $
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
138
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
46 MN 639 Safety Risk Assessment & Management 3-1-0 4 $
47 MN 640 Eco Friendly Mining 3-1-0 4 $
48 MN 642 Hydrogeology 3-1-0 4 $
49 MN 643 Remote Sensing & GIS for Mining Engineering 3-1-0 4 $
Notes: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses)
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Offered	to
1 CE 301 Advanced Surveying 3-1-0 4 @
2 CE 316 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 #
3 CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4 #
4 CE 333 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-1-0 4 #
5 CE 336 Advanced Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4 #
6 CE 421 Ground Improvement Techniques 3-0-0 3 #
7 CE 425 Environmental Geotechnics 3-0-0 3 #
8 CH 228 Treatment of Industrial Effluents 3-0-0 3 #
9 CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4 #
10 CS 434 Image Processing 3-0-0 3 #
11 CS 435 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 #
12 CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3 #
13 HS 320 Human Resource Management 3-0-0 3 #
14 MA 420 Operations Research 3-1-0 4 #
15 MA 421 Stochastic Processes 3-1-0 4 #
16 ME 413 Experimental stress analysis 3-0-0 3 #
17 ME 440 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3 @
18 MM 268 Ceramic and Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0 3 #
*Note: # (B.Tech. and all dual degree courses), $(only for dual degree courses), @ (only for B.Tech courses)
COURSES OFFERED AS OPEN ELECTIVES
(Normally not offered to students of Mining Engineering)
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-	P Credits Non Eligible Branches
1 MN 203 Basic Surveying 3-0-0 3 CE
2 MN 206 Introductory Mining Technology 3-0-0 3 -
3 MN 323 Rock Engineering 3-0-0 3 CE
4 MN 336 Solid Fuels and Clean Coal Technology 3-0-0 3 -
5 MN 433 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3 CH, CE
6 MN 438 Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3 CE, CH, MM
SUMMARY OF COURSES 
Sub Discipline: Non-specific Subjects
MN 201 Mine Development 3-1-0 4
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
139
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MN 202 Mine Surveying 3-1-0 4
MN 203 Basic Surveying 3-0-0 3
MN 204 Mining Machinery 3-0-0 3
MN 205 Mineral Exploration 3-0-0 3
MN 206 Introductory Mining Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 207 Mining Geology 3-0-0 3
MN 208 Geostatistics 3-0-0 3
MN 301 System Engineering 3-0-0 3
MN 302 Mine Economics 3-1-0 4
MN 303 Material Handling Systems 3-0-0 3
MN 304 Computer Application in Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 305 Mineral Processing Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 400 Mine Planning 3-1-0 4
MN 451 Mine Management 3-1-0 4
MN 600 Mine Planning 3-1-0 4
MN 602 Mine Management 3-1-0 4
MN 603 Geo – aspects Management of low and high risk solid byproducts 3-0-0 3
MN 606 Strata Control Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 607 Ground Control Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
MN 608 Tunneling 3-1-0 4
MN 609 Advanced Surface Mining 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Geomechanics
MN 311 Surface Mining Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 313 Underground Mining Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 321 Rock Mechanics 3-1-0 4
MN 322 Geomechanics 3-1-0 4
MN 323 Rock Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 324 Strata Control Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 325 Ground Control Techniques 3-1-0 4
MN 410 Tunneling 3-1-0 4
MN 411 Advanced Surface Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 412 Mining of Deep Seated Deposits 3-1-0 4
MN 413 Advanced Coal Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 414 Rock Mechanics Application to Environmental Problems 3-0-0 3
MN 415 Advanced Metaliferrous Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 421 Rock Slope Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 610 Mining of Deep Seated Deposits 3-1-0 4
MN 611 Advanced Coal Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 614 Rock Mechanics Application to Environmental Problems 3-1-0 4
MN 616 Advanced Metaliferrous Mining 3-1-0 4
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
140
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Sub Discipline: Environment
MN 232 Solid Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 331 Solid Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 330 Mine Ventilation 3-1-0 4
MN 332 Remote Sensing and Its Application 3-1-0 4
MN 336 Solid Fuels and Clean Coal Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 431 Mine Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 433 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3
MN 435 Eco-friendly Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 436 Environmental Pollution and Control in Mines 3-1-0 4
MN 438 Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3
MN 441 Mine Legislation and Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 442 Mine Fires and spontaneous heating 3-1-0 4
MN 451 Mine Management 3-1-0 4
MN 620 Application of Artificial Intelligence in Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 623 Advanced Environmental Engg. 3-1-0 4
MN 632 Environmental Management 3-1-0 4
MN 633 Mine Fires and spontaneous Heating 3-1-0 4
MN 635 Advanced Mine Ventilation 3-1-0 4
MN 637 Noise Impact Assessment And Control 3-1-0 4
MN 638 Hazardous Waste Management 3-1-0 4
MN 639 Safety Risk Assessment & Management 3-1-0 4
MN 640 Ecofriendly Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 641 Mine Legislation & Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 642 Hydrogeology 3-1-0 4
MN 643 Remote Sensing & GIS for Mining Engineering 3-1-0 4
Sub Discipline: Laboratory Courses
MN 271 Mine Surveying Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 273 Mining Geology & Exploration Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 274 Mining Machinery Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 370 Mine Ventilation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 371 Rock Mechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 372 Computer Application in Mining Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 373 Mineral Processing Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 374 Geomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 375 Material Handling Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 376 Model preparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 377 Solid Fuel Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 471 Mine Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN472 Mine Planning and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
141
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MN 473 Simulation and Modeling of Mining Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 671 Rock Excavation Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 672 Advance Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 673 Mine Engineering Laboratory - II 0-0-3 2
MN 674 Mining Engineering Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
Sub Discipline: Project, Seminar and Special Courses
MN 391 Special Topic in Mining Engineering – I 3/4
MN 392 Special Topic in Mining Engineering – II 3/4
MN 393 Special Laboratory in Mining Engg – I 0-0-3 2
MN 394 Special Laboratory in Mining Engg – II 0-0-3 2
MN 395 Engineering Product Development Project - I 0-0-6 4
MN 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4
MN 491 Research Project – I 0-0-3 2
MN 492 Research Project – II 0-0-3 2
MN 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
MN 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
MN 495 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
MN 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
MN 687 Seminar and Technical Writing – III 0-0-3 2
MN 688 Seminar and Technical Writing – IV 0-0-3 2
MN 691 Short Term Industrial/Research Experience 0-0-0 2
MN 692 Comprehensive Viva - Voce 0-0-0 4
MN 693 Research Project – III(Summer) 0-0-0 10
MN 694 Research Project - IV 0-0-0 10
MN 695 Research Project - V 0-0-30 20
Department of Mining Engineering
Curricula
142
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Department of Mining Engineering
 
Curricula and Syllabi  
 Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch) 
 
 
 
2014-15 onwards 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Planning and Architecture 
National Institute of Technology Rourkela 
May 2014 
2 
 
Department of Planning and Architecture 
1.    Vision 
To provide every citizen of India a proper habitat for living and work with state of the art 
facilities and services ensuring minimal damage to the environment 
2.    Mission 
I. To produce socially responsible architects who would not only be industry leading 
technocrats in the field of design, implementation and management of human habitats 
and ancillary services but also experts in application of state-of-art technologies in the 
fields of illumination, acoustics, energy and materials. 
II. To create planners for 21st century India with emphasis on planning for the changing 
socio-economic needs of the society in an evolving economy. The planners thus 
groomed would be capable technocrats and efficient urban managers. 
III. To carry out relevant research in all aspects of planning and architecture that have 
reference to contemporary living with emphasis on functionality, safety, comfort, 
conservation, and aesthetics. 
3.    Programme Name e.g. B.Tech, M.Tech, Control & Automation etc. 
I. Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch) 
4.   PEOs 
I. To equip students with knowledge of engineering, arts and aesthetics for pursuing 
studies in Architecture.  
II. To impart understanding on the relationship between man, the built space, the natural 
environment and their spatial implications.  
III. To provide knowledge on the latest engineering and technological aspects of building 
sciences including evolving areas like illumination, acoustics, building services, 
building automation, etc. 
IV. To impart required skills to deal with users’ requirements through proper 
investigation and creation of design problems and addressing them through suitable 
technical, aesthetic skills and compliance with regulatory requirements. 
5.    POs 
i. Graduates will demonstrate an ability to conceive, frame, analyze and provide design 
solutions to architectural problems 
ii. Graduates will demonstrate ability to work in a multidisciplinary environment  and 
incorporate these knowledge to improve design solutions 
iii. Graduates will demonstrate skills to use modern engineering tools, software and 
equipment to analyze problems. 
iv. Graduates will demonstrate knowledge of professional and ethical responsibilities. 
v. Graduates will be able to represent and communicate effectively using latest media 
technologies in both verbal and written form. 
vi. Graduates will show the understanding of impact of architectural solutions on the 
society and also will be aware of contemporary issues. 
3 
 
vii. Graduates will get necessary training to go in for higher academic programmes or for 
employment in Industry. 
6. Curriculum of B. Arch (Batch of 2014 and onwards) 
 
FIRST SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 MA 101 Core Course – I: Mathematics-I 3-1-0 4 
2 HS 311  Core Course – II: Communicative English 3-0-0 3 
3 PA161 Core Course – III: Basic Design 3-0-0 3 
4 PA171 Core Course – IV: History of Architecture-I 3-0-0 3 
5 CE 100 Engineering Mechanics OR 3-1-0 4 
CE 130 Environmental and safety 
engineering 
6 PA111 Laboratory-I: Architectural Design-I 0-0-3 2 
7 PA121 Laboratory-II: Architectural Graphics-I 0-0-3 2 
8 CS 171 Laboratory-III: Computing Laboratory-I 0-0-3 2 
9 WS 171 Laboratory-IV: Workshop Practice-I 0-0-3 2 
10 EA 171 Extra Academic Activity-I 0-0-3 2 
TOTAL 15-2-15 27 
 
SECOND SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 MA102 Core Course – V: Mathematics – II 3-1-0 4 
2 PA176 Core Course – VI: History of Architecture-
II 
3-0-0 3 
3 PA132 Core Course – VII: Building Construction-I 3-0-0 3 
4 PA142 Core Course – VIII: Building Materials-I 3-0-0 3 
5 CE 100 Engineering Mechanics OR 3-1-0 4 
CE 130 Environmental and Safety 
Engineering 
6 PA112 Laboratory-V: Architectural Design-II 0-0-3 2 
7 PA122 Laboratory-VI: Architectural Graphics-II 0-0-3 2 
8 PA134 Laboratory-VII: Building Construction 
Studio-I 
0-0-3 2 
9 PA162 Laboratory-VIII: Visual Arts-I 0-1-3 3 
10 EA 172 Extra Academic Activity-II 0-0-3 2 
11 PA182 Study Tour-I 0-0-0 2 
TOTAL 15-3-15 30 
 
4 
 
THIRD SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 CE 203 Core Course – IX: Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 
2 PA271 Core Course – X: History of Architecture-
III 
3-0-0 3 
3 PA231 Core Course – XI: Building Construction-II 3-0-0 3 
4 PA241 Core Course – XII: Building Materials-II 3-0-0 3 
5 PA281 Core Course – XIII: Climate Responsive 
Architecture 
3-1-0 4 
6 PA211 Laboratory-IX: Architectural Design-III 0-0-6 4 
7 PA221 Laboratory-X: Architectural Graphics-III 0-0-3 2 
8 PA233 Laboratory-XI: Building Construction 
Studio-II 
0-0-3 2 
9 PA261 Laboratory-XII: Visual Arts-II 0-1-3 3 
10 PA283 Laboratory-XIII: Non-graphic Computer 
Application 
0-0-3 2 
TOTAL 15-3-18 30 
 
FOURTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 CE 212 Core Course – XIV: Structural Analysis 3-1-0 4 
2 PA272 Core Course – XV: History of Architecture-
IV 
3-0-0 3 
3 PA232 Core Course – XVI: Building Construction-
III 
3-0-0 3 
4 PA282 Core Course – XVII: Building Bye Laws 
and Codes of Practices 
3-0-0 3 
5 PA Professional Elective-I 3-0-0 3 
6 PA212 Laboratory-XIV: Architectural Design-IV 0-0-6 4 
7 PA222 Laboratory-XV: Computer Aided Design 
and Simulation-I 
0-0-3 2 
8 PA234 Laboratory-XVI: Building Construction 
Studio-III 
0-0-3 2 
9 CE 274 Laboratory-XVII: Surveying Field work 0-0-3 2 
10 PA284 Laboratory-XVIII: Model Making 
Workshop 
0-0-3 2 
11 PA286 Study Tour-II 0-0-0 2 
TOTAL 15-1-18 30 
 
  
5 
 
FIFTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 CE 311 Core Course – XVIII: Reinforced Concrete 
Design 
3-1-0 4 
2 CE 401 Core Course – XIX: Estimation and 
Construction Management 
3-1-0 4 
3 PA351 Core Course – XX: Building Services-I 3-0-0 3 
4 PA Professional Elective-II 3-0-0 3 
5  Open Elective I- HS and Open Elective 3-0-0 3 
6 PA Professional Elective-III (Interior, 
Landscape, Urban Design) 
0-1-3 3 
7 PA311 Laboratory-XIX: Architectural Design-V 0-0-9 6 
8 PA321 Laboratory-XX: Computer Aided Design 
and Simulation-II 
0-0-3 2 
9 PA331 Laboratory-XXI: Working Drawing – I  0-0-3 2 
TOTAL 15-3-18 30 
 
SIXTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 CE 312 Core Course – XXI: Design of Steel 
Structures 
3-1-0 4 
2 PA352 Core Course – XXII: Building Services-II 3-0-0 3 
3 PA382 Core Course – XXIII: Theory of Design 3-1-0 4 
4 PA384 Core Course – XXIV: Human Settlements 
and Vernacular Architecture 
3-0-0 3 
5  Open Electives-II: HS and open elective 3-0-0 3 
6 PA312 Laboratory-XXII: Architectural Design-VI 0-0-9 6 
7 PA322 Laboratory-XXIV: Computer Aided Design 
& Simulation – III 
0-0-3 2 
8 PA332 Laboratory-XXIII: Working Drawing – II  0-0-3 2 
9 PA386 Laboratory-XXV: Estimation, Costing and 
Specifications Lab 
0-0-3 2 
TOTAL 15-2-18 29 
 
SEVENTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1   Core Course – XXV: Advanced Structural 
Design and Systems 
3-0-0 3 
2 PA441 Core Course – XXVI: Advanced Building 
Materials 
3-0-0 3 
3 PA481 Core Course – XXVII: Professional 
Practice-I 
3-0-0 3 
4 PA Professional Elective-IV 3-0-0 3 
5 PA Professional Elective-V 3-0-0 3 
6 PA411 Laboratory-XXVI: Architectural Design- 0-0-12 8 
6 
 
VII 
7 PA431 Laboratory-XXVII: Advanced Building 
Construction Studio 
0-0-3 2 
8 PA451 Laboratory-XXVIII: Advanced Building 
Services 
0-0-3 2 
9 PA413 Research Project-I (Dissertation) 0-0-0 4 
10  Seminar & Technical Writing-I 0-0-0 2 
TOTAL 15-0-18 33 
 
 
EIGHTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 PA482 Core Course – XXVIII: Professional 
Practice-II 
3-0-0 3 
2 PA Professional Elective-VI 3-0-0 3 
3 PA Professional Elective-VII 3-0-0 3 
4 PA412 Research Project-II (Thesis) 0-0-0 12 
5 PA414 Comprehensive Viva-voce 0-0-0 2 
6  Seminar & Technical Writing-II 0-0-0 2 
TOTAL 9-0-0 25 
 
NINTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 PA511 Professional Training-I 0-0-0 4 
2 PA513 Documentation of Innovative 
Details-I 
0-0-0 2 
3 PA515 Field Observation-I 0-0-0 2 
4 PA517 Site Supervision-I 0-0-0 2 
5 PA519 Critical Appraisal-I 0-0-0 2 
TOTAL 0-0-0 12 
 
TENTH SEMESTER 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 PA512 Professional Training-II 0-0-0 4 
2 PA514 Documentation of Innovative 
Details-II 
0-0-0 2 
3 PA516 Field Observation-II 0-0-0 2 
4 PA518 Site Supervision-II 0-0-0 2 
5 PA510 Critical Appraisal-II 0-0-0 2 
6 PA580 Academic Project Documentation 0-0-0 4 
TOTAL 0-0-0 16 
 Professional Training-I and II to be done for 18 weeks. 
7 
 
 The student has the choice to either do Professional Training-II with the same 
Architectural firm under which he/she did Professional Training-I or to do it in 
another firm for more exposure to different practice. 
 Academic Project Documentation means compilation of all the academic projects 
including Thesis and Professional Training. 
 
LIST OF PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
SL 
NO 
SUB CODE SUBJECTS LTP CREDITS 
1 PA101 Building Acoustics 3-0-0 3 
2 PA103 Building Illumination 3-0-0 3 
3 PA105 Housing 3-0-0 3 
4 PA107 Urban Design 0-1-3 3 
5 PA108 Interior Design 0-1-3 3 
6 PA109 Landscape design 0-1-3 3 
7 PA201 Construction Management 3-0-0 3 
8 PA202 Urban and Regional Planning 3-0-0 3 
9 PA203 Architectural Conservation 3-0-0 3 
10 PA204 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3 
11 PA205 Architectural Journalism 3-0-0 3 
12 PA206 Theatre/Film Set Design 3-0-0 3 
13 
PA207 
Expert Systems Advanced 
Computing 3-0-0 3 
14 PA208 Marketing Skills 3-0-0 3 
15 PA209 Building Systems Integration 3-0-0 3 
16 PA301 Visual Communication 3-0-0 3 
17 PA302 Sustainable Architecture 3-0-0 3 
18 PA303 Energy Conscious Architecture 3-0-0 3 
19 PA304 Intelligent Buildings 3-0-0 3 
20 PA305 Modular Coordination 3-0-0 3 
21 PA306 Art in Architecture 3-0-0 3 
22 PA307 Environmental studies 3-0-0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detail Syllabi
143
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICAL ENGINEERING
DETAILED SYLLABI OF COURSES
Sl. No Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
1 BM 201 Anatomy and Physiology 3-0-0 3
2 BM 202 Clinical Science 3-1-0 4
3 BM 203 Clinical Biochemistry 3-0-0 3
4 BM 205 Clinical Microbiology 3-0-0 3
6 BM 232 Biofluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
7 BM 234 Biothermodynamics 3-0-0 3
8 BM 242 Immunology 3-0-0 3
9 BM 244 Cell and Molecular Biology 3-0-0 3
10 BM252 Bioenergetics & Metabolism 3-0-0 3
11 BM 254 Bioprocess Calculation 3-0-0 3
12 BM 256 Enzymology 3-0-0 3
13 BM 271 Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
14 BM 272 Biofluid Mechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
15 BM 273 Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory 0-0-3 2
16 BM 274 Analytical Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
17 BM 275 Clinical Microbiology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
18 BM 282 Clinical Science Laboratory 0-0-3 2
19 BM 311 Medical Signal and Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
20 BM 312 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
21 BM 313 Biological Control System 3-0-0 3
22 BM 314 Biomedical Image Processing 3-1-0 4
23 BM 315 Laser & Fiber Optics in Medicine 3-0-0 3
24 BM 316 Biosensors and Biotransducers 3-0-0 3
25 BM 317 Biomedical Engineering 3-0-0 3
26 BM 318 Medical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
27 BM 321 Biomaterials 3-1-0 4
28 BM 322 Biopolymers 3-0-0 3
29 BM 324 Surface Engineering of Biomaterials 3-0-0 3
30 BM 331 Bioheat and Mass Transfer 3-1-0 4
31 BM 332 Biomechanics 3-0-0 3
32 BM 341 Genetic Engineering 3-1-0 4
33 BM 342 Applied Cell Biology 3-0-0 3
34 BM 343 Bioinformatics 3-0-0 3
35 BM 345 Animal Tissue Culture 3-0-0 3
36 BM 352 Biochemical Engineering 3-1-0 4
37 BM 353 Pharmaceutical Technology 3-0-0 3
38 BM 354 Bioseparation 3-1-0 4
39 BM 356 Bioinstrumentation and Process Control 3-1-0 4
40 BM 358 Bioreactor Analysis & Design 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
144
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
41 BM 361 Agricultural Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
42 BM 362 Plant Tissue Culture 3-0-0 3
43 BM 370 Bioinformatics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
44 BM 371 Cell and Molecular Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
45 BM 372 Bioseparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
46 BM 373 Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
47 BM 374 Biochemical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
48 BM 375 Bioheat and Mass transfer Laboratory 0-0-3 2
49 BM 376 Bioprocess Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
50 BM 378 Animal Cell Culture and Immunotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
51 BM 381 Biomaterial Laboratory 0-0-3 2
52 BM 382 Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
53 BM 383 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
54 BM 384 Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
55 BM 385 Medical Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
56 BM 386 Experimental Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
57 BM 387 Biomedical Signal Processing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
58 BM391 Special Topics in Biotechnology & Medical Engg. –I 3/4
59 BM392 Special Topics in Biotechnology & Medical Engg. –II 3/4
60 BM393 Special Laboratory in Biotechnology & Medical Engg. –I 0-0-3 2
61 BM394 Special Laboratory in Biotechnology & Medical Engg. –II 0-0-3 2
62 BM395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
63 BM396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
64 BM 401 Hospital Management 3-0-0 3
65 BM 402 Health Informatics 3-0-0 3
66 BM 403 Hospital Engineering and Information system 3-0-0 3
67 BM 405 Telemedicine 3-0-0 3
68 BM 411 Medical Embedded system 3-0-0 3
69 BM 413 Medical Imaging 3-0-0 3
70 BM 415 Electronic devices for Rehabilitation Engineering 3-0-0 3
71 BM 421 Tissue engineering 3-0-0 3
72 BM 422 Computer Application in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
73 BM 423 Nanotechnology in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
74 BM 424 Artificial Organs and Rehabilitation Engineering 3-0-0 3
75 BM 425 Biomaterials in Tissue Engineering 3-0-0 3
76 BM 427 BioComposites 3-0-0 3
77 BM 428 Nanotechnology in Biomedical Engineering 3-0-0 3
78 BM 429 Materials in medical science 3-0-0 3
79 BM 431 Physiological system modeling 3-0-0 3
80 BM 432 Biomicrofluidics 3-0-0 3
81 BM 433 Biotransport 3-0-0 3
82 BM 441 Protein Engineering 3-0-0 3
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
145
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
83 BM 442 Cancer Biology 3-0-0 3
84 BM 443 Introduction to Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
85 BM 444 Structural Biology 3-0-0 3
86 BM 452 Fermentation Technology 3-0-0 3
87 BM 463 Food Technology 3-0-0 3
88 BM 465 Biological Waste Treatment 3-0-0 3
89 BM 471 Bioprocess Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
90 BM 472 Biomicrofluidics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
91 BM 473 Food Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
92 BM 481 Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
93 BM 482 Computer aided Tissue Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
94 BM 483 Computational Biomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
95 BM 484 Structural Biology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
96 BM 491 Research Project–I 0-0-6 4
97 BM 492 Research Project–II 0-0-9 6
98 BM 493 Seminar and Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
99 BM 494 Seminar and Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
100 BM 495 Short term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-3 2
101 BM 496 Comprehensive Viva Voce 0-0-0 2
BM 201 ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction: Definition of human anatomy and physiology, anatomical terms and planes; Skeletal system: Classification 
of bones, joints and muscles, major muscles of limbs and their actions. Functional concept of the human body, bone 
and muscle physiology; Cardio Vascular System: Structure & function of Heart & blood vessels, Special functional 
tissue of heart, E. C. G., Cardiac cycle, Blood – composition, function, blood group, blood clotting. blood pressure-
regulation & controlling factors; Respiratory system: Upper and lower respiratory tract, Structure and Function of 
respiratory membrane, Pulmonary circulation, Mechanics of breathing, Transport and control of gases, Lungs volume 
and capacities, Regulation of respiration, Pulmonary function tests; Nervous system & special senses: Brain and spinal 
cord, peripheral autonomic nervous system, nerve physiology, EEG, MEG & ECG; Eye & ear; Endocrine Glands: types, 
location, description and functions; Digestive system: Parts of digestive system, gastro intestinal tract and associated 
glands; Urinary system: Parts and function of urinary system; Male and female reproductive system and Lymphatic 
system: Spleen, glands and lymph nodes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. S Snell, Clinical Anatomy by Regions, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 8th edition, 2007. 
2. R. Drake, A. W. Vogl, Adam W. M. Mitchell, and R. Tibbitts, Gray’s Atlas of Anatomy, Churchill Livingston, 1st edition, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Saladin, Anatomy & Physiology: The Unity of Form and Function, McGraw-Hill College, 2006
2. E. N. Marieb, JonMallatt, P. B. W. Addison, Human Anatomy, Wesley, 2007. 
3. D. Shier, J. Butler, Ricki Lewis Hole’s Human Anatomy & Physiology, McGraw-Hill College, 2006 
BM 202 CLINICAL	SCIENCE 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacodynamics, Drug dose, Enzyme kinetics, and Autonomic nervousystemdrugs, 
Hormonalmedicine, diovascular and renalmedicine, Chemotherapeutics and antibiotics, Neuropsychiatric drugs, 
Drug side effects, Cause of cancer, solid tumours of the body, Basics of Embryology, histopathology of normal and 
abnormal body tissues, Different type of blood cells and pathologies, Different types of microbes, Bacteria, Virus, 
fungal disorders, Protozoa and nematodes, Blood borne infections, Sign and symptoms, Gait analysis and orthopaedic 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
146
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
problems, Detail anatomy of Eye and general ophthalmic disorders, Problems during anaesthesia, ventilation, 
Emergency treatment, Different types of surgical procedure, Pre-operative and Postoperative Care, Pregnancy and 
Labour, Common gynaecological and obstetrical problems, Common Skin and ENT disorders, Medical diagnostics, 
Advantage and disadvantages of different diagnostic Procedure. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. S. Fauci, E. Braunwald, D. L. Kasper andS. L. Hauser, Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, McGraw-Hill Professional: 17th 
Edition, 2008
2. L. S. Bickley, Guide Physical Examination and History Taking, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 10thEdition2008
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. A Harvey, P. CChampe, R. Finkel and L. Cubeddu, Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Pharmacology, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 4th Edition 2008
2. E. Klatt and V. Kumar, Robbins and Cotran Review of Pathology, Saunders; 2nd Edition 2004
BM 203 CLINICAL	BIOCHEMISTRY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Living cell: Definition, structure and function, prokaryotic vs eukaryotic cells, sub cellular organelles, function of 
cell organelles, structure and function of cell membrane, transport of substances across cell membrane, cell to 
cell junctions and communications; Cellular Metabolism: Carbohydrate metabolism (Glycolysis, TCA cycle, Pentose 
Phosphate Pathway, Gluconeogenesis /Glycogen Metabolism, Malate and Lactate shunts, Regulation of Carbohydrate 
Metabolism), lipid metabolism (Fatty acid synthesis, Beta oxidation and regulation of FA metabolism), amino acids and 
protein metabolism, introduction to nucleic acid chemistry; Redox potential, Oxidative phosphorylation; Electrolytes: 
Acid base balance and biochemical measurement of acids –base and electrolyte status of the patients. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Robert Murray, Peter A Mayes, Victor W Rodwell, Daryl K Granner, Harper’s Illustrated Biochemistry: McGraw Hill Companies, 
27th edition, 2006. 
2. Pamela C Champe, Richard A Harvey, Denise R Ferrier, Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Biochemistry: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 4 edition, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. N. Chatterji and M. Schinde, Textbook of Medical Biochemistry: CBS press, 4th edition 2004
2. Martin Holtzhauer, Basic Methods for the Biochemical Lab: Springer 1st edition, 2006. 
3. Rao N Mallkarajuna, Medical biochemistry, New age international Pvt Ltd, 2002
BM 205 CLINICAL	MICROBIOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to Microbiology; Prokaryotic cell structure and function; Microbialnutrition, Microbial growth, Control 
of Microorganisms by physical and chemical agents; Microbial genetics and Microbial Taxonomy; The Deinococci 
and Nonproteo bacteria G–ve; The proteo bateria; The low G+C grampositive bacteria; The high G+C grampositive 
bacteria; The Fungi and Slimemolds; Viruses; Medical Microbiology
Essential	Reading:	
1. Prescott/Harley/Klein’s, Microbiology, McGraw-Hill Science / Engineering/Math, 7th Edition, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. K. Cowan and K. P. Talaro, Microbiology: A Systems Approach, McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math; 2nd edition, 2008. 
2. M. J. Leboffe, M. Leboffe and B. E. Pierce, Photographic Atlas For The Microbiology Lab, Morton Publishing Company, 2nd 
Edition, 1999. 
BM 232 BIOFLUID	MECHANICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Properties of fluids: viscosity, density, specific volume, specific weight. Pressure and its measurement. Kinematics 
of fluid flow: types of fluid flow, continuity equation. Dynamics of fluid flow: Euler’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation. 
Circulatory biofluid mechanics: systemic and pulmonary circulations, circulation in the heart. Blood Rheology. Models 
of biofluid flows: Poiseuille’s flow, pulsatile flow. Non-Newtonian fluids: power-law model, Herschel-Bulkley model, 
Casson model. Krogh model of oxygen diffusion from blood vessel to tissue. Dimensional analysis and modeling. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
147
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. N. Mazumdar, Biofluid Mechanics, World Scientific, 2004. 
2. Frank M. White, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, 2010. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. Waite and J. FineApplied Biofluid Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
2. A. K. Jain, Fluid Mechanics, Khanna Publishers. 
BM 234 BIOTHERMODYNAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Energy transformation. First law of thermodynamics with examples from biochemistry. Second law of thermodynamics. 
Gibbs free energy and its application in biology: photosynthesis, glycolysis, osmosis, dialysis, membrane transport, 
ELISA, PCR. Reaction kinetics: rate constant and order of reaction, first-order and second-order reactions, Enzyme 
kinetics. 
EssentialReading:	
1. D. J. Haynie, Biological thermodynamics, Cambridge, 2008. 
BM 242 IMMUNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, basic concepts in immunology, components of the immune system, principles of innate and adaptive 
immunity, Innate immunity, Different lines and layers of defense, Pattern recognition in innate immune system, 
The complement system, Induced innate responses to infections, Antigen recognition by B-cells, The structure of 
a typical antibody molecule, Interaction between the antibody and specific antigen, Diversity of Immunoglobulins: 
VDJ Recombination; Antigen recognition by T cells, Antigen processing and presentation: MHC, Development and 
survival of lymphocytes, Lymphocytes in bone marrow and thymus, Positive and negatives election of lymphocytes, 
Survival and maturation of lymphocytes, The Adaptive Immune Response, T Cell-Mediated Immunity and cytotoxicity, 
Macrophage activation byarmed CD4TH1cells, Humoral Immune Response; Adaptive Immunity to Infection, Infectious 
agents and how they cause disease, The course of the adaptive response to infection, The mucosal immune system, 
Immunological memory; Failures of Host Defense Mechanisms, How do pathogens evade the immune system, 
Inherited immune deficiency diseases, Acquired immune deficiency syndrome, Allergy and Hypersensitivity, Effector 
mechanisms in allergic reactions and IgE, Hypersensitivity diseases, Autoimmunity and Transplantation, Autoimmune 
responses are directed against self antigens. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Janeway, Travers, Walport, and Shlomchik, Immuno biology, the immune system in health and disease, Garland Science 
Publishing, 6thEdition, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. M. Sompayrac, How the Immune System Works (Blackwell’s How It Works), Wiley-Blackwell; 3rd edition, 2008. 
BM 244 CELL	&	MOLECULAR	BIOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction: Properties of cells, cell membranes, subcellular organelles, Cytoskeleton; Cell Junctions: Types and 
structure of junctions (Tight Junctions, Adherens Junctions, Desmosomes); Cell communication: communication 
via diffusible molecules (surface receptors and intracellular receptors), Cellular Continuities (Contact-Mediated and 
ECM-Mediated), Role of ECM in Morphogenesis, Gap Junctions, Cell adhesion molecules: Modes of cell adhesion, 
classification and functions of CAMs; Signal Transduction via Surface Receptors: Classification and action of individual 
surface receptors (Ion Channel Linked Receptor, Enzyme Receptors, GuanylateCyclases, Receptor Tyrosine Kinases, 
Cytokine-Receptor Superfamily, G-Protein Coupled Receptor); cAMP Signaling from Receptor to Function; Dual 
Signalling Pathway: Inositol phosphates and protein kinase C, calcium & calmodulin; Cross-Talk, signal amplification 
& cascade mechanisms; Microtubules & Motor Proteins; Microfilaments, Myosins, and Microbes; Chemotaxis & the 
Inflammatory Response; Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis: The Events; Vesicle Trafficking: COPs, SNARES & Other 
Things; Protein Targeting; Cell Cycle: Stages, regulation of cell cycle specific genes, cellular aspects of cancer, Cellular, 
oncogenes and gene therapy. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
148
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Gerald Karp: Cell and Molecular Biology: Concepts and Experiments; Wiley; 5 edition, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. Nindl Waite, Lee R. Waite; Applied Cell and Molecular Biology for Engineers; McGraw-Hill Professional; 1 edition, 2007. 
2. B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, P. Walter; Molecular Biology of the Cell; Garland Science; 5 edition; 2004. 
BM252 BIOENERGETICS	&	METABOLISM 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Free Energy Concept : Molecular basis of entropy, concept of free energy, standard free energy and measurement of 
free energy, significance in metabolism. Application of first and second law of thermodynamics to biological systems; 
Energy Conversions - Mitochondria: Sequence of electron carriers and sites of oxidativephosphorylation, ATP 
generation, and hemeandnon-hemeiron proteins. Thermodynamic considerations, oxidation - reduction electrodes, 
standard electrode potential, redox couples, phosphate group transfer potential; Chloroplast: Architecture, light 
harvesting complexes, bacteriorhodopsin, plastocyanin, carotenoids and other pigments. Hill reaction, photosystem 
I and II-location and mechanism of energy transfer. Calvin cycle, quantitative efficiency, photorespiration, C4 
metabolism; Nitrogen Fixation: Biological fixation of nitrogen, symbiotic and nonsymbiotic nitrogen fixation. 
Nitrogenaseenzyme complex – azoferredoxin and molybdoferrodoxin. Physiological electron donors and mechanism 
of nitrogen reduction, assimilation of ammonia, nitrogen cycle. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Saks, Molecular System Bioenergetics: Energy for Life, Wiley-VCH; 1st Edition, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Nelson and W. H. Cox, Lehningers Principles of Biochemistry, Fourth Edition, 2004. 
2. Greenspan and Baster, Basicand Clinical Endocrinology. 
BM 254 BIOPROCESS	CALCULATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to Biochemical Engineering Calculations: Units and dimensions, mole concept, the chemical equations 
and stoichiometry, limiting and excess reactant, conversion and yield. Mass and energy balances in bioprocesses, 
flow sheet and process calculations, metabolic stoichiometry of growth and product formation, material balance 
and energy balance with recycle, by pass and purge streams. Solving material balance problems that do not involve 
chemical reactions, solving material balances problems involving chemical reactions, multiple subsystems, recycle, 
bypass, and purge calculations. Gases Vapors, Liquids and Solids: Ideal gas law calculations, real gas relationships, vapor 
pressure and liquids, saturation, partial saturation and humidity. Energy Balances: Concepts and units, calculation 
of enthalpy changes, application of the general energy balance without reactions occurring energy balances that 
account for chemical reaction, reversible processes and the mechanical energy balances, heats of solution and 
mixing, psychometric charts and their use. Microbial Stoichiometry 
BM 256 ENZYMOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
The naming and classification of enzymes; structure and function of enzymes; specificity of enzyme action; monomeric 
and oligomeric enzymes; kinetics of single and multisubstrate enzymes catalyzed reactions; different types of enzyme 
inhibitors; sigmoidal and allosteric enzymes; chemical nature of enzyme catalysis; bindings of ligand to proteins; 
applications of enzymology. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. Palmer (Ed), Enzymes: Biochemistry, Biotechnology, Clinical Chemistry, Horwood Publishing Chinchester, 2001. 
2. L. Stryer (Ed), Biochemistry, W. H. Freeman & Co., New York, 1995. 
BM 271 ANATOMY	AND	PHYSIOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Identification of various organs and skeletal parts from charts and models-1, Morohometrics of human femur, skull 
and pelvis from CT Scan Images, Preparation of slices from tissue, fixation and examination under microscope, 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
149
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Preparation of blood film, staining and examination under microscope, TLC, DLC estimation of blood, Recording the 
ECG, EEG and EMG signal, Recording respiratory parameters through spirometry, Examination of eye with direct 
ophthalmoscope
BM 272 BIOFLUID	MECHANICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Viscosity Measurement, Surface tension measurement, Verification of Bernoulli’s theorem, Reynoldsapparatus, 
Pitottube, Flowmeasurement, Calculation of friction factor, Rheological testing of non-Newtonian fluid, 
Reciprocatingpump, Centrifugal pump
BM 273 CLINICAL	BIOCHEMISTRY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Study of plasma protein electrophoresis; Study of chromatography of aminoacids; Study of colorimetry. Study of 
spectrophotometer. Study of pHmeter. Quantitative estimation of glucose: Enzymatic method of glucose estimation in 
human blood sample. Quantitative estimation of serum urea and creatinine. Urine analysis for presence of: reducing 
sugars, proteins, ketonebodies, blood, bile salts and bile pigments. 
BM 274 ANALYTICAL	BIOTECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Determination of melting temperature of DNA, pH mediated equilibrium unfolding of protein, denaturant mediated 
equilibrium unfolding of protein; enzyme isolation and kinetics; monitoring protein-DNA interaction; monitoring 
protein aggregation through thioflavin T assay; calculation of binding parameters in proteins through quenching 
study; analysis of protein structure procured from protein data bank using swisspdb viewer; calculation of protein 
hydrophobicity, secondary structure, aggregation tendency through online softwares. 
BM 275 CLINICAL	MICROBIOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Laboratory equipment and tools–The use of light microscope; Determination of cell number; size measurement of 
microbial cells. Preparation of media to culture micro organisms and ubiquity; Selective, differential and enriched 
media preparation; Observation of micro organisms: the wetmount technique Isolation and pure culture by streak 
plate technique; Differential stain: The Gramstain; The acid-faststain; The sporestain by Malachitegreen; The 
capsulestain by Indianink; The effect of antibiotics on bacteria: Determination of MIC of antibiotic against E. coli; 
Enumeration of heterotrophic bacteria from drinking watersource and tapwater: dilutions, calculations
BM 282 CLINICAL	SCIENCE	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Urea, creatinine and electrolytes analysis of urine through ELISA Plate Reader, Identification of the various diagnostics 
and surgical tools in hospital scenario, Hb %, ESR, PCV, MCHC, MCH estimation, Interpretation of ECG from subjects, 
Interpretation and analysis of EEG Signal, Spectrophotometric analysis of various chemicals in blood serum, Isolation 
and Amplification of DNA for forensic examination
BM 311 MEDICAL	SIGNAL	&	SIGNAL	PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to biomedical signals, Sampling theorem, continuous and discrete LTI system, properties of LTI system; 
Introduction to Z Transform: The Z transform, properties of Z transform, inverse Z transform, transfer function in Z 
domain, location of poles and zeroes of Z- domain; Discrete Fourier Series and Transform: Discrete Fourier series, 
Discrete Fourier Transform(DFT), Fast Fourier Transform(FFT); Digital Filters Realizations: Characteristics of FIR 
filters, frequency response, design of FIR filters. Analog filter approximations-Butterworth and Chebychev. Design 
of IIR filters from analog filters: bilinear transformation method, step and impulse in variance techniques, spectral 
transformations. Introduction to joint time-frequency analysis. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
150
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Oppenheim and R. W Schafer, Digital Signal Processing, Prentice Hall India, 2005 
2. D. C. Reddy, Biomedical Signal Processing – Principles and Technique, Tata McGraw-Hill., 2005 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Antoniou, Digital Signal Processing, McGraw Hill, 2005 
2. Lefeachor, Digital Signal Processing, Prentice Hall, 2002 
3. J. G. Prokis and D. G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithm and Applications, PHI/Pearson Education, 1996 
BM 312 BIOMEDICAL	INSTRUMENTATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Transducers: Resistance type: Potentiometer, Strain gauge; inductive type: LVDT; Capacitive type: Differential pressure 
transmitter, Piezoelectric crystal; Sensing elements: Temperature sensing elements: RTD, Thermistor, Thermocouple, 
Semiconductor type (IC sensor); Pressure sensing elements: Manometers; Elastic elements: Bourdon tube, Bellows; 
Electrical type; Mcleod Gauge, Pirani Gauge; Flow sensing elements: Headmeters (Orifice, Venturi, Flow nozzle), 
Area meters (Rotameters), Electromagnetic flowmeter, Coriolisflowmeter. Measuring circuits: Deflection Bridge, 
Instrumentation amplifier; Signal conditioning: Switching devices: Relays (electromagnetic), Contactor, Transistor 
switches; OPAMP & Practical considerations: Inverting, Non-inverting, and differential configuration, Power 
amplification; Active and passive filters (low pass, high pass, band pass, notch); Isolation amplifiers; constant voltage 
and constant current sources for excitation, Wired signal transmission in industry (Voltage, 4-20 mA loop, Frequency); 
Signal Modulation; signal conversion: voltage-to-frequency, frequency-to-voltage, voltage-to-current, current-to-
voltage; A/D and D/A converters. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Cromwell, Weibell & Pfeiffer, Biomedical Instrumentation & Measurement, Prentice Hall, India, 2ndEdn. 2003 
2. J. Webster, Bioinstrumentation, Wiley & Sons. 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. Bronzino, Biomedical Engineering & Instrumentation, PWS Engg. Boston. 3rd Edn. 
2. J. Enderle, Bioinstrumentation, Morgan & Claypool Publisher 2006. 
3. R. S. Khandpur, Handbook of Bio-Medical Instrumentation, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003 
BM 313 BIOLOGICAL	CONTROL	SYSTEM 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Open and closed loop system. Mathematical models of physical systems. Transfer functions. Block diagram algebra, 
Signal flow graphs, Feedback characteristics of control systems. Control systems and components. DC and AC 
servomotors. Principles of stepper motors; Standard test signals. Time response of first order and second order 
systems. Design specifications of second systems. Proportional controller. PD controller, PID controller Necessary 
conditions for stability, stability criteria, Relative stability; Concept and construction of root locus, Root contours. 
Frequency response analysis, Correlation between time and frequency response, Bode plots, Stabilty in frequency 
domain. Nyquiststabilitycriterion; Examples of biological control system. Cardiovascular control system, respiratory 
control system, Bodytemperature regulation, Bloodglucose regulation; Pupilcontrolsystem, visual fixation system, 
Oculo-motorsystemskeletal muscle servo-mechanism, The semicircularcanal, Free swinginglimbs. Human operator 
tracking characteristics. Biological receptors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. O Katsuhika, Modem control engineering, 2nd edition, Prentice hall of India, 1992 
2. I J Nagrath and M Gopal, Control Systems Engineering, 3rd edition, New Age publishers, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M C Khoo, Physiological Control Systems- Analysis, Simulation and Estimation, IEEE Press, 2000. 
2. R P Van Wijk Van Brievingh and D P F moller (Eds), Biomedical Modeling and Simulation on a PC –A workbench for physiology 
and biomedical engineering, springer verlag, 1993. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
151
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 314 BIOMEDICAL	IMAGE	PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Digital image fundamentals: Image digitization, sampling & quantization, neighbor of pixels, connectivity, relations, 
equivalence & transitive closure, distance measures, arithmetic/logic operations, Different types of transform- 
discrete, fast Fourier, 2-D Fourier & inverse Fourier Image enhancement fundamentals: Spatial & frequency domain 
methods, contrast enhancement, histogram processing, image smoothing, image averaging, masking, image 
sharpening, removing of blur caused by uniform linear motion, enhancement in the frequency domain; Image 
restoration fundamentals: Degradation model, discrete formulation, algebraic approach to restoration–unconstrained 
& constrained; Image compression and segmentation fundamentals: Fidelity criteria, image compression models, 
lossy and lossless compression technique. Image segmentation: point detection, line detection, edge detection, edge 
linking and boundary detection; Algorithms used in medical image processing: Brief of reconstruction techniques – 
algebraic, simultaneous iterative and simultaneous algebraic. Reconstruction algorithm for parallel projections, fan 
beam projection and back projection. Introduction to various approaches of pattern recognition. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. Suetens, Fundamentals of image processing, Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
2. Gonzalez and Woods, Digital image processing, 2nd ed., Pearson, 2007 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. C. Gonzalez, R. E. Woods, S. L. Eddins, Digital Image Processing Using MATLAB(R), Course Technology, 1 edition, 2004 
2. A. K Jain, Fundamentals of image processing, prentice hall, Eagle cliffs, New Jersey, 1989 
3. Chanda & Majumdar, Digital image processing and analysis, PHI, 2003 
BM 315 LASER	&	FIBER	OPTICS	IN	MEDICINE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Laser characteristics: Single frequency operation, coherence of laser, spatial distribution, intensity of laser emission, 
polarization of laser emission, measurement of pulsed laser energy. Principles of laser applications in medicine and 
biology; Laser in biology: Optical properties of tissue, Pathology of laser reaction in skin, thermal effects, laser irradiation, 
Non thermal reactions of laser energy in tissue, effect of adjuvant; Lasers in surgery: Surgical instrumentation of CO2, 
Ruby, Nd-YAG, He-Ne, Argonion, Q-switched operations, continuous wave, Quasi–continuous, surgical applications 
of the selasers; Laser applications: Lasers in dermatology, lasers in ophthalmology, laser photocoagulations, laser 
in dentistry, Laser flow cytometry, Laser transillumination & diaphanography- Speckle intereferometry, holography 
-Application Safety with biomedical Lasers; Fiberoptics in diagnosis: Transmission of signals, light and construction 
details of optical fiber, application of fiberoptics in medicalfield. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. Goldman, The Biomedical laser Technology and Clinical Applications, Springer, 1981 
2. Hans-Peter Berlien, Gerhard J. Müller, H. Breuer, and N. Krasner, Applied Laser Medicine, Springer; 1 edition, 2004 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Francis T. S. Yu and Shizhuo Yin, Fiber Optic Sensors, CRC; 1 edition 2002 
2. Nandini K. Jog, Electronics in medicine and biomedical instrumentation, Prentice Hall of India 
BM 316 BIOSENSORS	AND	BIOTRANSDUCERS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Classification of transducers, selecting of transducers, circuit based on transduction Temperature transducers, 
Displacement transducers, Pressure transducer, photoelectric transducers, Flow transducers, piezoelectric 
transducers and their applications; Sensors/receptors in the human body, basic organization of nervous system-
neural mechanism and circuit processing, Chemoreceptor, sensor models in the time and frequency domains; 
Biochemical Transducers-Electrode theory: electrode-tissue interface, metal-electrolyte interface, electrode-skin 
interface, electrode impedance, electrical conductivity of electrode jellies and creams; Biopotential electrodes, 
Reference electrodes, Recording electrodes for ECG, EEG and EMG. Transducers for the measurement of ions and 
dissolved gases, pH electrode, specific ion electrodes; Biosensors-Ion exchange membrane electrodes. Types, basic 
components and medical applications of biosensors, Basic principles of MOSFET biosensors & BIOMEMS; Optical 
sensor-photodetectors, optical fiber sensors, and indicator mediated transducers, general principles of optical sensing, 
optical fiber temperature sensors. Pulse sensor: photoelectric pulse transducer, strain gauge pulse transducer. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
152
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Handbook of Biosensors and Electronic Noses: Medicine, Food and the Environment, CRC-Press; 1 edition; 1996 
2. T. Togawa, T. Tamura, P. Ake Oberg, Biomedical Transducers and Instruments, CRC Press, 1997 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Biosensors, Oxford University Press, USA; 2 edition, 2004 
2. D. L. Wise, Biosensors: Theory and Applications, CRC Press, 1993, 2001 
BM 317 BIOMEDICAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
History of Biomedical Engineering; Moral & Ethics; Anatomy & Physiology; Rehabilitation Engineering; Biomaterials; 
Artificial organs; Tissue Engineering; Biomedical Instrumentation; Biomedical Sensors; Biosignal Processing; 
Bioelectric Phenomena; Biomedical Imaging; Patient Safety in Hospitals; Biomedical waste disposal. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. D. Enderle, Susan M. Blanchard, Joseph D; Bronzino, Introduction to Biomedical Engineering- Academic Press, 2005
2. J. D. Bronzino, Biomedical engineering fundamentals; CRC Press, 2006
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. B. Ritter, Stanley Reisman, Bozena B. Michniak, Biomedical Engineering Principles, CRCPress, 2005
2. Silver Frederick H, Biomaterials, Medical Devices and Tissue Engineering, Chapman & Hall, London- 1994
3. Leslie, Cromwell, Fred J. Weibell, Erich A. Pfeiffer; Biomedical Instrumentation and Measurements; 2nd ed. Pearson 
Education-2004
BM 318 MEDICAL	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Human body, Biomedical Instrumentation and Measurement, Basic Principles of Measurement, Electrodes, Sensors, 
and Transducers, Bioamplifiers, Electrocardiographs, Physiological Pressure and Other Cardiovascular Measurements 
and Devices, Measurement of Respiratory Parameters, Respiratory Therapy Equipment, Measurement of Brain 
Function, Intensive and Coronary Care Units, Operating Rooms, Medical Laboratory Instrumentation, Medical 
Ultrasonography, Electrosurgery Generators, Battery-Operated Medical Equipments, Electro-Optics, Radiology and 
Nuclear medicine Equipment, Electromagnetic Interference, Quality Assurance, Quality Improvement, Medical 
Equipment Maintenance. 
Essential	readings:	
1. John G Webster, Medical Instrumentation: Application and Design, ISBN: 8126511060, ISBN-13: 9788126511068, 978-
8126511068, Publisher: Wiley India Pvt Ltd, Edition: 3rd Edition (2007). 
2. John G. Webster, Clark John W. Jr., Michael R. Neuman, Medical Instrumentation: Application and Design, ISBN: 0471676004, 
ISBN-13: 9780471676003, 978-0471676003, Publisher: John Wiley & Sons, Edition: 4th Edition (2009). 
Suggested Readings: 
1. Shakti Chatterjee, Aubert Miller, Biomedical Instrumentation Systems, Publisher: Delmar Cengage Learning; 1 edition, ISBN-10: 
141801866X, ISBN-13: 978-1418018665. 
2. Barbara Christe, Introduction to Biomedical Instrumentation: The Technology of Patient Care, Publisher: Cambridge University 
Press; 1 edition, ISBN-10: 0521515122, ISBN-13: 978-0521515122 
BM 321 BIOMATERIALS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, biomaterials in medicine; Metallic implant materials: different types, Host tissue reaction with biometal, 
corrosion behavior and the importance of passive films for tissue adhesion. Hard tissue & Soft tissue replacement; 
Polymeric implant materials: Types and classification, Mechanical, Surface, Electrochemical & Physiochemical 
properties of biopolymers. Biodegradable polymers for medical application. Synthetic polymeric membranes and 
their biological applications; Ceramic implant materials: Types of bioceramics, I mportance of wear resistance 
and low fracture toughness. Host tissue reactions: importance of interfacial tissue reaction; Composite implant 
materials: Mechanics of improvement of properties by incorporating different elements. Composite theory of fiber 
reinforcement. Polymers filled with osteogenic fillers. Host tissue reactions; Testing of Biomaterials: biocompatibility, 
blood compatibility and tissue compatibility, Toxicity tests, sensitization, carcinogenicity, mutagenicity and special 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
153
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
tests, Invitro and Invivo testing; Sterilisation of implants and devices: ETO, gamma radiation, autoclaving. Effects of 
sterilization. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. V. Bhat, Biomaterials, Springer, 2002. 
2. JB ParkandJ. D. Boonzino, Biomaterials: Principles and Application, CRC Press, 2002
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J. Black, Biological Performanceofmaterials, Taylor & Francis, 2006
2. C. P. SharmaandM. Szycher, Blood compatible materials and devices, TechnomicPublishingCo. Ltd., 1991. 
3. J. B. ParkandR. S. Lakes, An Introductionto Biomaterials, Springer, 2007
4. B. D. Ratner, F. J. Schoen, A. S. Hoffman, J. E. Lemons, BiomaterialsScience: An introductionto Materialsin medicine, 
AcademicPress, 2004. 
BM 322 BIOPOLYMERS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introductions to biopolymers, properties of biopolymers, structure-properties relationship, applications. 
Polysaccharides: alginates, dextrans, chitosan, hyaluronic acids. Bacterial polyesters: poly(hydroxyl alkanoates), 
poly(hydroxybutyrates). Proteinas: collagen, fibrin, gelatin, albumin. Artificical biopolymers: aliphatic polyesters 
derived from lactic and glycolic acids, aliphatic polyesters derived from malic acid, polyamides derived from citric acid 
and lysine, primary amine-containing polyesters derived froms erine. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. D. Ratner, A. S. Hoffman, F. J. Schoen, J. E. Lemons, BiomaterialsScience, AcademicPress; Edition 1, 1996. 
2. J. Y. Wong, J. D. Bronzino, Biomaterials, CRC Press, Edition 2007
SupplementaryReading: 
1. SweeHinTeoh, Engineering Materials for Biomedical Applications, World Scientific Edition1, 2004. 
2. J. B. Park, J. D. Bronzino, J. D. Bronzino, ParkB. Park, Biomaterials: Principles and Applications, Taylor & Francis, Edition1, 2002. 
BM 324 SURFACE	ENGINEERING	OF	BIOMATERIALS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Surface dependent engineering properties, common surface initiated engineering failures; mechanism of surface 
degradation of material used in the body and outside the body in natural environment in service condition, Importance 
and necessity of surface engineering; Classification and scope of surface engineering in metals, ceramics, polymers 
and composites, tailoring of surfaces of advanced materials; Surface protection; surface modification techniques: 
classification, principles, methods, and technology; conventional surface engineering methods: electrochemistry and 
electro-deposition; Scope and application of conventional surface engineering techniques in engineering materials; 
advantages and limitations of conventional processes; Recent trend in surface engineering: physical/chemical vapour 
deposition; plasma spray coating; plasma assisted ion implantation; surface modification by directed energy beams 
like ion, electron and laser beams; Characterization and testing/evaluation of surface- properties; structure-property 
correlation. Economics and energy considerations, designing of surface engineering processes; Surface engineering 
of medical instruments and implants. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. Hao and J. Lawrence, Laser surface treatment of Bio-implant materials, John-Wiley and Sons publishers, 2006. 
2. K. G. Budinsky, Surface engineering for wear resistance, VIed, PrenticeHall, NewYork 1998. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J. E. Ellingsen, S. PetterLyngstadaas, Bio-Implant Interface: Improving Biomaterials and Tissue Reactions, CRC Press, 2003: 
2. G. Rakhorst, R. Ploeg, Biomaterials InModern Medicine: The Groningen Perspective, World Scientific PublishingCompany; 
1stedition2008. 
BM 331 BIOHEAT	AND	MASS	TRANSFER	 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Fundamentals of heat and mass transfer in biological systems - Thermoregulation, Metabolism, Thermal comfort. 
Temperature in living systems –hyperthermia and hypothermia. Modes of Heat Transfer – Conduction, Convection, 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
154
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and Radiation. Basic law of heat conduction – Fourier’s law; thermal conductivity of biological materials, temperature 
dependence of thermal conductivity, steady state heat conduction through a layered surface with different thermo-
physical properties (e.g. skin). Effect of metabolism on heat transfer. Transient (unsteady state) heat conduction. Heat 
transfer with phase change – freezing and thawing. The bio-heat transfer equation for mammalian tissue. Convection 
heat transfer and the concept of heat transfer coefficient, individual and overall heat transfer coefficient, critical/ 
optimum insulation thickness, heat transfer through extended surfaces. Radiation exchange between surfaces, Mass 
Transfer: Equilibrium, Mass conservation, and kinetics, Modes of Mass Transfer: Diffusion, Dispersion, and Advection. 
Governing equations and boundary conditions of mass transfer, Steady and unsteady diffusion mass transfer (e.g. 
drug delivery), Convection mass transfer, Local and overall mass transfer coefficient, heat and mass transfer analogy. 
Flow in porous media. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Ashim K. Datta, Biological and Bioenvironmental Heat and Mass Transfer: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2002. 
2. Frank P. Incropera and David P. DeWitt, Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer: John Wiley & Sons; 5th edition 2006. 
BM 332 BIOMECHANICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Review of principles of mechanics, vector mechanics - resultant forces of coplanar and non- coplanar and concurrent 
and non-concurrent forces, parallel forces, equilibrium of coplanar forces, Newton’s laws of motion, work and energy, 
moment of inertia; Analysis of rigid bodies in equilibrium, free body diagrams, system analysis in equilibrium, types 
of support or joint, Analysis of joints in various postures, Basic assumptions and limitations, biomechanical analysis 
of elbow, shoulder, spinal column, hip knee and ankle; Forces involve in blood flow, general Bernoulli’s equation, 
wind kessel model, stress in the ventricular wall, pressure volume loop. Hagen-poiseuillelaw – derivation and 
applications, steady laminar flow in elastic tube, wave propagation in blood, reflection and transmission of waves 
at arterial junctions, blood flow in veins, microcirculation; Mechanism of air flow, respiratory cycle, lung ventilation 
model, methods of determining pressure, flow rate and volume spirometry, respiratory plethysmography, diagnostic 
significance of the lung-ventilation model, static and dynamic respiratory mechanics tests; Design of orthopedic 
implant, specifications for aprosthetic joint, biocompatibility, requirement of a biomaterial, characteristics of different 
types of biomaterials, manufacturing process of implants, fixation of implants. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. YCFung, Biomechanics: MechanicalPropertiesofLivingTissues, Springer, 2ndEdition, 1993. 
2. N. OzkayaandM. Nordin, Fundamentals of Biomechanics-Equilibrium, Motion and Deformation, Springer-verlag, 2nd Edition1999
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J. GWebster, Medical Instrumentation –Application and design, JohnWileyand sons Inc. 3rded. 2003. 
2. D. Dowson and V. Wright, An introduction to Biomechanics of joints and joint replacements, Mechanical Engineering 
Publications, 1980
3. Y. C. Fung, Biodynamics-circulation, Springer-Verlag, 1994. 
BM 341 GENETIC ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction: Genes, Chromatin, Chromosomes and Genome; Cell and tissue culture techniques; DNA technology: 
Scope and Gene cloning - concept and basic steps; application of bacteria and viruses in genetic engineering; 
Molecular biology of E. coli and bacteriophages in the context of their use in genetic engineering; Gene cloning: 
Restriction endonucleases, ligases and other enzymes useful in gene cloning, PCR technology for gene/DNA detection, 
cDNA, usages of plasm id and phagesas vectors; Model vectors for eukaryotes-Viruses, Gene libraries; Use of marker 
genes; Medicine related applications i.e. commercial synthesisof hormones and vaccines. Microbial applications 
i.e.large scale preparation of organic chemicals, bio-mining, microorganisms as feed of livestock; Biotechnology and 
environment i.e. pollution control, wastedisposal, biogas; Monoclonal antibodies and their applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Desmond S. T. Nicholl; AnIntroductiontoGenetic Engineering, Cambridge UniversityPress, 3rd Edition, 2008. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. M. Gen, R. Cheng, GeneticAlgorithmsandEngineeringDesign, Wiley-Interscience, 1st Edition, 1997. 
2. J. A. Nolta, GeneticEngineering of MesenchymalStemCells, Springer, 1th edition, 2006. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
155
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 342 APPLIED	CELL	BIOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	Biochemistry,	Cell	and	Molecular	Biology
Structural intricacy & Chemical composition of cells, Structure, diversity and function of receptor and ion channels, 
Intercellular communication, From cells to tissue, Cell Adhesion, Cell Migration, Cell Proliferation, Cell Differentiation, 
Cell Death, Endocytosis, Mechano-transduction, Stem cell, Cell culture and characterization of cells, Concepts of 
Immuno-compatibility, Interface of cell biology with pharmaceutical technology / Bio-nano technology/ Biomedical 
Engineering / Tissue engineering / Regenerative Medicine. 
Essential	Reading
1. B. Alberts, D. Bray, K. Hopkin, A. Jhonson, Essential of cell biology, 3rd edition, Garland Science
2. H. Lodish, A. Berk, C. A. Kaiser, M. Kreiger, Molecular Cell Biology; 6th edition, W. H. Freeman
Supplementary Reading
1. R. I Freshney, Culture of Animal cell: A manual of basic techniques and specialized application, Black well 6th edition. 
2. J. Hancock, Cell Signaling, Academic Press
BM343 BIOINFORMATICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Scope of Bioinformatics, Elementary commands and protocols, ftp, telnet, http; Primer on information theory; 
Introduction to Homology (with special mention to Charles Darwin, Sir Richard Owen, Willie Henning and Alfred 
Russel Wallace); DNA mapping and sequencing; Map alignment; Large scale sequencing methods (Shotgun and Sanger 
method); Heuristic Alignment algorithms; Global sequence alignments– Neddleman– Wunsch Algorithm Smith-
Waterman Algorithm-Local sequence alignments (Amino acid substitution Matrices (PAM, BLOSUM); Introduction to 
Biological databases; Organization and management of databases; Searching and retrieval of information from the 
World Wide Web; Structure databases– PDB (ProteinData Bank), Molecular Modeling Databases (MMDB); Primary 
Databases (NCBL, EMBL, DDBJ); Introduction to Secondary Databases Organization and management of databases 
(Swissprot, PIR, KEGG); Introduction to BioChemical databases-organization and Management of databases(KEGG, 
EXGESCY, BRENDA, WIT); Multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. H. Rashidi and L. K. Buehler, Bioinformatics Basics Applications in Biological Science and Medicine, CAC Press, 2000. 
2. D. Gusfiled, Algorithmson Strings Trees and Sequences, CambridgeUniversityPress, 1997. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. P. Baldi and S. Brunak, Bioinformatics: A Machine Learning Approach, MIT Press, 1988. 
2. D. Mount, Bioinformatics, CSH Publications, 2000. 
3. Genomics and Proteomics-Functional and Computational aspects. Springer Publications, Editior-Sandor Suhai. 
BM 345 ANIMAL	TISSUE	CULTURE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Basics of Cell and Tissue Culture: Laboratory requirements for tissue culture, substrates for cultures, culture media for 
animal cell cultures, culture procedures and principles, freeze storing of cells and transport of cultures. Characteristics 
of Cells in Culture: Contact inhibition, anchorage independence/dependence, cell-cell communication, cell senescence. 
Cell Culture Lines: Definition, development and maintenance, cloning of celllines, cell synchronization viral sensitivity 
of cell lines, cell line preservation and characterization, stem cell lines. General Tissue Culture Techniques: Types of 
tissue cultures, methods of disaggregating primary cultures, primary tissue explantation technique. Organ Culture: 
Methods, behavior of organ explants and utility of organ culture, whole embryo culture. Methods in Cell Culture: 
Micro carrier cultures, cell immobilization, animal cell bioreactor, large scale cell cultures for biotechnology, somatic 
cell fusion, flow cytometry, transfection. Applications of Animal Cell Culture: Use in gene therapy, cloning from short-
term cultured cells, cloning from long-term cultured cells, Cloning for production of transgenic animals, cloning for 
conservation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. RIFreshney, Culture of Animal Cells: Amanual of basictechnique, 4thEdition, WIELY- LISS, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. JR. W. Masters, Animal Cell Culture: A Practical Approach, Oxford University Press, 3rd edition, 2000. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
156
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 352 BIOCHEMICAL	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Concept of ideal reactors based on flowc haracteristics, design of Ideal reactors using material and energy balance 
equations. Single reactors, with ideal flow condition, comparison of volumes of plugflow reactor and chemostat. 
Multiple reactors-methods to show how total volume is affected in multiple reactors. Searching for mechanism 
– Arrhenius equation – Batch reactor analysis for kinetics (synchronous growth and its application in product 
production). Growth Kinetics: Batch growth quantifying cell concentration, growth profiles and kinetics in batch 
culture, fedbatch growth, continuous growth and their grow the kinetic quantification, chemo stat growth, semi-
continuous / exponential feeding strategy. Maximizing the yield of intermediate production series reactions Design 
principles–Nonisothermal reactions and pressure effects; Non-ideal flow in bioreactors-reasons for non-ideality, 
concept of RTD studies, characterization of non-ideality using RTD studies, various distribution functions, conversions 
using tracer studies. Diagnosing the ills of nonideal bioreactors, various models of nonideal flow. Design and analysis 
of bioreactors-stability and analysis of bioreactors, biomass production and effect of dilution rate. Design and 
operation of various bioreactors, viz CSTF, fed batch systems, air- lift bioreactors, fluidizedbed bioreactors. Scale up 
of bioreactors. Criteria for selection of bioreactors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. G. Rao, Introduction toBiochemical Engineering, Tata McHill, 2005. 
2. J. E. Baileyand D. F. Ollis, Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, 2nd edition, McGraw- Hill, 1986. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J. E. BaileyandD. F. Ollis, BiochemicalEngineeringFundamentals, McGrawHillHigherEducation; 2ndedition, 1986. 
BM 353 PHARMACEUTICAL	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, Pharmacokinetics vs pharmacodynamics, Bioavailability, Conventional pharmaceutical dosages forms; 
tablet, capsule, ointment, parenteral products, opthalmic products, aerosols, emulsions. Controlled drug delivery 
systems; microparticles, nanoparticles, liposome, neosome, hydrogel, transdermal patch, mucoadhesivebuccal and 
sublingual preparation. Targeted drug delivery system, Environment sensitive drug delivery system and Remote 
controlled drug delivery system. Overview of Biopharmaceuticals, Recombinant growth factor and enzyme, 
therapeutic antibodies, vaccines, adjuvants, cell therapy. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. A. Lieberman, L. Lachman and J. B. Schwartz, Pharmaceutical Dosage forms (Vol 1, 2 and 3), Second edition, Informa Health 
Care. 
2. Mathiowitz Edith, Encyclopedia of Controlled Drug Delivery, John Wiley & Sons 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Binghe Wang, Teruna J. Siahaan, Richard A. Soltero, Drug Delivery: Principles and Applications, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. T. Scheper, Gene Therapy and Gene Delivery Systems (Advances in Biochemical Engineering / Biotechnology), Springer. 
3. D. J. A. Crommelin, R. D. Sindler, B. Meibohm, Pharmaceutical Biotechnology; Fundamental and Application; 3rd edition, 
Informa Health Care 
BM 354 BIOSEPARATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Basic concepts of Bio-separation Process, Separation characteristics of proteins and enzymes– size, stability, 
properties; purification methodologies Characteristics of bio-products; overview of reaction processes involved in 
separation, numerical examples illustrating the process; Filtration and Centrifugation. Filtration at constant pressure 
and at constant rate; empirical equations for batch and continuous filtration, centrifugal and cross-flow filtration, 
Centrifugation: basic principles, design characteristics; ultracentrifuges: principles and applications; Techniques 
Involved in Separation Processes; Solvent extraction of bio-processes, aqueous two-phase extraction, adsorption-
desorption process; Salt precipitation; Chromatographic separation based on size, charge hydrophobic interactions and 
metal ion affinity. Affinity chromatography, inhibitors: their preparation and uses, method of linkages, Electrophoresis 
SDS-PAGE (Polyacrylamide Gel), horizontal and vertical type, methods, case studies; Membrane based separation 
processes. Micro-filtration, Reverse osmosis, Ultra filtration and affinity ultra filtration, concentration polarization, 
rejection, flux expression, membrane modules, dead-ended and cross-flow mode, material balances and numerical 
problems, biological applications. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
157
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. A. Belter, E. L. CusslerandWei-ShouHu, Bioseparations: Downstream Processing for Biotechnology, Wiley-Interscience, 1st 
edition, 1988. 
2. S. Ahuja, Handbook of Bioseparations, Volume2(Separation Science and Technology), Academic Press, ISBN-13: 978-
0120455409, 1st edition, May2000. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. Bailey & Olis, Biochemical Engg. Fundamentals, McGraw-Hill, 1990. 
2. S. N. Mukhopadhyay, Process Biotechnology Fundamentals, Viva BooksPvt. Ltd. 2001
BM 356 BIOINSTRUMENTATION	AND	PROCESS	CONTROL 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction and review of process control; Basic electrical components; Basic electronics circuits; Industrial 
Instrumentationà Pressure measurement, level measurement, flow measurement, temperature & heat 
measurement, humidity measurement, density measurement, viscosity measurement, pH measurement, position & 
motion sensors, force, torque & load sensors, smoke & chemical sensors, sound & light sensors; Actuators & control; 
Signal conditioning; Signal transmission; Process controlàControl modes, Implementation of control loops, Digital 
controllers; Documentation and symbols. 
Essential	readings:	
1. Curtis Johnson, Process Control Instrumentation Technology, ISBN: 8120330293, Publishing Date: 2009, Publisher: Phi Learning, 
Edition: 8th Edition. 
2. William C. Dunn, Fundamentals of Industrial Instrumentation And Process Control, ISBN: 0070677492, Publishing Date: 2009, 
Publisher: Tata Mcgraw Hill Education Private Limited, Edition: 1st Edition. 
BM358 BIOREACTOR	ANALYSIS	&	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Types of reactors- batch, plug flow reactor (PFR), continuous stirred rank reactors (CSTR), fluidized bed reactor, bubble 
column, air life fermenter, etc; concept of ideal and non-ideal reactor; residence time distribution; Models of non-
ideal reactors? plugflow with axial dispersion, tanks-n-series model; Chemostat model with cell growth kinetics; 
Plugflow reactor for microbial processes; optimization ofreactor systems; Multiphase bioreactors? Packed bed with 
immobilized enzymes or microbialcells; three? Phase fluidized bed trickling bed reactor; Design and analysis of the 
above reactor systems; Gas liquid reactors; Unconventional bioreactors like Hollow fiberreactor, membrane reactor, 
perfusion reactor for animal and plant cell culture. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. A. Asenjo, Bioreactor System Design (Biotechnology and Bioprocessing Series), CRC, 1st Edition, ISBN-13: 978-0824790028, 
1994. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J. M. S. Cabral, M. Mota, and J. Tramper, Multiphase Bioreactor Design, CRC, ISBN-13: 978-0415272094, 2001. 
BM361 AGRICULTURAL	BIOTECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Molecular Markers: Comparison of different types of markers: -RFLP, RAPD, AFLP, AP-PCR, STS, EST, SNP, 
DNA Microarray; Construction of Molecular Maps Genome Sequencing in Plants and Functional Genomics. 
TransplastomicPlants: Engineering and Transformation of Chloroplast Genome. Genetic Improvement of Plants using 
different Invitroculture Techniques. Development of crops adaptable to environmental stresses, diseases and pests. 
Transgenic plants: Molecular Farming: Plants As factories for biopharmaceuticals, Transgenic value added speciality 
crops, Use of antisense RNA and other technologies. Biofertilizers, Biopesticides, BioinsecticidesSoil Reclamation: 
Phytoremediation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M J Chrispeels, Plants, Genes and Crop Biotechnology, Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Inc., 2nd Sub edition, 2002. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. B Shmaefsky, Biotechnology on the Farm and in the Factory: Agricultural and Industrial Applications (Biotechnology in the 21st 
Century), Chelsea House Publications, 2005. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
158
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM362 PLANT	TISSUE	CULTURE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to cell and tissue culture; Tissue culture media(composition, preparation); Initiation and maintenance 
of callus and cell suspension culture, organogenesis; Protoplast isolation culture and fusion; Production of haploids, 
Somaclonalvariations, Germplasm conservation (Cryopreservation); Production of secondary metabolites from plant 
cell cultures; Processes for enhancing the production of secondary metabolites. Technology of plant cell culture for 
production of chemicals; Bioreactors systems and models for mass cultivation of plant cells; Agrobacterium mediated 
gene transfer; Agrobacterium based vectors, viral vectors and their application; Direct gene transfer methods; 
chemical methods, electroporation, microinjection, particle bombardment. Herbicide resistance, Insect resistance, 
Disease resistance, virus resistance, Abiotic stress tolerance: Drought, temperature, salt; Application of plant 
biotechnology for the production of quality oil, Industrial enzymes, Antigens(edible vaccine)and plant antibodies; 
Metabolic engineering for plant secondary metabolites. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Smith, Plant Tissue Culture: Techniques and Experiments, 2nded., Academic Press, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. J. Crispeels and D. E. Sadava, Plants, Genes and Crop Biotechnology, Jones and Bartlett Publishers (2nd Edition), 2003. 
BM 370 BIOINFORMATICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
An introduction to the computing platforms on which the course is taught: Remote computing, text editing, basics of 
the UNIX operating system, and the X environment. Molecular databases and how they are organized and accessed: 
Wisconsin Package and its graphical user interface (GUI) SeqLab and the on-site GCG sequence databases will be 
reviewed. Access methods like WWW, NCBI’s Entrez. Unknown DNA -- rational probe design and analysis -- the 
“guessmer”: Designing and analyzing oligonucleotide primers for discovering genes in organisms. DNA fragment 
contiguous assembly (GCG’s SeqMerge) and restriction enzyme mapping. Database similarity searching and the 
dynamic programming algorithm: Methods and algorithms, their limitations, and the significance of their findings. 
Gene finding strategies: Searching by signal versus searching by content, i.e.transcriptional/translational regulatory 
sites and exon/intron splice sites, versus ‘nonrandomness, ’ codon usage; and homology inference. Multiple sequence 
alignment, expectation maximization, profiles, and Markov models. Molecular evolutionary phylogenetic inference: 
PAUP* (Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony [and Other Methods], PHYLIP (PHYLogeny Inference Package), and 
other tools. Estimating protein secondary structure and physical attributes: Proteolytic digestion mapping, molecular 
weight and amino acid composition determination, isoelectric point estimation, hydrophobicity and hydrophobic 
moment determinations, surface probability and antigenicity mapping, and secondary structure prediction. Molecular 
modeling and visualization. 
BM 371 CELL	AND	MOLECULAR	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to relevant equipment; Learning mammalian cell culture, subculture and storage (human fibroblasts); 
Isolation and purification of nucleic acids (human fibroblasts)
RNA 
DNA ((lysis, extraction, ethanol precipitation and resuspension of DNA)
Gene amplification from isolated DNA and RNA
End point PCR
Real time PCR
Electrophoresis of DNA: Gel electrophoresis; Plasmid: Plasmid preparation; transformation; restriction digestions 
(pGLO) and gel electrophoresis of digest; Transfection (E. coli): Transfection of antibiotic resistance gene by heat 
shock and electroporation followed by validation; Induction of gene expression: Grow pGLO bacteria, shift to different 
concentrations of arabinose, collect samples at various intervals, quantitate fluorescence and optical density; 
Conjugation: Mix donor and recipient; interrupt mating at specific times; plate, count colonies and analyze data; 
Demonstration of Hybridoma technology
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
159
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 372 BIOSEPARATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Separation of proteins (>60kDa) from cell debris using centrifugation and dialysis.; Study of desalting out of proteins; 
Separation of proteins using HPLC and quantify the fractions.; Separation of binary protein complex using FPLC; 
Separation of protein complex using sucrose gradient method; Separation of proteins using Electrophoresis methods; 
Isolation of DNA using from cell extract; Separation of various molecular weight proteins using reverse osmosis and 
ultrafiltration techniques. 
BM 373 ENVIRONMENTAL	BIOTECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Determination of electrical conductivity and alkalinity of waste water; . Determination of dissolved oxygen in water 
samples; Determination of Biochemical oxygen demand in water samples; . Determination of Chemical oxygen 
demand in water samples; Determination of Total suspended solids (TSS) and total dissolved solids (TDS) in water 
samples; Microbial degradation of phenol; Microbial degradation of chromium; Determination of toxic metal contents 
in industrial effluents; Adsoption through activated carbon for waste water treatment; Analysis of CO & NOx in air 
samples; Analysis of Bacteria, fungi, mold and pollen present in air samples; Determination of Organic Matter and 
Acidity of soil sample; Isolation of microflora from soil samples collected different area; Biosorption of heavy metals 
from aqueous solution of metals; Determination of Cation exchange capacity of soil sample 
BM 374 BIOCHEMICAL	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Isolation of useful microorganisms from natural samples; Growth of microorganisms, estimation of Monod parameters; 
Temperature effect on growth-estimation of energy of activation and Arrhenius; . Constant for microorganisms.; Study 
of growth kinetics of bacteria in shakeflask.; Separation of protein using sucrose gradient method.; Separation of 
proteins using Electrophoresis methods.; Separation of DNA using Electrophoresis method.; Separation of protein 
using reverse osmosis.; Study of growth kinetics saccharomyces cerevisiaein shakeflask.; Estimation of dry cell mass.; 
Study of growth kinetics of bacteria in bioreactor.; Death kinetics of saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
BM 375 BIOHEAT	AND	MASS	TRANSFER	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Thermal conductivity of liquids; Heat transfer through a stacked layer.; Parallel flow and counter flow heat exchanger. 
Effective insulation. Determination of Stefan Boltzmann constant. Unsteady heat transfer. Dropwise and Filmwise 
Condensation Apparatus. Mass transfer with or without chemical reaction; Cryospray. Determination of diffusion 
constants. 
BM 376 BIOPROCESS	INSTRUMENTATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
To study the principle, calibration and measurement of pH using a digital pH meter.; To study the working principle 
of turbidimeter and determine the turbidity of an unknown solution. To study the operation of conductivity meter 
and find out the conductance of an unknown solution. To determine the dynamic and kinematic viscosity of the 
Newtonian fluids using Ostwald’s viscometer. To determine the surface tension of a liquid using Stalagmometer by 
(a) drop count method and (b) drop weight method. To determine the critical micelle concentration of tween 80 
using Stalagmometer. To study the working principle of UV-Vis spectrophotometer and to find out the concentration 
of an unknown sample. To prepare emulsions by wet gum method and to determine the droplet size distribution 
by developing a program in NI Vision 2010. To acquire and save analog signals in computer using ADCs. To study 
the operation of optocouplers in signal isolation. To find out the melting point of a given sample using melting 
point apparatus. Temperature measurement using semiconductor temperature sensors. To study the principle of 
impedance spectroscopy. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
160
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 378 ANIMAL	CELL	CULTURE	AND	IMMUNOTECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Preparation of cell culture media, Cell counting by hemocytometer, Cell viability study by trypan blue exclusion 
method, Cell passage, Primary cell culture; Cell viability study by MTT assay method, FACS based live/dead study 
using DIO/PI, Cell cycle analysis, LPS induced macrophage activation study by nitric oxide estimation, ELISA, Immuno-
histochemical analysis of cellular F-actin distribution, MACS based sorting of CD4/CD8 cells from total splenocyte 
population, FACS based sorting of CD4/CD8 cells from total splenocyte population, Endocytosis study. 
BM381 BIOMATERIAL	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Determination of hardness of different implant materials by Vickers Indentation. Determination of tensile strength 
of implant materials. Determination of modulus of rigidity of different biomaterials. Extraction of biopolymers 
from plants by HPLC method. Estimation of haemocompatibility of biomaterials by hemolysis studies; To study 
the influence of surface roughness on the wetability of the implant material. Determination of surface energy of 
different biomaterials through contact angle measurement. Determination of glass transition temperature of 
polymer and polymer composite. Measurement of rheological properties of polymer solution and simulated of body 
fluid. Determination of moment of inertia of human bone using compound pendulum method. Determination of 
roughness of different implant materials. Determination of coefficient of friction and wear resistance of different 
implant surfaces. Study the pitting corrosion behavior of stainless steel in simulated body fluid. Determination of 
corrosion rate of Titanium implant in simulated body fluid
BM 382 BIOMEDICAL	IMAGE	PROCESSING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Image enhancement–Histogram; Image smoothing, Image sharpening; Lowpass filter, highpass filter, median filter; 
Point detection, Line detection; Edge detection, Prewitt Edge, quich Edge detector; Mathematical operation on 
images; Image data compression; Implementation of the TWO Dimensional F.F.T. Batchprocessing of manufactured 
medical devices; Continuous monitoring of the manufactured medical devices; Particle size analysis; Image 
registration; Volume reconstruction; Determination of the color-coded parts in a given device; Inspection of devices 
using gauging; Cell culture analysis; Inspection of the PCB components; Edge detection as a tool for connector pin 
inspection; Inspection of the blister packs; Dental floss inspection; Pills inspection using watershed algorithm; Tablet 
discoloration inspection; Foreign tablet inspection; Label Inspection; Determination of the dents on the medical 
devices; Calibration of the Bordon Pressure Tube using image processing and analysis tools
BM 383 BIOMEDICAL	SIGNAL	PROCESSING	LABORATORY	-	I 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to LabVIEW., Signal acquisition using ADC cards, Determination of the frequency components in a given 
signal using FT, Design of DSP Program to Measure distance with help of acoustics, Design of Acoustic LED Volume 
Unit Meter, Design of AM Modulation, Design of FM Modulation, Design of Automatic gain Control using SPEEDY 33, 
Design of Bandstop Filter and deployment on to SPEEDY 33, Design of Biquad Filter and deployment on to SPEEDY 33, 
Design of Blink LED, Design of DTMF decoder and deployment on to SPEEDY 33, Design of FFT Bit Twiddling, Design 
of Fourier series on SPEEDY 33, Design of FSK Modem, Design of heterodyne filter, Design of LED Cross Correlation, 
Design of LMS Filter, Design of QPSK, Simple Convolution using SPEEDY 33, Speech Pitch Modifier using SPEEDY 33, 
Designing of Windowing Techniques, Design of Fourier Transform, Design of Discrete Time Signals, Discrete Fourier 
Transforms using SPEEDY 33. Z-Transforms on SPEEDY 33, Digital Filter Design using SPEEDY 33, Design of IIR Filter. 
FIR Filter Design on SPEEDY 33, Create a Virtual Instrument to Write a string on to display of Arm Cortex LM3S8962, 
Create a Virtual Instrument to measure Temperature and display on Arm Cortex M3, Create a virtual instrument 
to measure heart rate and display on ARM cortex M3, Create a Virtual Instrument to display Health monitoring 
conditions of Patient, Create a Virtual Instrument to Acquire and measure small voltage signals, Create a program to 
build etch a sketch game using Arm Cortex, Program to control Speed of Motor on ARM cortex
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
161
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 384 BIOMEDICAL	INSTRUMENTATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Designing of a window comparator, Designing of a voltage buffer, Designing of a differential amplifier and improvement of 
its CMRR, Designing of a bio potential lamplifier, Comparison of the input impedances of a differential amplifier and a 
bio potential amplifier, Designing of a bio potential amplifier using 2 OPAMPS, To design a voltage-current converter 
and to study its importance in signal transmission, To design V-F and F-V converters, To study the signal transmission 
properties of a MCT2E optocoupler, To design precision half-wave and full-wave rectifiers, Designing of precision peak 
and valley detectors. 
BM 385 MEDICAL	EQUIPMENT	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
To study the functioning of aspirometer, To develop a biofeedback system, To develop a continuous temperature 
monitoring system, To design an impedance spectroscope, To design an online heart rate monitoring system, To 
design a continuous humidity monitoring system, To design a low cost sphygmomanometer, To design a low cost 
stethoscope, To design an ECG amplifier. 
BM 386 EXPERIMENTAL	BIOMECHANICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Determination of stress strain curve for hard tissues (bone/ metallic implants), Determination of stress strain curve for 
soft tissues (scaffolds/ chitosin/etc), Determination of compressive strength for metallic biomaterials, Determination 
of flexural strength using 3-point bend fixture, Effect of stiffness/young’s modulus on stress shielding, Cyclic fatigue 
testing of hard tissues, Biomechanical torsion test on long bones, Study on wear characteristics of various metallic 
implants
BM 387 BIOMEDICAL	SIGNAL	PROCESSING	LABORATORY-	II 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Manipulation of signals as per a given mathematical equation, Data compression, Extraction of a signal portion, Basics 
of filtering techniques., Implementation of FIR and IIR filters and study their characteristics Designing of notch filter to 
eliminate 50 Hz noise, Designing of comb filter to eliminate 50 Hz noise and its harmonics, Signal averaging as a tool to 
improve SNR, Implementation of an adaptive filter for noise cancellation, Instrumentation of amplifier to acquire ECG 
Signals, Signal Processing of ECG Signals and Measuring Heart Rate, Spectrum analysis of Noisy and pure Biosignal, 
Time domain and Frequency Domain Measurements on Biosignals, Design of a Biosignal Logger, Implementation of 
a program for designing a biofeedback system on EMG, Implementation of a program to drive DC motor using EMG 
signal. (DC Drive Should be designed on own)
BM 401 HOSPITAL	MANAGEMENT 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Classification of Hospital systems, Role of biomedical engineers; Aspects of hospital services- outpatient- inpatient 
supportive emergency drug and medical supply nursing dietary service transport services; Hospital planning –location, 
orientation, budgeting, inside & outside communication, electric power supply for various theatres and rooms, 
diesel generator, standby power supply; Air-conditioning of important theatres and equipment housings, water 
supply requirements and management, lifts, fire fighting equipments. Sanitation, laundry services; Computer and 
information management in hospitals: computer aided hospital management: application administration / discharge 
records of patient’s patients billing – maintenance of patient’s records, their history, maintenance of inventory of 
medicines and drugs- purchase; Electrical factors in hospital design, voltage stabilizer, uninterrupted powersupply 
for intensive care units and computerized monitoring units-safety precautions, protection, grounding of ECG, EEG, 
ENG and other therapeutic equipments; Biomedical equipment services their purchase, servicing and maintenance of 
equipment, training of men for medical equipments, preventive and periodical maintenance procedure. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S I Goel and R Kumar, Hospital administration and management, Deep and Deep pub. NewDelhi, 2002
2. L. E. Swayne, J. Duncan and P. M. Ginter, Strategic Management of Health Care Organizations, Wiley-Blackwell; 5 edition 2007
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
162
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
3. Sahni, ISHA sourcebook of modern technology for hospitals and health care, Bangalore, 1992
4. M. Nowicki, The Financial Management of Hospitals and Healthcare Organizations, Health Administration Press; Fourth 
edition, 2007
BM 402 HEALTH	INFORMATICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Planning and designing of hospital systems: financial aspects, equipment, building, organization, medical services, BME 
services and technical aspects: pole & responsibilities layout, setting and functions of BME department in a hospital. 
Biomedical Equipment management; Data base management: introduction to data structure, elements, arrays, 
records, sets, tables, singly and doubly linked data, stacks, queues and trees, Architecture of DBMS. Representation of 
data, physical record interface, datamodels, relational, Hierarchical and network approach; Data modeling techniques: 
relational, Hierarchical and network normalization techniques, Data indexing and structuring techniques, integrity and 
security of database, information searching and retrieval; Hospital information system: computerization & functional 
capabilities of a computerized hospital information system. Cost effectiveness of using computer, security of computer 
records source of data for decision making, Computerized patient database management, Microprocessors, database 
approach to laboratory computerization; Application of artificial intelligence in medicine; Telemetry application in 
Medicine: Telemetry circuits, modulation systems, single and multi channel telemetry system, implantable telemetry 
system, wireless telemetry, video conferencing, tele- surgery, virtualreality. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R D Lele, Computers inmedicine, Tata McGrawHillPub, NewDelhi, 1998. 
2. GDKunders, HospitalPlanningDesignandManagement, TATAMcGrawHill Pub. New Delhi, 2003
SupplementaryReading: 
1. C JDate, An introduction todatabasesystems, 8
th
edition, AddisonWesley2003
2. JD Ullman, Principles of databasesystem, Galgotia Pub. 1990. 
3. RSKhandpur, Handbookofbiomedicalinstrumentation, TataMcGrawHillPub, 2ndeds, NewDelhi, 2003
BM 403 HOSPITAL	ENGINEERING	AND	INFORMATION	SYSTEM 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Classification of hospital & architecture, Aspects of hospital services–inpatient, outpatient and emergency. Location 
& environment of hospital, Hierarchy of medical and paramedical staff & their functions and responsibilities. Modern 
Hospital Architecture; Electrical power systems in hospitals: Safety of electrical systems, Protective systems. Design of 
sub stations, breakers, Surgeprotectors, EMI filters, voltagestabilizers, generatorsets and UPS. Uninterrupted power 
supply for ICU and computerized monitoring units. Specification & estimation for hospital wiring - small case study 
Air conditioning & gas supply systems: Air conditioning & refrigeration systems, air changes, filtering & sterility, 
deodorization, disinfection, dehumidification & cryogenicsystems. Centralized supply of air, oxygen, nitrous oxide & 
vacuum, Management of lifts, fire fighting equipments; Hospital engineering & Management: Definition of biomedical, 
clinical & hospital engineering, Importance and function of BME department, Importance of ISO 9000 Certificates 
in hospitals; Hospital Information system: Role of database, Need & Overview of Networking, topologies and its 
configuration. Structuring medical records, Computerization in pharmacy & billing. Automated clinical laboratory 
systems & radiology information system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Rudi Van De Velde and P. Degoulet, Clinical Information Systems: AComponent- Based Approach, Springer; 1stedition, 2003
2. A. K. Saini, Management Information System in Hospitals, Deep & Deep Publications, India, 2002
SupplementaryReading: 
1. T. S. Hargest, C. A. Caceres, G. Hammer, J. L. Williams, Management and Clinical Engineering, Artech House, 1980
2. A . Narayanan, Basic Refrigeration and Air Conditioning, McGraw-Hill Education, 2005
3. H. E. Smalley, Hospital Management Engineering – A guide to the improvement of hospital management system, PHI. 1982
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
163
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 405 TELEMEDICINE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
History of Telemedicine, Block diagram of telemedicine system, Telehealth, Telecare, Origins and Development of 
Telemedicine, scope, benefits and limitations of Telemedicine; Types of information: Audio, Video, StillImages, Text & 
data, Fax. Types of Communication & Network: PSTN, POTS, ATN, ISDN, Internet, Wireless communications, Different 
modulation techniques. Types of antennas, Integration and Operational issues, real-time Telemedicine; Data Exchange: 
Network Configuration, Circuit and packet switching, H. 320 series ( Video phone based ISBN)T. 120, H. 324(Video 
phone based PSTN), Video Conferencing; Data Security and standards: Encryption, Cryptography, Mechanisms of 
encryption, Phases of Encryption, Protocols: TCP/IP, ISO-OSI, Standards to followed DICOM, HL7; Ethical and legal 
aspects of telemedicine; Teleradiography: Basic parts of teleradiology system, Telepathology-Multimedia databases, 
colorimages of sufficient resolution: Dynamic range, spatial resolution, compression methods, Interactive control of 
color, control ledsampling, security and confidentiality tools. Tele cardiology, Teleoncology, Tele surgery. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. C. Norris, Essentials of Telemedicine and Telecare, John Wiley & Sons, 2002
2. R. Wootton & Victor Patterson, Introduction to Telemedicine, RSM Press, 2006
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Olga Ferrer-Roca & M. Sosaludicissa, Handbook of Telemedicine, IOS Press 2002
2. A. Darkins & M. Cary, Telemedicine and Telehealth: Principles, Policies, Performance and Pitfalls, Springer Publishing Company; 
1stedition, 2000
3. R. Latifi, Current Principles and Practices of Telemedicine and e-Health: Volume 131 Studies in Health Technology and 
Informatics, IOS Press; 1stedition, 2008
BM 411 MEDICAL	EMBEDDED	SYSTEM 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Memory interfacing ROM and SRAM; I/O interfacing: I/O mapped I/O scheme. SimpleI/Oports (8282); Peripherals 
interfacing: Matrix key board, 7-segment LED’s, DAC, ADC, Getronics parallel; printer, CRT data terminal; Interfacing of 
8086 with programmable peripheral interfacechip(8255), Programmable; communicator chip(8251), Programmable 
Internal timer chip (8253), Programmable; interrupt controller(8259), DMA(8257) controller; Interfacing applications 
of 8051 –ADC, DAC, Elevator and simulator, 7-segment display, traffic light controller, LEDdisplay, keyboard interfacing; 
Interfacingapplication of PIC-Analog to digital module, power down (sleep) modes; Programming of PIC, Standard 
I/O and processor directives, CCS-PIC COMPILER; Interfacing of medical sensors, carbondioxide and oxygen sensors, 
respiration, force, flow, differential voltage and current probes and humidity sensors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. J Goankar, Microprocessor architecture, programming and application with 8085, 4th Ed., Penram International Publishing, 
1999. 
2. K. J. Ayala, The 8051 Microcontroller-Architechture, Programming and Applications, 2nd Ed., Penram International Publishing, 
2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Barnett, L. O’ cull and S. Cox, Embedded C programming and the microchip PIC, Thomson Learning, 2004 
2. T. Noergaard, Embedded Systems Architecture: A Comprehensive Guide for Engineers and Programmers, Newnes 2005 
BM 413 MEDICAL	IMAGING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
X-rays production & properties, various components of radiographic systems, rating charts of X- ray tubes. Electrical 
circuit for X-ray m/c, filament circuits and mA control, HT circuits, KV control, control of exposure timers, collimators, 
scatter & grids, absorbed dose, basics of tables & arms, dark room accessories, types of X-ray tubes for various 
medical applications; Principle of photography and radiographic film image, film sensitometry, information content 
of an image, image quality factors, MTF. Detectors-ionization chamber, proportional counter, Geiger- Muller counter 
scintillation detectors, semiconductor radiation detector, Image intensifier, automatic brightness control system, 
image distortion and artifacts; Fluoroscopic imaging system, principle, specific system design. Digital fluoroscopy-c-
arm system. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), digital subtraction programming; Radiotherapy principles, dosage 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
164
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
atafor clinical applications, radiation therapy planning, collimatorsandbeamdirection devices, dose measurement 
and treatment planning, teleisotope units. Safety protocols & protection; Physics of thermography, Imaging systems, 
clinical thermography, liquid crystal thermography Special imaging techniques. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. R. Hendee and E. R. Ritenour, Medical Imaging Physics, 3rd editions, Mosbey Year-Book, Inc., 1992. 
2. J. T. Bushberg, J. Anthony Seibert, E. M. Leidholdt Jr., J. M. Boone, The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging, 2nd Edition, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. C. Gonzalez and R E Woods, Digital image processing, 2nd ed. Prentice Hall, 2002. 
2. P. Suetens, Fundamentals of image processing, Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
3. Dowsett, Kenny & Johnston, The Physics of Diagnostic Imaging, Chapman & Hall Medical, Madras/London, 1998 
4. R. Salzer, Biomedical Imaging: Principles and Applications, Wiley-Interscience, 2008 
BM 415 ELECTRONIC	DEVICES	FOR	REHABILITATION	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
New technologies in rehabilitation engineering, retinal prosthesis for the visually impaired, intelligent techniques 
for the hearing impaired, sensory feedback for lower limb prosthesis, multifunctional control of prostheses using 
myoelectric signals, neural prostheses, upper limb myoelectric prostheses, artificial heart control using computer-
aided support technologies, diaphragm pacing, intelligent systems for pacemakers, service robots, mobility devices 
for the blinds and visually impaired, design concepts of KAFO. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Hisaichi Ohnabe and Douglas A. Hobson, An Introduction to Rehabilitation Engineering, Publisher: Taylor & Francis; 1 edition, 
ISBN-10: 0849372224, ISBN-13: 978-0849372223. 
2. Horia-Nicolai L Teodorescu and Lakhmi C. Jain, Intelligent Systems and Technologies in Rehabilitation Engineering, Publisher: 
CRC Press; 1 edition, Language: English, ISBN-10: 0849301408, ISBN-13: 978-0849301407. 
Suggested Readings: 
1. Rory A. Cooper, Rehabilitation Engineering Applied to Mobility and Manipulation (Series in Medical Physics and Biomedical 
Engineering), Publisher: Taylor & Francis; 1 edition, ISBN-10: 0750303433, ISBN-13: 978-0750303439. 
2. AbdelsalamHelal, MounirMokhtari and BessamAbdulrazak, The Engineering Handbook of Smart Technology for Aging, 
Disability and Independence, Publisher: Wiley-Interscience; 1 edition, ISBN-10: 0471711551, ISBN-13: 978-0471711551. 
BM 421 TISSUE	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, structural and organization of tissues: Epithelial, connective; vascularity and angiogenesis, basic wound 
healing, cell migration, current scope of development and use in therapeutic and in-vitro testing; Cell culture- 
Different cell types, progenitor cells and cell differentiations, different kind of matrix, cell-cell interaction. Aspect 
of cell culture: cell expansion, cell transfer, cell storage and cell characterization, Bioreactors; Molecular biology 
aspect-Cell signaling molecules, growth factors, hormone and growth factor signaling, growth factor delivery in tissue 
engineering, cell attachment: differential cell adhesion, receptor-ligand binding, and Cell surface markers; Scaffold 
and transplant- Engineering biomaterials, Degradable materials, porosity, mechanical strength, 3-D architecture 
and cell incorporation. Engineering tissues for replacing bone, cartilage, tendons, ligaments, skin and liver. Basic 
transplant immunology, stemscells; Casestudy and regulatory issues– cellt ransplantation for liver, musculoskeletal, 
cardiovascular, neural, visceral tissue engineering. Ethical FDA and regulatory issues. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Palsson, S. Bhatia, TissueEngineering, PearsonPrenticeHall, 2003
2. G. Vunjak-Novakovic, R. Ian Freshney, Culture of Cells for Tissue Engineering, WIS, 2006
SupplementaryReading: 
1. B. Palsson, J. A. Hubbell, R. Plonseyand J. D. Bronzino, TissueEngineering, CRC- Taylor & Francis. 
2. J. D. Bronzino, TheBiomedical Engineering–Handbook, CRC; 3rd edition, 2006
3. R. P. Lanza, R. LangerandW. L. Chick, Principles of tissueengineering, Academic press, 1997
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
165
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 422 COMPUTER	APPLICATION	IN	TISSUE	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Anatomic and Biophysics Modelling, Geometric Morphology, Volumetric Representation, Mechanics deformation 
Kinetics, CAD based Modelling, Counter based Modelling, Surface Extraction, Solid Model, Biomedical Physical 
Modelling, Physical model by rapid prototyping. Scaffold informatics and Biomimetic Design and Modelling, Tissue 
morphology classification and characterization, Biological intent, Informatics database and modelling, Biomimetic 
Design, Design for multi-constraints, A framework for Biomimetic design, Mutiscalemodelling for Biological system, 
Asymptomatic homogenization for both spatial and temporal degradation. Bio-manufacturing for Tissue scaffolds, 
Bio-conductive scaffolds fabrication, Multilateral hybrid scaffold, Smart scaffold with micro/nano sensor, Bio-
manufacturing for Tissue constructs, Scaffold with anatomic cell seeding, Cellular tissue threads, Cell-embedded, 3d 
cells and organ printing, Cell pattern, printing and deposition, Bio-blue printing and organ modelling, Organ printing
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. P. Lanza and J. Vacanti: Principles of tissue engineering, Academic Press 2007, ISBN: 0123706157
2. U. Meyer, J. Handschel, T. Meyer and H. P. Weismann: Fundamentals of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine: Springer 
Verlag, 2009 ISBN: 3540777547
Supplemental Reading: 
1. P. R. Fernandes; Advances on Modeling in Tissue Engineering : Springer Verlag, 2011 ISBN: 9400712537
2. C. S. S. R. Kumar: Tissue, cell and organ engineering, Wiley-VCH, 2006, ISBN: 9783527313891
BM 423 NANOTECHNOLOGY	IN	TISSUE	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Nanotechnology in tissue engineering, Scaffold based Approach, Polymeric nanofibers in Tissue Engineering, 
Synthetic polymers, Biopolymers, Synthesis of nanofibers by different methods, Application of polymeric nanofibers 
in tissue engineering. Synthesis, biological effects of nanofibers- attachment, proliferation, differentiation, migration. 
Problems with current implants, ceramic nano materials, metal nano materials, polymeric nano materials, composite 
nanomaterials. Magnetic nanoparticles for tissue engineering. Carbon nano tube in tissue engineering. Nano wires 
for tissue engineering. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Popat, Nanotechnolgy in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, CRC, 2009, ISBN: 143980141X
2. H. F. TibbalsMedical Nanotechnology and Nanomedicine CRC Press2010 ISBN: 1439808740
Supplemental Reading: 
1. J. M. Polak, Advances in tissue engineering Imperial College Pr2008 ISBN: 1848161824
BM 424 ARTIFICIAL	ORGANS	AND	REHABILITATION	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to artificial organs: Biomaterials used in artificial organs and prostheses, Rheological properties of 
blood, blood viscosity variation, Casson equation, flow properties of blood, problems associated with extra corporeal 
blood flow; Artificial kidney: kidney filtration, artificial waste removal methods, hemodialysis, equation for artificial 
kidney and middle molecule hypothesis. Hemodialysers, mass transfer Analysis, regeneration of dialysate, membrane 
configuration, wearable artificial kidney machine, separation of antigens from blood in ESRD patients; Artificial heart-
lung machine: lungs gaseous sexchange/ transport, artificial heart-lung devices. Oxygenators, Liver support system, 
artificial pancreas, blood and skin; Audiometry: air conduction, bone conduction, masking, functional diagram of an 
audiometer. Hearing aids, Opthalmoscope, etinoscope, I. A. B. P principle and application; Rehabilitation Engineering: 
Impairments, disabilities & handicaps, measurement & assessment, engineering concepts in sensory & motor 
rehabilitation. Engg. Concept in communication disorders, Rehabs for locomotion, visual, speech & hearing, Artificial 
limb & hands, prosthetic heart valves, Externally powered & controlled orthotics & prosthetics, Myoelectric hand & 
arm prostheses, marcus intelligent hand prostheses, gait study, spinal rehabilitation. 
Essential	Reading
1. Gerald EMiller, Artificial Organs, Morgan & Claypool, 2006
2. Kondraske, G. V, Rehabilitation Engineering. CRC press1995
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
166
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading
1. Bronzino Joseph, Hand book of biomedical Engineering, Springer, 2000
2. R. S. Khandpur, Biomedical Instrumentation: Technology and Application, McGraw-Hill Professional
BM 425 BIOMATERIALS	IN	TISSUE	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to biomaterials, Types of biomaterials, Biocompatibility testing of biomaterials, Surface characterization 
methods, Cells interaction with biomaterials. Scaffold fabrication methods: fiber bonding, electrospinning, solvent 
casting, and particulate leaching, melt molding, freeze drying, phase separation, Rapid prototyping. Micro and nano 
fabricated Scaffolds. Three dimensional scaffolds- Design and engineering, Smart biomaterial. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. A. Burdick Biomaterials for Tissue Engineering Applications Springer Verlag2010 ISBN: 3709103843
Supplemental Reading: 
1. E. Jabbari Biologically-Responsive Hybrid Biomaterials: A Reference for Material Scientists and Bioengineers World Scientific 
Publishing Company 2010 ISBN: 9814295671
2. C. Gualandi Porous Polymeric Bioresorbable Scaffolds for Tissue Engineering Springer Verlag 2011 ISBN: 3642192718
BM 427 BIOCOMPOSITES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, biocompatibililty, fabrication(filament winding, pultrusion, extrusion, injection molding, compression 
molding, thermoforming) and characterization, mechanics of composite materials, structure-property relationship, 
designing with composite materials, Biomedical application of polymer composites- bone plates, intramedullary nails, 
total hip replacement, bonegrafts, denatsl materials, prosthetic sockets, tendons and ligaments, vascular grafts. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. H. Teoh, Engineering Materials for Biomedical Applications, World ScientificEdition1, 2004. 
2. S. Ramakrishna, An Introduction to Biocomposites, Imperial College Press; Edition 1, 2004
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. D. Ratner, A. S. Hoffman, F. J. Schoen, J. E. Lemons, BiomaterialsScience, Academic Press, Edition1, 1996. 
2. J. Y. Wong, J. D. Bronzino, Biomaterials, CRC Press, Edition 2007
BM 428 NANOTECHNOLOGY	IN	BIOMEDICAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Nanotechnology-, nanodefinitions, unique properties of nanoscalematrices. Chemical Routes for Synthesis of 
Nanomaterials, Nanocomposites, Types of Nanocomposite (i.e.metal oxide, ceramic, glass and polymer based); Core-
Shell structured nanocomposites Superhard Nanocomposite. Nanopolymers: Preparation and characterization, Metal 
Nanoparticles: Size control of metal Nanoparticles and their characterization; Nano fabrication: Nanolithography, 
E beam lithography, Ion beam lithography etc. Nanoparticles Synthesis- Methods of Preparation, top down and 
bottom up approach, Characterization methods, Properties and size effect of nanomaterials, electrical, Mechanical, 
Magnetic, Optical and catalytic properties, Cluster compounds, quantum-dots from MBE and CVD, wet chemical 
methods, Nanofiber synthesis- electrospin fibers, self assemblefibers. Advanced Nanomaterials: Fundamentals 
of magnetic materials, Carbon Nano Structures: Introduction; Fullerenes, C60, C80 and C240 Nanostructures; 
Properties & Applications (mechanical, optical and electrical). Preparation of Carbon Nano-Tubes: Properties, 
Applications. Characterization Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM), TEM and 
EDAX analysis, X-ray diffraction, Optical Microscope and their description, operational principle and application for 
analysis of nanomaterials. Biomedical Applications – drug delivery, tissue regeneration, cancer detection, imaging 
and diagnostics, outlook for future. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. Cao, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Imperial College Press, 2004. 
2. M. Winterer, Nano-crystalline Ceramics: Synthesis and Structure, Springer, 2002 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M Wilson, K Kannangara, G Smith and M Simmons, Nanotechnology: Basic Science and Emerging Technologies, Chapman and 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
167
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Hall, 2002 
2. M A. Ratner, D Ratner, M Ratner, Nanotechnology: A Gentle Introduction to the Next Big Idea, Prentice Hall PTR, 2002. 
BM 429 MATERIALS	IN	MEDICAL	SCIENCE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction: Definition of biomaterials, classification of biomaterials properties of materials, mechanical properties; 
Metallic implant materials: Definition. Stainless steel, Co-basedalloys, Ti and Ti-based alloys. Polymeric implant 
materials: Natural and arftificial biopolymers; Ceramic implant materials: Definition. Bioresorbableandbioactive 
ceramics. Aluminiumoxides, Glass ceramics, Carbons. Composite implantmaterials: Definition, Properties and 
applications. Biocompatibility & toxicological screening of biomaterials. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B D. Ratner, AS. Hoffman, FJ. Schoen, JE. Lemons, Biomaterials Science: Academic Press, 1stEdition, 1996. 
2. S HTeoh, Engineering Materials for Biomedical Applications, World Scientific: 1st Edition, 2004. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J B. Park, JD. Bronzino, Biomaterials: Principles and Applications; Taylor & Francis, Edition1, 2002. 
2. JY. Wong, J D. Bronzino, Biomaterials, CRC Press, Edition 2007
BM 431 PHYSIOLOGICAL	SYSTEM	MODELING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Techniques of mathematical modeling, classification of models, characteristics of models. Purpose of physiological 
modeling and signal analysis, linearization of nonlinear models, Time invariant and time varying systems for 
physiological modeling; Electromotive, resistive and capacitive properties of cell membrane, change in membrane 
potential with distance, voltage clamp experiment and Hodgkin and Huxley’s model of action potential, the voltage 
dependent membrane constant and simulation of the model, model for strength-duration curve, model of the whole 
neuron. Huxley model of isotonic musclecontraction, modeling of EMG, motor unit firing; Electrical analog of blood 
vessels, model of systematic blood flow, model of coronary circulation, transfer of solutes between physiological 
compartments by fluid flow, counter current model of urine formation, model of Henle’sloop, and Linearized model 
of the immune response: Germ, Plasma cell, Antibody, system equation and stability criteria. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Endarle, Blanchard & Bronzino, Introductionto Biomedical Engg., Academicpress. 2005
2. S. R. Devasahayam, Signals & Systems in Biomedical Engineering, Springer, 2000
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. Candy, Signal Processing: The Model Based Approach, Mc. GrawHill, 1986
2. L. Stark, Neurological Control System, PlenumPress, 2007
BM 432 BIOMICROFLUIDICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, Microfluidics vs traditional fluidics, Microfluidic systems in nature, Fundamental principles, Concept of 
biomicrofluidics, different transport phenomena in biomimetic micro fluidic system, Micro mixing and biochemical 
reaction in microfluidic platform, Concept of ‘Lab on a chip’, Mathematical modeling of transport phenomena and 
micromixing of biomimetic microfluidic processes, Micro-manupulation of biomicrofluidic system using electric and 
magnetic field, Microfluidics in Tissue Engineering, Experimental approaches in biomicrofluidics, Future prospect. 
Essential	Reading
1. S. Chakraborty, Microfluidicsand Microfabrication, Springer
2. P. Tabeling, Introduction to microfluidics, Oxford University Press
Supplementary Reading
1. J. D. Zahn, Methods in Bioengineering: Biomicrofabrication andBiomicrofluidics, Artech House. 
2. F. A. Gomez, Biological application of microfluidics, John Wiley & Sons
3. J. Berthier and P. Silberzan, Microfluidics for Biotechnology, Artech House 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
168
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 433 BIOTRANSPORT 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
A review of thermodynamic concepts: open systems, closed systems, phase equilibrium. Physical properties of the 
body fluids and the cell: fluid composition, osmotic pressure, the cell membrane. Physical and flow properties of blood 
and other fluids: blood rheology, Hagan-Poiseuille equation, the Casson equation, Marginal zone theory, boundary 
layer theory. Solute transport in biological systems: Fick’s first and second laws, mass transfer in laminar boundary 
layer flow, solute transport by capillary filtration, solute diffusion within heterogeneous media, solute permeability, 
transport of solutes across the capillary wall, The Krogh tissue cylinder. Oxygen transport in biological systems: diffusion 
of oxygen in multicellular systems, oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve, The Hill equation, oxygen transport in the 
Krogh tissue cylinder. Approach to pharmaco kinetic modeling and drug delivery, one and two compartmental models. 
Physiological applications-itravenous injection, constant intravenous infusion, determination of regional blood flow 
volumes and blood flow rates. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Fournier, Basic Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering, Taylor & Francis; 2 edition, 2006
2. A. T Johnson, Biological Process Engg. An analogical approach to fluid flow, heat transfer, mass transfer applied to biological 
system, John Wiley and Sons1999. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. A. B. Ritter, S. Reisman, B. B. Michniak, Biomedical Engineering Principles, CRC Press, 2005
2. D. O. Cooney, Biomedical Engineering Principles- An introduction to fluid, heat and masst ransfer processes, Marcel Dekker 
Inc. 1976. 
BM 441 PROTEIN ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Protein - general introduction, forces that determine protein structure and physicochemical properties. Mechanisms of 
protein folding, molten globule structure, characterization of folding pathways. Determination of protein structure by 
various spectroscopic techniques. Background and basic principles, Absorption and Fluorescence, Circular Dichroism, 
FT-Raman, FT-IR, NMR, X-raycrystallography, MALLS. Thermal properties of proteins and application of DSC. Protein 
denaturation, aggregation and gelation. Flow properties of proteins and sensory properties of proteinaceous foods. 
Protein functionality. Protein raw materials-cereals, legume, oilseeds and pseudo cereals. Muscle protein, Milk 
protein, Egg protein. Protein modification as result of technological processes: thermal, enzymatic, physical, pressure, 
solvents, interactions. Nutritive role of food proteins. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. 1. J L. Cleland andC S. Craik, Protein Engineering: Principles and Practice, Wiley-Liss, ISBN-13: 978-0471103547, 1stedition, 
February7, 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S Lutz and UT Bornscheuer, Protein Engineering Handbook, Wiley-VCH, ISBN-13: 978-3527318506, Newedition, January20, 
2009. 
BM442 CANCER	BIOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Regulation of Cell cycle, mutations that cause changes in signal molecules, effects on receptor, signal switches, 
tumoursuppressor genes, modulation of cell cycle in cancer. Different forms of cancers, Diet and cancer. Chemical 
Carcinogenesis, Metabolism of Carcinogenesis, Natural History of Carcinogenesis, Targets of Chemical Carcinogenesis; 
Principles of Physical Carcinogenesis, X - Ray radiation - mechanism of radiation Carcinogenesis. Oncogenes, 
Identification of Oncogenes, Retroviruses and Oncogenes, detection of Oncogenes, Growth Factor and Growth Factor 
receptors that are Oncogenes; Oncogenes / Proto Oncogene activity. Growth factors related to transformations. 
Clinical significances of invasion, heterogeneity of metastatic phenotype, Metastatic cascade, Basement Membrane 
disruption, Three-step theory of Invasion; Proteinases and tumourcell invasion. Detection of Cancers, Prediction of 
aggressiveness of Cancer, Advances in Cancer detection. Different forms of therapy, Chemotherapy, radiation Therapy, 
and Immuno therapy: advantages and limitations. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
169
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. Khan, S. Pelengaris, The Molecular Biology of Cancer, First Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. Pecorino, Molecular Biology of Cancer: Mechanisms, Targets and Therapeutics, 2nd edition, Oxford University Press, USA, 
2008. 
BM 443 INTRODUCTION	TO	BIOTECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Scope and importance of Biotechnology; Structure of prokaryoteandeukaryotic cells; Cell cycle and its regulation; 
analytical techniques for quantification of Biomolecules; Fine structure of gene; DNA replication damage andrepair; 
Regulation of gene expression; sequencing of DNA and proteins; Principles and applications of Recombinant DNA 
technology; Techniques for gene transfer in plants and production of transgenic plants; fusion and culture methods; 
Biotechnology; transgenic plants to combat biotic and abiotic stresses; Bioinformantics and its potential inplant and 
animal molecular biology; Animal cell culture; Biology of stem cell culture and its therapeutic applications; Current 
status of biotechnology researchin India. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. J. Thiemanand M. A. Palladino, Introduction to Biotechnology, Benjamin Cummings; 2ndedition; 2008; ISBN-13: 978-
0321491459. 
SupplementaryReading: 
1. M. Wink, an Introduction to Molecular Biotechnology: Molecular Fundamentals, Methods and Applications in Modern 
Biotechnology, Wiley-VCH, 1st Edition, 2006, ISBN-13: 978-3527314126. 
BM444 STRUCTURAL	BIOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Levels of structures in Biological macromolecules, Forces that determine Protein and Nucleic acid structure. 
Polypeptide chains; hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions and water structures; ionic interactions, disulphide 
bonds. Types of proteins and interactions that govern protein folding, protein structure, The protein globule and 
hydrophic interactions organized folds, folding mechanisms, membrane proteins, helix-coil transitions, Molecular 
recognition, supramolecular interactions, Functional importance of Protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid 
interactions. Prediction of protein structure; Nucleic acids; general characteristics of nucleic acid structure, geometric, 
glycosidic bond rotational isomers backbone rotational isomers and ribose puckering forces stabilizing ordered 
forms, base pairing, base stacking; tertiary structure of nucleic acids. Biochemical Kinetics studies, catalytic efficiency 
relaxation spectrometry, ribonuclease as an example. Size and shape of micro molecules: chromophores, transition 
dipole moments, absorbance, and concentration. Circular dichroism: Principle and applications; Diffusion ultra 
centrifugation viscometry; X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. L. Nelson and M. M. Cox, Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, W. H. Freeman, Fourth Edition, 2004. 
2. K. EvanHolde, C. Johnson and P. S. Ho, Principles of Physical Biochemistry, Prentice Hall, Second Edition, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P R. Bergethon, The Physical Basis of Biochemistry, The Foundations of Molecular Biophysics, Springer, Corrected Edition, 2000. 
BM 452 FERMENTATION	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to fermentation: Rate of microbial growth and death. Fermentation kinetics, mass transfer diffusion, 
membrane transport, dialysis, nutrient uptake. Fermenter design, operation, measurement and control in 
fermentation. Aeration and agitation in fermentation: Oxygen requirement, measurement of adsorption coefficients, 
bubble aeration, mechanical agitation, correlation between mass-transfer coefficient and operating variables. 
Fermenor design, operation measurement and control and types of fermentation sub-merged/solid state. Sterilization-
air sterilization, media sterilization. Batch/continuous fermentation, scale up in fermentation. Product recovery. 
Biological waste treatment and inplant sanitation. Principle and use of biosensor. Production of vitamins, amino acids, 
organic acids, enzymes and antibiotics, alcohols. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
170
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. P. Stanburry and A. Whitaker, Principles of Fermentation Technology. Pergamon Press, Oxford UK, 1984. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. H. Steinkraus, Handbook of Indigenous Fermented Foods, MarcelDekker, 1983. 
BM463 FOODTECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Food chemistry, Food analysis, Food biochemistry, Food biotechnology, Food microbiology, Numerical procedures, 
Food physics, Food processing, Food preservation, Food engineering, Food packaging, Nutrition, Sensory evaluation, 
Statistical analysis, Quality assurance and legislation, Toxicology, Product technology, Food packaging. 
Essential	readings:	
1. Campbell, Food Technology, Heinemann Educational, 2002. 
2. Ian Graham, Food Technology, Smart Apple Media, 2008. 
Supplementary readings: 
1. Eiri Board, Technology of Food Preservation & Processing, Engineers India Research Institute, 2008. 
2. Eiri Board, Technology of Food Processing Industries, Engineers India Research Institute, 2011. 
BM 465 BIOLOGICAL	WASTE	TREATMENT 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, Types and characterization of biomedical waste, hazards of Standards of BMW; Health BMW and its 
assessment, medical waste handling methods, treatment methods, : incineration, steam and gas sterilization, chemical, 
thermal, irradiation & microwave treatments, grinding a & shredding, compaction; Management of infectious waste; 
Medical waste reuse, recycling and reduction; Control and monitoring of airpollution caused by BMW; Casestudies on 
BMW management in hospitals and medical colleges; Recent advances in BMW; Regulation/legal provision on BMW. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. J. Landrum, Medical Waste Management and Disposal, William Andrew Inc, 1999
2. R. Radhakrishan, Biomedical Waste Management, Sumit Enterprises, 2007
SupplementaryReading: 
1. J. Kishore, G. K. Ingle, Biomedical Waste Management in India, 1sted, Century Publications NewDelhi, 2004. 
2. Jr. W. C. Blackman, Basic Hazardous Waste Management, Third Edition, 2001
BM 471 BIOPROCESS	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction, Process Development, process alternatives, Process flowsheeting and simulation using ASPEN PLUS, 
Conceptual Process Synthesis, Conceptual design of reactors, Bioreactor design, Bioreactor Design parameters, 
pressure vessels, distillation/adsorption columns, storage vessels, Synthesis of Separation Trains, Cost Estimation & 
profitability analysis, Scale-up & pilot plant studies, Safety in design, Batch process Design for sequential processing 
using, Continuous Bioreactor design (group term projects). 
BM 472 BIOMICROFLUIDICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to Microfluidics System design module (Comsol based), Simulation of two fluid mixing in straight 
Y-channel, Mixing in Y-channel with serpentine section (Importance of Convection, Diffusion and Secondary Flows in 
Biological Sample Preparation), Simulation of electrokinetic flow in microfluidic devices (Biochip), H-Filter design and 
simulation for Cell Separation & Concentration Gradient Chemotaxis, Simulation of 3D Fluid-Structure Interaction in 
Microchannel
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
171
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
BM 473 FOOD	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Enumeration of microorganisms, Isolation of lactic acid bacteria from yoghurt. To study the spreading coefficient of 
butter, stored at different temperatures., To determine the puncture strength of fruits and vegetables, To study the 
bloom strength of the gelatin gels. To determine the fracture strength of the chocolates using 3-point bending setup.; 
To study the extrusion properties of dough, To study the peeling strength of the packaged seals.; To study the cutting 
strength of fruits and vegetables. To determine the moisture content within food materials.; To study the viscosity of 
the commonly available sauces and ketchups. 
BM 481 TISSUE	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Module 1 - Scaffold Formation and Characterization; Preparation of 2D Collagen Films; Preparation of 3D Scaffolds; 
Preparation of Silk Fibroin scaffold by Salt Leaching Method; Preparation of Silk Fibroin scaffold by Phase Separation 
Method; Preparation of Silk Fibroin scaffold by Electrospinning; Design of 3D scaffold by rapid proto typing technique.; 
Characterization of biopolymers and scaffold; Mechanical Strength; Contact angle measurement; Pore size & Porosity; 
Module 2 - Cells and Cell Culture; Introduction to Cell Culture lab and aseptic skill; (Use of Biosafety cabinet, CO2 
incubators, Microscopes, Sterile Conditions); Preparation of Cell Culture Media and other supplements & Additives; 
Isolation and Culturing of MNCs from Peripheral blood; Cell counting & cell morphology Module 3 - Bioreactors and 
Integration; Introduction to type of bioreactors & their operation; (Spinner Flask, Rotating vessel, Perfused Column 
and Perfused Chamber); MNC seeding on 2D films and 3D scaffolds; MNC seeding on 2D & 3D polymer scaffolds by 
static method; MNC seeding on 2D & 3D polymer scaffolds by dynamic method; Culture and cell growth study in 
bioreactor; Module-4 -Cell Survival & Function; Live/Dead Fluorescence Assay; MTT Viability Test; Cell Viability Test 
by Trypan Blue staining method
BM 482 COMPUTER	AIDED	TISSUE	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Scaffold Based Tissue Engineering-: MIMICS – 1, Scaffold Design 1: CT/MRI Image-based 3D Reconstruction & Unit Cell 
Design-MIMICS – 2, CAD Modeling of tissue anatomy, Scaffold Design 2: Biomaterials- MIMICS – 3, Scaffold Design 3: 
Biomaterials-MIMICS-4, Scaffold Design 5: CAE analysis, Scaffold Fabrication 1: Chemical Techniques, CAE analysis of 
Scaffold Design, Scaffold Fabrication 2: Solid Freeform Techniques, Scaffold Fabrication 3: Cell Fabrication Techniques, 
Project Discussion & Assignments, Project Assignment, Project Presentation
BM 483 COMPUTATIONAL	BIOMECHANICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Stresses analysis on hard tissues/ soft tissues in uniaxial, biaxial and tri axial loading, Stress analysis on femur during 
standing (axial, bending), Stress analysis on hip joint during motion (static and dynamic), Stress analysis on knee cap, 
Stress analysis on shoulder joint, Biomechanics of spine, Biomechanics of human jaw, Analysis of Foot forces during 
walking and jumping
BM 484 STRUCTURAL	BIOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Monitoring protein unfolding and refolding. Protein misfolding and aggregation in vitro. Study the thermodynamics of 
protein folding, misfolding. Monitoring Protein-DNA interaction. Study Protein, DNA and various metallic nanoparticle 
interactions. Study the folding behaviour of proteins by the action of Heat shock proteins (Hsp). Small ligand docking. 
Protein-protein docking. Protein-Protein, Protein-DNA interaction study by Chromatography. Protein-Protein 
interaction study by Isothermal titration calorimetry.; Calculation of Hydrophobicity and other surface characters 
of macromolecules by online software. Estimation secondary and tertiary structure of proteins by online software. 
Study Protein, DNA and various metallic nanoparticle interactions. Monitoring the process of amyloid formation of a 
protein in-vitro. 
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
172
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Detail Syllabi
173
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	CIVIL	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
Sub Code Subject Name L-T-P Credits
CE 100 Engineering Mechanics 3-1-0 4
CE 130 Environment and Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 171 Engineering Drawing 0-0-3 2
CE 201 Civil Engineering Materials and Construction 3-0-0 3
CE 202 Surveying 3-0-0 3
CE 203 Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
CE 204 Elements of Architecture & Town Planning 3-0-0 3
CE 205 Architecture & Town Planning 3-1-0 4
CE 207 Cost Effective Housing 3-1-0 4
CE 209 Concrete Technology 3-1-0 4
CE 212 Structural Analysis 3-0-0 3
CE 214 Theory of Elasticity 3-0-0 3
CE 252 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
CE 261 Elements of Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 271 Building Drawing Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 272 Highway Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 273 Mechanics of Solids Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 274 Surveying Field Work 0-0-3 2
CE 301 Advanced Surveying 3-1-0 4
CE 302 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3
CE 303 Remote Sensing and Geographic Information System 3-0-0 3
CE 311 Structural Design 3-0-0 3
CE 312 Design of Steel Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 313 Advanced Structural Analysis 3-1-0 4
CE 314 Structural Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CE 316 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4
CE 318 Finite Element Method 3-1-0 4
CE 321 Mechanics of Soil 3-0-0 3
CE 322 Geotechnical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 331 Environmental Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 333 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-1-0 4
CE 334 Air Quality Management 3-1-0 4
CE 336 Advanced Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4
CE 341 Basic Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 342 Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 351 Hydraulics and Hydraulic Machines 3-1-0 4
CE 352 Advanced Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
CE 371 Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 372 Steel Structures Design Practice 0-0-3 2
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
174
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Sub Code Subject Name L-T-P Credits
CE 373 Advanced Surveying Field work 0-0-3 2
CE 374 Transportation Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 375 Structural Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 376 Environmental Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 377 Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 378 Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 391 Special Topic in Civil Engineering – I 3/4
CE 392 Special Topic in Civil Engineering – II 3/4
CE 393 Special Laboratory in Civil Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
CE 394 Special Laboratory in Civil Engineering – II 0-0-3 2
CE 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
CE 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
CE 401 Estimation, Costing & Construction Management 3-1-0 4
CE 403 Optimization Methods in Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 404 Quality Management 3-0-0 3
CE 405 Disaster Management 3-0-0 3
CE 407 Optimization Methods and Its Applications in Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 411 Plate and Shell Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 412 Pre-stressed Concrete 3-0-0 3
CE 413 Advanced Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 415 Earthquake and Wind Resistant Design of Structures 3-0-0 3
CE 418 Probability and Reliability Methods in Civil Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 421 Ground Improvement Techniques 3-0-0 3
CE 423 Advanced Foundation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 424 Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 425 Environmental Geotechnics 3-0-0 3
CE 426 Soil Structure Interaction 3-0-0 3
CE 428 Soil Dynamics and Industrial Foundations 3-0-0 3
CE 432 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
CE 436 Environmental Management in Industries 3-0-0 3
CE 441 Advanced Transportation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 442 Traffic Engineering & Transportation Planning 3-0-0 3
CE 443 Pavement Design 3-0-0 3
CE 444 Pavement Materials 3-0-0 3
CE 445 Design of Airports and Hill Roads 3-0-0 3
CE 451 Irrigation Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 452 Water Resources Engineering 3-0-0 3
CE 453 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-0-0 3
CE 454 Ground Water Hydrology 3-0-0 3
CE 455 Open Channel Flow 3-0-0 3
CE 456 Water Resources Planning and Management 3-0-0 3
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
175
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Department of Civil Engineering
Sub Code Subject Name L-T-P Credits
CE 471 Computer Aided Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 472 Structural Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CE 473 Geotechnical Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
CE 474 Water Resources Engineering Design Practice 0-0-3 2
Note: For 6 level courses please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
CE 100 ENGINEERING MECHANICS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Statics: Introduction: Basic Concepts of Force, Moment and Couple; System of Coplanar forces, Equilibrium of 
Coplanar force systems, Free body diagrams and method of solution of engineering problems, Friction, Coulomb’s 
Laws for dry friction, Coefficient of friction, Angle of friction, Belt friction and Screw Jack; Internal forces in Members 
of Trusses and Frames (Method of joints, Method of Sections) and Method of Members; Centroid: Theorems of 
Pappus, Moment of Inertia of plane figures, Polar Moment of Inertia and Product of Inertia; Principle of Virtual 
Work and application; Dynamics: Kinetics of Rectilinear motion and Curvilinear motion of a particle - D’Alembert’s 
Principle, Linear Momentum and Impulse, Moment of Momentum, Work and Energy, Impact; Rigid Body motion - 
Kinematics of rotation and plane motion, Instantaneous Centre of Rotation; Equation of motion of a Rotating rigid 
body, D’Alembert’s Principle for rotation and plane motion, Resultant Inertia force in Rotation, Compound Pendulum, 
Angular Momentum, Energy Equations for rotating bodies, Equations of Plane Motion of a rigid body and Energy 
equations for Plane motion. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. P. Timoshenko, D. H. Young, and J. V. Rao: Engineering Mechanics, revised fourth edition, Tata-McGraw Hill, Special Indian 
Edition, 2007. 
2. R. C. Hibbeler, Engineering Mechanics (Statics and Dynamics), Pearson Education Asia Pvt. Ltd, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. K. Tayal, Engineering Mechanics, Umesh Publications, Delhi, 11th edition, 2001. 
2. F. P. Beer and E. R. Johnston, Mechanics for Engineers (Static & Dynamics), 7th edition, McGraw Hill International Student 
Edition, 2003
3. J. L. Meriam and L. G. Kraige, Engineering Mechanics (Static & Dynamics), John Wiley, 2002. 
CE 130 ENVIRONMENT	AND	SAFETY	ENGINEERING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Environmental	Engineering:	Introduction to Environmental engineering Nature and scope of environment problems; 
Ecosystem effects through bio-geochemical cycles; Local, regional and global environmental challenges, Basic 
concepts of biodiversity and its significance, human behavior and values for a sustainable society; Water Pollution 
Fundamentals and Control Strategies: Water quality-physical, chemical & biological characteristics, Drinking water 
standards; Effluent quality requirements; Water and wastewater treatment processes-treatment train, physical, 
chemical and biological unit operations; Air Pollution Fundamentals and Control Strategies: Air pollution - sources, 
classifications and regulations; indoor air pollution, air pollutants and their effects, Monitoring Principles and 
instrumentation for particulate and gaseous pollutant measurements; Air pollution control strategies: physical, 
chemical and biological methods; Noise standards and criteria, Noise pollution measurement in ambient air and 
industrial complex, Control methods for noise pollution; Engineering principles in waste management, Case studies 
on industrial applications of cleaner technologies in chemical, metallurgical, pulp and paper, textile, electroplating, 
leather, dairy, cement and other industries. Environment Management and Sustainability Tools for sustainable 
management including ISO certification, environment audit, EIA and LCA; National and International policies, 
regulations and institutions.; Safety Engineering: Introduction: Background, Benefits of safety in Industry, Safety 
Terms and Definitions. Safety Mathematics and Reliability Basics: Basic Statistics, Set Algebra, Probability, Reliability. 
Workplace Accidents and Safety: Accident Causation Theories (Dmino Theory, Human Factor Theory), Accident 
Investigation and Reporting. Legal Aspects of Safety: Factories Act 1948, Other International Codes (OSHA Laws 
& Regulations). Hazards Related to Various Industries: Chemical, Electrical, Mining, and Construction Safety and 
Risk Management: Safety Management Principles, Safety Program Plan, Safety Committees, Safety Performance 
Measures, Risk Assessment, Risk Management. Safety Analysis Methods: FMEA, FTA, Markov Method, HAZOP, JHA, 
Control Charts. Human Factors in Safety: Job Stress, Ergonomics, Human behaviour, Human Reliability Prediction 
Models, Personal Protective Equipments; Safety Costing; Safety Cost Estimation Methods, Safety Cost Estimation 
Models, Safety Cost Performance Measurement Indices. 
Detail Syllabi
176
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. L. Davis and D. A Cornwell, Introduction to Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill International, 2005
2. B. S. Dhillon, Engineering Safety: Fundamentals, Techniques, Applications, World Scientific. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. Kiely, Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill Int. 2004
CE 171 ENGINEERING	DRAWING 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Introduction to AutoCAD basic commands, Code provision of IS-696 regarding Lines, Lettering and Dimensioning. 
Drawing of Scales (Plane Scales, Diagonal Scales, Vernier Scales and Scales of Chords), Construction of simple 
geometrical figures and Engineering curves; Orthographic Projections: Projection of a point situated in various 
quadrants, projections of straight lines, true length, true inclinations and traces of a straight lines, auxiliary 
projections, auxiliary inclined and Auxiliary vertical planes, projection of plane figures. Projection of simple solids, 
Auxiliary projection of solids, section of solids, true shape of section; Development of surfaces: prisms, pyramids, 
cylinders, cones, spheres, pipe bends; Isometric projection: Principles, Isometric scales, Isometric projection of plane 
figures and simple solids. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Venugopal, Engineering Drawing and Graphics + AutoCAD, New Age International (P) Limited. 4th Reprint: June, 2008. 
2. N. D. Bhatt, Geometrical Drawing, Charotar Book Stall, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. L. Narayana and P. Kannaiah, Engineering Graphics, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 
2. J. D. Bethune, Engineering Graphics with AutoCAD, Pearson Education. 
CE 201 CIVIL	ENGINEERING	MATERIALS	AND	CONSTRUCTION 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Materials: Stone-classification, quarrying and dressing; Brick-manufacturing, testing, classification, special bricks, 
cement concrete, timber –seasoning, defects, bitumen; Special materials: Alternate timber material, polymer based 
building materials, geogrids, geosynthetic, ceramic products, cladding. Building construction: Foundation: - Spread 
footing, isolated, combined and cantilever footing, raft foundation. Pile foundation; Stone and Brick Masonry: 
Comparison, general principles, bonds and joints. Reinforced concrete and reinforced brick work; Damp proofing of 
floors and walls; Doors and Windows: Definition, function and classification, Principles governing their number, size, 
area and positioning; Staircase and escalators
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication. 
2. P. C. Varghese, Building Materials, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi-1. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. S. Arora, Text book of Engineering materials, Kalyani publication. 
2. D. N. Ghose, Material of Construction, Tata McGraw Hill. 
3. S. K. Duggal, Building Materials, New Age International Pvt. Ltd. 
CE 202 SURVEYING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: classification of surveys; Linear measurements: Types of Chains and tapes, chaining and ranging, 
principles of chain survey, equipments, applications, errors and corrections, obstacles in chaining, - Electronic 
Distance Measurement (EDM); Angle and direction measurements: Measurement of bearing, Computation of angles 
from - Bearings, Designation of bearings, fore bearing and back bearing, Prismatic compass, Principles of compass 
survey, local attraction and corrections, compass traverse and adjustments; Plane table survey: Equipments, working 
operations, different methods, advantages and disadvantages, Two point and Three point problems; Levelling: 
Principle, Levelling instruments, Dumpy level, booking and reducing levels, simple and differential levelling, profile 
and reciprocal levelling, methods of levelling, curvature and refraction corrections, bubble tube and its sensitiveness, 
levelling difficulties. Contouring: definition, contour interval, characteristics of contours, direct and indirect methods of 
contouring, interpolation of contours, uses of contour maps; Minor instruments: box sexant, planimeter, pentagraph, 
inclinometer
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Roy, Fundamentals of Surveying, PHI. 
2. B. C. Punmia, A. K. Jain & A. K. Jain, Surveying Vol-I, Vol-II, Laxmi publications. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
177
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. T. P. Kanetkar & Kulkarni, A text book of Surveying and Levelling. 
2. D. Clark, Plane and Geodetic Surveying, Constable Company Ltd, 10 Orange Street, London WC. 
CE 203 MECHANICS	OF	SOLIDS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Concept of Stress and strain, Definition of stress, stress tensor, normal and shearing stresses in axially loaded 
members, stress-strain relationship; Generalized Hooke’s Law, Poisson’s ratio, relationship between E, G, K and ν, 
stress-strain diagram for uniaxial loading, working stress.; Analysis of Axially Loaded Members, Composite bars in 
tension and Compression, temperature stresses in composite rods, statically indeterminate problems, Transformation 
of Plane stress and Plane strain, principal stresses and principal planes, Mohr’s circle of stress, principal strains 
and principal axes of strain, Mohr’s circle for strain, Strain rosettes, determination of principal strains from strain 
measurements, calculation of principal stresses from principal strains; Stresses in thin cylinders and thin spherical 
shells, wire winding of thin cylinders; Torsion of Circular shafts and Helical Springs, strength of solid and hollow 
circular shafts, design of circular members in torsion,  close coiled helical springs; Members subjected to flexural 
loads, shear force and bending moment diagrams for cantilever and simply supported beams, elastic curve.; Theory 
of simple bending, bending stresses in beams, shearing stresses in beams, composite beams, Slope and deflection of 
beams by integration method and moment area method; Euler’s theory for compression members; short struts with 
eccentric loading, Kern of rectangular and circular sections. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. P. Popov, Engineering Mechanics of Solids, Prentice hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 
2. S. P. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, Elements of Strength of Materials, Affiliated East West Press Pvt. Ltd. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. H. Ryder, Strength of Materials, ELBS. 
2. H. Shames, Introduction to Solid Mechanics, Prentice hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 
CE 204 ELEMENTS	OF	ARCHITECTURE	AND	TOWN	PLANNING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Architectural development: historic examples, factors influence architectural development; Principles of architectural 
design: primary elements, form, space, organization, circulation, proportion and scale, ordering principles; Functional 
planning of buildings: Planning, designing and construction, general building requirements, (as per the National 
building Code); Evolution of towns: origin and growth, historical development of town planning in ancient valley 
civilizations; Objects and necessary of town planning; Surveys and analysis of a town; New Concepts in town planning: 
Garden city movement, Linear city and Satellite city concepts, Neighborhood Planning; Planning Principles, Practice 
and Techniques: Elements of City plan, Estimating future needs, Planning standards, Estimating future needs, Zoning 
- its definition, height and bulk zoning, F. A. R.; Concepts of Urban planning, Design and Landscaping. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Gallion and S. Eisner, The Urban Pattern: City planning and Design - C B S publishers, 5th edition, 2005. 
2. D. K. Francis Ching, Architectures: Form, Space and Order, John Wiley, 2nd edition 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. National Building Code of India 2005, BIS, New Delhi. 
2. S. Eisner, A. B. Gallion and S. Eisner, The Urban Pattern: City planning and Design, John Wiley 6th edition 1996. 
CE 205 ARCHITECTURE	AND	TOWN	PLANNING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Architectural development: natural and built environment, historic examples, factors influence architectural 
development; Principles of architectural design: design methods, primary elements, form, space, organization, 
circulation, proportion and scale, ordering principles; Functional planning of buildings: Planning, designing and 
construction, general building requirements, permit and inspection (as per the National building Code); Evolution of 
towns: history and trends in town planning: origin and growth, historical development of town planning in ancient 
valley civilizations; Objects and necessary of town planning; Surveys and analysis of a town; New Concepts in town 
planning: Garden city movement, Linear city and Satellite city concepts, Neighborhood Planning; Planning Principles, 
Practice and Techniques: Elements of City plan, Estimating future needs, Planning standards, Zoning - its definition, 
procedure and districts, height and bulk zoning, F. A. R., Master Plan; Concepts of Urban planning, Design and 
Landscaping. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Gallion and S. Eisner, The Urban Pattern: City planning and Design - C B S publishers, 5th edition, 2005. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
178
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. D. K. Francis Ching, Architectures: Form, Space and Order, John Wiley, 2nd edition 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. National Building Code of India 2005, BIS, New Delhi. 
2. S. Eisner, A. B. Gallion and S. Eisner, The Urban Pattern: City planning and Design, John Wiley 6th edition 1996. 
CE 207 COST	EFFECTIVE	HOUSING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Income based classification of population. High, Middle, Low Income group and economically weaker section. Basic 
shelter issues in India. Mindset of low income group and economically weaker section people. Problems associated 
with this group with relation to land, living condition and dwelling standards; Recommendation of housing and urban 
development corporation.; Traditional materials and techniques (rammed earth, sun dried bricks, wood, bamboo, 
jute); Alternate and developed methods / materials of construction: pressed soil blocks, use of stabilized soil, soil 
cement blocks, fly ash brick, by-product gypsum, foundation, arch foundation, walling- rat trap bond, roofing- 
filler slabs. Precast blocks and their use. Laurie Baker’s experiments in low cost housing.; Modular constructions. 
Experimental observations/findings of CBRI. Use of cost effective technologies (CECT) in building constructions, stub 
foundation, Rat trap bond (walls), brick arches (alternates to lintels) filler slab (roof). Use of Ferro cement.; Cost 
effective housing for natural disaster mitigation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. J. Goodman, R. P. Lama, R. Rajani, F. J. Burian, Low cost Housing Technology, Pergamon Press, 1979. 
2. International Association for Earthquake Engg., Guidelines for Earthquake Resistant Non-Engineered Construction. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. Baker, Are slums inevitable?, Centre of science & technology for Rural Development, (COSTFORD) Ayanthple, Thrissur, Kerala. 
2. L. Baker, Houses- How to reduce the building cost, Centre of science & technology for Rural Development, COSTFORD 
Ayanthple, Thrissur-68003, Kerala. 
CE 209 CONCRETE	TECHNOLOGY 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Concrete: Constituent materials; Properties of Cements, aggregates, water, admixtures (chemical and mineral). 
Mineral admixtures- Silica fumes, fly ash, slag. Mix Design of Concrete; Properties of Fresh concrete- workability, 
compaction, curing, Hardened concrete- Compressive strength, split tensile strength, flexural strength; Elasticity, 
shrinkage and creep.; Durability of concrete, permeability; corrosion.; Special concrete- high strength concrete, high 
performance concrete, self compacting concrete, ready mix concrete; Form work for concrete; Concrete under special 
conditions- Corrosion resistant concrete, lightweight concrete, high density concrete, Concrete for seismic resistant 
structure,; Precast concrete blocks; Nondestructive testing methods- Ultrasonic pulse velocity, rebound hammer; 
Repair and Rehabilitation of concrete; fibre reinforced concrete, polymer modified concrete. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. M. Neville, J. J. Brooks, Concrete Technology, Low Priced Edition, Pearson Education, 2004. 
2. A. R. Santhakumar, Concrete Technology, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. S. Shetty, Concrete technology- Theory & Practice, S. Chand & Company New Delhi, 2005. 
2. M. L. Gambhir, Concrete Technology, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 1995. 
CE 212 STRUCTURAL	ANALYSIS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Concept of determinate and indeterminate structures, determination of degree of indeterminacy in plane frame and 
continuous structures, determination of member forces in statically determinate pin-jointed space frames, deflection 
of pin-jointed plane trusses by Williot Mohr diagram; Rolling loads and influence line diagrams for simply supported 
beams, influence line for forces in members of Pratt and Warren trusses with parallel top and bottom chords; Analysis 
of fixed and continuous beams by Moment-Area method, Conjugate beam method and theorem of three moments, 
Analysis of three-hinged and two-hinged arches, Spandrel braced arches.; Analysis of suspension cable bridges with 
three-hinged and two-hinged stiffening girders subjected to dead and live loads, influence line for horizontal thrust, 
bending moment, normal thrust and radial shear for arches and suspension bridges. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. C. Hibbler, Structural Analysis, LCE, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2007. 
2. C. K. Wang, Intermediate structural analysis, McGraw-Hill. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
179
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. S. Negi, Theory and Problems in Structural Analysis, Tata-McGraw Hill. 
2. J. S. Kinney, Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Narosa Publishing House, 1991. 
CE 214 THEORY	OF	ELASTICITY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Elementary Concept of Elasticity: Stresses in three dimensional bodies, equations of equilibrium, strain displacement 
relations, stress strain relations, compatibility equations, boundary conditions, plane stress, governing differential 
equation, Airy stress function(Cartesian co-ordinates). Theories of Failure: Theories of Failure and its graphical 
representation for two-dimensional cases. Thick walled cylinders: Thick cylinders subjected to internal and external 
fluid pressures, compound cylinders, shrink-fit. Energy Methods: Strain energy expression in three dimensions, 
strain energy due to axial load, bending and torsion, Castigliano’s theorems, Principle of virtual work, Unit load and 
unit couple method. Unsymmetrical bending: Properties of beam cross- sections, slope of neutral axis, stresses and 
deflections in unsymmetrical bending. Shear centre of thin wall beam cross section. Curved beams: Bending of beams 
of large initial curvature, stress distribution in beams with rectangular, circular and trapezoidal cross sections, location 
of neutral axis, stresses in crane hooks, rings and chain links. Membrane stresses in shells, application to cylindrical, 
spherical and conical shells. Plastic Analysis of Beams: Plastic Modulus, Shape factor, plastic hinge, application to 
beams, and determination of collapse loads. Special Topics: Repeated stresses in structural and machine components, 
fatigue in metals, endurance limit, concept of stress concentration, stress concentration factor and notch sensitivity. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. S. Srinath, Advanced Mechanics of Solids, Tata-McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi. 
2. S. P. Timoshenko, Strength of Materials, Part I and II, D. Van Nostrand Company Inc. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. P. Boresi, R. J. Schmidth and O. M. Sidebottom, Advanced Mechanics of Materials, John Wiley and Sons. 
2. F. B. Seely and J. O. Smith, Advanced Mechanics of Materials, John Wiley and Sons. 
3. J. S. Kinney, Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Narosa Publications. 
4. S. P. Timoshenko & J. N. Goodier, Theories of Elasticity, McGraw Hill Publisher
CE 252 FLUID	MECHANICS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Physical properties of fluids- Compressibility, Elasticity, and Viscosity, Ideal and Real fluids, Concepts of shear stress, 
Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluids.; Pressure-density-height relationships, Pressure on plane and curved surfaces, 
Buoyancy, Stability of immersed and floating bodies, Free and forced vortex; Steady and unsteady, Uniform and 
non-uniform, Laminar and Turbulent flows, Free surface flows and Enclosed flows,; Definition of one, two and three-
dimensional flows, Velocity and Accelerations, Stream lines, Streak lines and Path lines, Stream tubes, Stream function 
and Velocity potential, flows nets, Circulation and Vorticity. Equation of continuity, One-dimensional Euler’s equation 
of motion and its integration to obtain Bernoulli’s equation, Momentum equation; Hydraulic mean radius, Concept 
of friction loss, Darcy-Weisbach equation Minor losses in pipe, Branched pipes in parallel and series, Transmission of 
power, Water hammer in pipes, Laminar flow in pipes-Hazen-Poiseulli’s equation, Turbulent flow in pipes, Velocity 
distribution in pipes, Moody’s diagram; Boundary layer thickness, Energy thickness, Laminar and turbulent boundary 
layer, separation of Boundary Layer. Momentum integral equation; Drag and Lift coefficient, Pressure drag and Friction 
drag characteristics on Sphere, Cylinder, and Disc, Circulation, Lift and Magnus effect, Lift Characteristics of air foils, 
Induced drag; Open channel flow, Uniform flow, Chezy’s, Kutter’s and Manning‘s equation, Concept of specific energy, 
Critical flow, Point gauge, Pitot tube, Current meter, Venturi meter, Orifice meter, Orifices and Mouth pieces, Notches 
and Weirs. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. C. Patra, Engineering Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, I st edition, 2008. 
2. P. N. Modi and S. M. Seth, Hydraulic and Fluid Mechanics, Standard Book House, New Delhi, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. F. Douglas, J. M. Gasiorek, J. A. Swaffield, Fluid Mechanics, Pearson Education, Asia, 1st edition, 2002. 
2. F. M. White, Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw-Hill, 5th Edition, New Delhi, 2003. 
3. R. K. Bansal, Fluid Mechanics and Hyd. Machines, Laxmi publisher, New Delhi, 2008. 
4. Som & Biswas, Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Machines, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2004. 
5. Subramanyam, Problems in Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2004. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
180
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 261 ELEMENTS	OF	CIVIL	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Building materials and construction materials: Bricks, Stones, Cement, Cement mortar, Cement Concrete, Reinforced 
concrete, pre stressed concrete; Construction: Foundations, Brick masonry, Stone masonry, walls, columns, floors, 
steps & stairs, lintels, roofs, doors & windows; Surveying: Chain Surveying, Compass surveying, Plane Table Surveying, 
Leveling. Transportation Engineering: Classification of highways, principles of alignment, Types of pavements, 
geometric design of airport components; Floods: River systems and Flood forecasting. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. S. Palanichamy, Basic Civil Engineering, Tata McGrawhill 3rd Edition, 2000. 
2. S. K. Khanna & C E G Justo, Highway Engineering, Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 8th edition 2001, Reprinted 2003
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. K. Duggal, Building Materials, New Age International Pvt. Ltd. 
2. S. C. Rangawala, Building Construction, Charotar Publishing House
3. S. P. Bindra, A Course in Highway Engg., Dhanpat Rai Publication
4. K. C. Patra, Hydrology & Water Resources Engg., Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2nd Edition
CE 271 BUILDING	DRAWING	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Basic concept, purpose, function and types of building (Residential, Industrial and Institutional); Principles of site 
selection, orientation of buildings and distribution of space; Line plan. Development of plan from a line plan; Details 
of Doors, windows, foundation and stair case etc.; A simple two-roomed official building, multi-storeyed residential 
building plan, front and sectional elevations. Building drawing project. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. G. Shah, C. M. Kale and S. Y. Patki, Building drawing with an integrated approach to built environment-2002-Tata McGraw-
Hill Publication. 
2. O. A. Wakita and R. M. Linde, Study guide for the professional practice of architectural working Drawings, 2nd edition 1994, 
John Wiley. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. L. Lalph, Architectural working Drawings, 4th edition, Sept. 1999, John Wiley. 
2. W. T. Goodban and Jr. J. Hayslett, Architectural drawing and planning, McGraw-Hill Pub
3. F. Reekie, Reekie’s Architectural Drawing, Elsevier. 
CE 272 HIGHWAY	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Determination of aggregate crushing value.; Determination of Los Angeles abrasion value of aggregates; Determination 
of aggregate impact value; Determination of penetration value of bitumen; Determination of softening point 
value of bitumen; Determination of ductility value of bitumen; Determination of flash and fire point of bitumen; 
Determination of specific gravity of bitumen; Determination of fineness modulus of coarse aggregate; Determination 
of fineness modulus of fine aggregate; Determination of stripping value of aggregate; Determination of bulking of 
sand; Determination of workability of concrete by flow table; Determination of flakiness index and elongation index 
of coarse aggregate; Determination of specific gravity and water absorption of coarse aggregate; Aging of bituminous 
binders; Marshall method of mix design; Demonstration of advanced equipments for characterization of pavement 
materials. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Highway Engineering Laboratory Manual
2. Relevant I. S. Codes
CE 273 MECHANICS	OF	SOLIDS	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Close coiled helical spring; Beam deflection; Brinell Hardness Test; Rockwell Hardness Test; Torsion Test on mild steel 
specimen; Tension test on mild steel specimen; Fatigue Test and determination of endurance limit; Column test; 
Compression testing; Experiments on strain measurement; Plane stress and plane strain; Charpy Impact Test. 
CE 274 SURVEYING	FIELD	WORK 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Chain Triangulation of a given area; Plotting the chain triangulation; Traversing a given area with Prismatic Compass; 
Plotting the compass traverse and graphical adjustment; Filling up with details with plane-table by i) radial and ii) 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
181
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
intersection method; Solving two-point problem and three-point problem; Study of Dumpy level and Auto level; 
Differential leveling; Permanent adjustment of Dumpy level; Reciprocal leveling; Determination of sensitiveness of 
the bubble tube; Profile leveling; Longitudinal sectioning and cross sectioning –Contouring; Interpolation of contours 
and preparation of contour map of a given area. 
CE 301 ADVANCED	SURVEYING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Use of transit theodolites: Observing horizontal and vertical angles, electronic theodolite. theodilite traversing- checks 
in traversing, precision and error, traverse computations, adjustment of closed traverse, elementary ideas of geodetic 
computation, EDM, Total station instrument, electronic measurements in surveying; Tacheometry: Different types of 
tacheometric measurements- fixed and movable hair tacheometres, tangential system, auto reduction tacheometers, 
Subtense bar; Triangulation: First order triangulation, selection of stations, inter-visibility of stations, satellite station, 
Base-line measuring apparatus and baseline measurement, base net; Survey adjustments: Theory of errors, probable 
error, principle of least squares, normal equations and correlations, level net; Aerial photogrammetry: Principles, 
computation of scale and distance between points, relief displacement, measurement of height of different objects, 
ground control, flight planning, Remote sensing: Introduction to microwave remote sensing and basic concepts, 
spectral reflectance of ground features, data acquisition and interpretation, applications of remote sensing for 
resources mapping, monitoring and management, Acquaintance of Global Positioning System and Geographic 
Information System. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Duggal, Surveying, Vol-I & II, 2nd Edition, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, 2004. 
2. S. K. Roy, Fundamentals of Surveying, PHI. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. M. Chandra, Plane Surveying, New Age International Pvt. Ltd., 2nd Edition, 2008. 
2. A. M. Chandra, Higher Surveying, New Age International Pvt. Ltd., 2nd Edition, 2007. 
3. I. Heywood, S. Cornelius and S. Carver, An Introduction To GIS, Person Education, 2nd Edition, 2004. 
4. T. M. Lillisand and R. W. Kaifer, Remote Sensing & Image Interpretation, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 6th Edition, 2007. 
CE 302 DISASTER	MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Cyclones: Formation, Cyclonic precipitation, anti-cyclones, Flood: Flood and its estimation, Flood warning, Flood 
protection measures. Earthquake: Causes of earthquake, plate tectonics, seismic zoning map, Characteristics of strong 
ground motions & attenuation, damage assessment, rehabilitation and retrofitting of structures. Environmental 
disaster: Impact assessment studies, computation and preparedness. Disaster management: Developing appropriate 
technology for disaster mitigation, Role of management teams, importance of awareness, alertness and preparedness 
camp. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. C. Patra, Hydrology and Water Resources Engineering, CRC Press, Florida, USA, 2nd Edition. 
2. N. Sharma, Earthquake resistant building construction, S. K. Kataria & Sons, New Delhi. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Subramanian, Engineering Hydrology, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi. 
2. V. P. Singh, Elementary Hydrology, Prentice Hall of India. 
3. P. C. Sinha, Disaster Mitigation, Preparedness, Recovery and Response, SBS Publishers & Distributors Pvt. Ltd.  
4. D. P. Coppola, Introduction to International Disaster Management, Butterworth-Heinemann. 
5. F. B. Friedman, Practical Guide to Environmental Management, McGraw Hill. 
CE 303 REMOTE	SENSING	AND	GEOGRAPHICAL	INFORMATION	SYSTEM 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Remote Sensing system: data acquisition and processing, Applications, Multi concept in remote 
sensing. Physical Basis of Remote Sensing: EMR nature, definition, nomenclature and radiation laws; Interaction 
in atmosphere-nature, its effects in various Wave-length regions, atmospheric windows; Interaction at ground 
surface soils Geometric basis of interaction. Platform and Sensors: Terrestrial, aerial and space platforms, Orbital 
characteristics of space platforms, sun- and geo-synchronous; Sensor systems-radiometers, opto-mechanical and 
push broom sensor; resolution : spectral, spatial, radiometric and temporal; IFOV, FOV, GRE; geometric characteristics 
of scanners, V/H and S/N ratio; Data products from various air and spaceborne sensors-aerial photographs, LiDAR, 
Landsat, SPOT, IRS, ERS, IKONOS etc., Image Interpretation: elements of interpretation; digital image processing and 
interpretation; Field verification. Geographical Information systems: components of GIS-data acquisition, spatial 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
182
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and attribute data, pre-processing, storage and management; data structures raster and vector data; GIS analysis 
functions; Errors and corrections; data presentation and generation of thematic maps. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. M. Chandra and S. K. Ghosh, Remote Sensing and GIS, Narosa Pub, 2007. 
2. T. M. Lillisand, R. W. Kaifer and J. W. Chipman, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation; John Wiley and sons Inc, 6th Edition 
Nov 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. I. Heywood, S. Cornelius and S. Carver, An Introduction to GIS; Pearson Education-2nd Ed, 2002. 
CE 311 REINFORCED	CONCRETEDESIGN	 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction; Basic Material Properties; Basic Design Concepts - Working Stress Method (WSM), Ultimate Load 
Method (ULM), Limit States Method (LSM); Behaviour in Flexure; Design of Beams and One-way Slabs for Flexure; 
Design for Shear; Design for Torsion; Design for Bond; Serviceability Limit States: Deflection and Cracking; Design 
of Two-way Slab Systems; Design of Staircases; Design of Compression Members; Design of Footings and Retaining 
Walls; Detailing and Construction Practices. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Unnikrishna Pillai & D. Menon, Reinforced Concrete Design (Third edition), Tata McGraw Hill, 2008 
2. A. Nilson, D. Darwin, C. Dolan, Design of Concrete Structures (13th edition), Tata McGraw- Hill 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. K. Jain, Reinforced Concrete: Limit State design, Nem Chand and Bros. 1999. 
2. S. K. Mallik and A. P. Gupta, Reinforced Concrete Design, Oxford and IBH 1999. 
3. Code of practice for Plain And Reinforced Concrete IS 456-2000. 
4. SP-16: Design Aids to IS 456-1978. 
CE 312 DESIGN	OF	STEEL	STRUCTURES 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Materials, Structures and Specifications, Riveted, Bolted & welded Connections, Design of Tension and Compression 
Members, Design of Beams, plate girders and gantry girders, Design of industrial buildings; Design of slab and 
gusseted base. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. N. Subramanian, Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press, 1st Edition, 2008. 
2. P. Dayarathnam, Design of steel structures, S Chand & Co Ltd, New Delhi, 2nd Edition, 1999. 
3. Indian Standard Code IS 800, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chandra and V. Gehlot, Design of steel structures, Scientific Publishers, India, 2005. 
2. B. C. Punmia, A. K. Jain and A. K. Jain, Design of Steel structures, Laxmi Publications, 2nd Edition, 2004. 
3. L. S. Negi, Design of steel structures, Tata McGraw Hill. 
4. A. S. Arya & J. L. Ajmani, Design of Steel Structures, Nemchand & Bros. 
CE 313 ADVANCED	STRUCTURAL	ANALYSIS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Development of generalized slope deflection equations and its applications to beams and plane frames. Moment 
distribution method and its applications to continuous beams and plane frames including sway and inclined members 
Analysis of beams and frames by Kani’s method including sway conditions and double storied frames.; Analysis of 
fixed arches by energy approach and Elastic center method. Energy Theorems, the theorem of conservation of energy, 
the minimum potential energy theorem, Raleigh-Ritz method of analysis of beams, stable, neutral and unstable 
equilibriums.; Study of Influence line diagram of indeterminate structures by Muller Breslue Principle.; Basics of 
matrix method of Analysis, the flexibility and stiffness method of analysis of beams and frames. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. S. Kinney, Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 1991. 
2. R. C. Hibbler, Structural Analysis, LCE, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. K. Wang, Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Mc Graw- Hill, Auckland. 
2. S. F. Borg and J. J. Genareo, Advanced Structural analysis, Van Nostrand Company, London. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
183
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 314 STRUCTURAL	DYNAMICS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Single degree of freedom system: Equation of motion, Damped and undamped free vibration, Response to harmonic, 
periodic, impulse load and general dynamic load, Duhamel’s integral; Multi degrees of freedom system: Equation of 
motion, Free vibration analysis, Dynamic response and modal analysis; Free and Forced vibration of distributed mass 
system: Beam
Essential	reading:	
1. R. W. Clough and J. Penzien, Dynamics of structures, McGraw-Hill Inc. 
2. A. K. Chopra, Dynamics of Structures: Theory and Applications to Earthquake Engineering, Prentice Hall of India. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. P. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, Vibration Problem in Engineering, D. Van -Nostrang Company. Inc. Affiliated East-West Press 
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi. 
CE 316 ADVANCED	MECHANICS	OF	SOLIDS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Elementary Concept of Elasticity: Stresses in three dimensional bodies, equations of equilibrium, strain displacement 
relations, stress strain relations, compatibility equations, boundary conditions, plane stress, governing differential 
equation, Airy stress function(Cartesian co-ordinates). Theories of Failure: Theories of Failure and its graphical 
representation for two-dimensional cases. Thick walled cylinders: Thick cylinders subjected to internal and external 
fluid pressures, compound cylinders, shrink-fit. Energy Methods: Strain energy expression in three dimensions, 
strain energy due to axial load, bending and torsion, Castigliano’s theorems, Principle of virtual work, Unit load and 
unit couple method. Unsymmetrical bending: Properties of beam cross-sections slope of neutral axis, stresses and 
deflections in unsymmetrical bending. Shear centre of thin wall beam cross section. Curved beams: Bending of beams 
of large initial curvature, stress distribution in beams with rectangular, circular and trapezoidal cross sections, location 
of neutral axis, stresses in crane hooks, rings and chain links. Membrane stresses in shells, application to cylindrical, 
spherical and conical shells. Plastic Analysis of Beams: Plastic Modulus, Shape factor, plastic hinge, application to 
beams, and determination of collapse loads. Special Topics: Repeated stresses in structural and machine components, 
fatigue in metals, endurance limit, concept of stress concentration, stress concentration factor and notch sensitivity. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. S. Srinath, Advanced Mechanics of Solids, Tata-McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi. 
2. S. P. Timoshenko, Strength of Materials, Part I and II, D. Van Nostrand Company Inc. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. P. Boresi, R. J. Schmidth and O. M. Sidebottom, Advanced Mechanics of Materials, John Wiley and Sons. 
2. F. B. Seely and J. O. Smith, Advanced Mechanics of Materials, John Wiley and Sons. 
3. J. S. Kinney, Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Narosa Publications. 
4. S. P. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, Theories of Elasticity, McGraw Hill Publisher
CE 318 FINITE	ELEMENT	METHOD 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Equations of Equilibrium, Strain displacement relations, Stress strain Relations, Plane stress and plane Strain problems, 
Basics of finite element method (FEM), different steps involved in FEM, Different approaches of FEM, Direct method, 
Energy approach, Weighted residual Method; Finite Element modeling of one and two dimensional problems. 
Isoparametric elements, four node, eight node elements. Numerical integration, order of integration; Bending of 
plates, rectangular elements, triangular elements and quadrilateral elements, Concept of 3D modeling. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. D. Cook, Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis, John Wiley, New York, 2004. 
2. O. C. Zienkiewicz and R. L. Taylor, Finite Element Method, Butterworth Heinemann publication, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. S. Krishnamoorty, Finite element methods, Tata-McGraw Hill, Second Edition, New Delhi, 2002. 
2. T. R. Chandupatla and A. D. Belegundu, Introduction to Finite Elements in Engineering, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., New 
Delhi, 5th Reprint, 1999. 
3. J. N. Reddy, An introduction to Linear Finite Element Method, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004. 
CE 321 MECHANICS	OF	SOIL 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Soil Properties and Classification: Formation of soils and types, Soil as three phase system. Soil consistency, sensitivity 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
184
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and thixotropy. Classification of soil.; Soil Compaction: Principles, water content - dry unit weight relationships, 
optimum moisture content, maximum dry unit weight, factors affecting compaction. Effects of compaction on density, 
shear strength and permeability. Field compaction methods; Permeability: Soil - water systems - capillarity, flow, 
Darcy’s law, permeability and tests for its determination, Permeability of stratified soils, estimation of permeability in 
the field piping, quicksand condition, seepage, flow nets, flow through dams, filters.; Shear Strength of Soil: Coulomb’s 
law, Mohr’s stress circle, strength envelop and failure conditions. Direct, Triaxial and Unconfined compression tests, 
Vane shear test, Effect of pore pressure; Soil Stabilization: Mechanical stabilizations Chemical stabilization- Lime 
stabilizations, cement and cement lime stabilization, bitumen stabilization. Use of Geosynthetics and other ground 
improvement techniques. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Gulhati and M. Datta, Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw Hill Company. 
2. B. M. Das, Principles of Geo-technical Engg, Thomson Books. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. N. S. Murthy, Principles of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engg, UBSPD. 
2. I. H. Khan, A text book of Geo-technical Engg, Prentice Hall India. 
3. B. C. Punmia, A text Book of Geo-technical Engg, Laxmi Publications. 
4. G. Ranjan & A. S. R. Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
CE 322 GEOTECHNICAL	ENGINEERING 3 Credits[3-0-0]
Stresses in Soils: Boussinesq’s Equation: Vertical Stress distribution on horizontal and vertical planes, . Newmark’s 
influence chart, Contact pressure distribution. Consolidation and Settlement Analysis: Equation of one dimensional 
consolidation. Coefficient of consolidation, coefficient of compression, compression index, pre-compression pressure. 
Overconsolidation, Consolidation Settlement analysis. Basics of three- dimensional consolidation, Sand drains. 
Floating mat foundation.; Bearing Capacity and Analysis of Foundations –Shallow foundation: Terzaghi’s bearing 
capacity equation, factors influencing bearing capacity. Bearing capacity for square, rectangular and circular footings. 
Bearing capacity under eccentric load on layered soil. Bearing capacity based on in-situ tests.; Pile Foundation- Load 
carrying capacity of a pile (Static and dynamic formulae), Pile group, Settlement analysis of pile.; Earth Pressure, 
Retaining Structures and Sheet Pile Walls: Earth pressure Theories- Rankine Earth pressure theory, Coulomb’s Earth 
pressure theory.; Sheet pile walls: Pressure against sheet pile walls, cantilever and anchored bulk heads (free earth 
support method). Pressure against wallings in large trenches.; Soil Investigation: Conventional and Geo-physical 
methods of soil investigation. Stability of Slopes: Stability of infinite slopes, stability of finite slopes, 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. M. Das, Principles of Geo-technical Engg, Thomson Books. 
2. G. Ranjan and A. S. R. Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. K. Gulhati and M. Datta, Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw-Hill Companies. 
2. V. N. S. Murthy, Principles of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engg, UBSPD. 
3. 3. B. C. Punmia, A text Book of Geo-technical Engg, Laxmi Publisher
CE 331 ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
General requirement for water supply, Quality and quantity of water, Domestic water quality standards; Sources of 
water and their yield, population forecast, Design period; Intakes, pumping and transportation of water; Physical, 
chemical and biological characteristics of water and their significance, water quality criteria, water borne diseases, 
Appurtenances of water treatment and distribution systems. DO and BOD demand in streams.; Essentials of wastewater 
engineering, Quantities of wastewater and storm water, wastewater characteristics; Water and wastewater plumbing 
systems, Waste water collection and conveyance systems, Design of sewerage systems, Pumping of waste water.; Air 
pollution and pollutants, air quality, ambient and atmospheric standards, Sampling and monitoring of air pollutants. 
Prediction of air pollution dispersion, air quality modeling; Solid and hazardous waste management- Generation, on-
site storage, collection, separation, processing and disposal On-site storage methods, Collection systems-Vehicles, 
routing, route balancing and transfer stations, Processing methods, recovery and reuse of materials and energy, 
Disposal methods such as sanitary landfill, biological digestion & etc. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. M. J. Hammer, Water and Wastewater Technology, Prentice Hall, 6th edition, 2007. 
2. H. S. Peavy, D. R. Rowe and G. Tchobanoglous, Environmental Engineering, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 7th Rev Ed edition, 2000. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
185
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Suggested Readings: 
1. Metcalf & Eddy Inc., George Tchobanoglous, Franklin, L., Burton, H. D. Stensel, Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Reuse, 
McGraw-Hill Higher Education; 4th edition, 2002. 
2. T. J. McGhee, E. W. Steel, Water Supply and Sewerage, McGraw-Hill College; 6th edition, 1991. 
3. C. N. Sawyer, P. L. McCarty, G. F. Parkin, Chemistry for Environmental Engineering and Science, McGraw-Hill Inc., 5th edition, 
2002. 
4. S. K. Friedlander, Smoke, Dust & Haze: Fundamentals of Aerosol Dynamics, Oxford University Press, New York, 2nd edition, 2000. 
CE 333 ENVIRONMENTAL	IMPACT	ASSESSMENT 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Evolution of EIA; EIA at project; Regional and policy levels; Strategic EIA; EIA process; Screening and scoping criteria; 
Rapid and comprehensive EIA; Specialized areas like environmental health impact assessment; Environmental risk 
analysis; Economic valuation methods; Cost-benefit analysis; Expert system and GIS applications; Uncertainties; 
Practical applications of EIA; EIA methodologies; Baseline data collection; Prediction and assessment of impacts on 
physical, biological and socio-economic environment; Environmental management plan; Post project monitoring, 
EIA report and EIS; Review process. Case studies on project, regional and sectoral EIA; Legislative and environmental 
clearance procedures in India and other countries, Siting criteria; CRZ; Public participation; Resettlement and 
rehabilitation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. M. Noble, Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment: A Guide to Principles and Practice. Oxford University Press, 
USA, 2005. 
2. J. Glasson, Introduction to Environmental Impact Assesment: Principles, and Procedures, Process, Practice and Prospects (The 
Natural and Built Environment Series), Routledge; 3rd edition, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. Morris, Methods of Environmental Impact Assessment (The Natural and Built Environment Series), Spon Press, USA, 2nd 
edition, 2001. 
2. R. K. Jain, L. V. Urban, G. S., Stacey, Harold, E. Balbach, Environmental Assessment, McGraw-Hill Professional; 2 edition, 2001. 
3. B. B. Marriott, Environmental Impact Assessment: A Practical Guide, McGraw-Hill Professional, 1 edition, 1997. 
4. D. P. Lawrence, Environmental Impact Assessment: Practical Solutions to Recurrent Problems, Wiley-Interscience; 1st edition, 
2003. 
CE 334 AIR	QUALITY	MANAGEMENT 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Air pollutants, Sources, classification, Combustion Processes and pollutant emission, Effects on Health, vegetation, 
materials and atmosphere, Reactions of pollutants in the atmosphere and their effects-Smoke, smog and ozone layer 
disturbance etc; Atmospheric diffusion of pollutants and their analysis, Transport, transformation and deposition of 
air contaminants on a global scale, Air sampling and pollution measurement methods, principles and instruments; 
Emission factors, regulations, control strategies and policies. Particulate Pollutant Control: Settling chambers - laminar 
and turbulent flow; Filtration - interception; Impaction; Convective diffusion; Collection of particles by cylindrical fibres 
and granular beds; Electrostatic precipitation - field and diffusion charging; Electrical migration velocity; Cyclones - 
laminar and turbulent flow; Wet collectors; Efficiency and dimensions of particle control devices. Gaseous Pollutant 
Control: Gas absorption in tray and packed towers; Stage efficiency; Liquid/gas rates; Equilibrium number of stages/
packed height; Absorption with/without chemical reaction; Removal of SO2; Adsorption in fixed beds; Breakthrough; 
Removal of HCs/VOCs; NOx removal from effluent streams; Wet scrubbers. Integrated air pollution control systems; 
Effect of process parameters on performance of control systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. N. de Nevers, Air Pollution Control Engg. McGraw-Hill Inc, 2000. 
2. R. D. Griffin, Principles of Air Quality Management, CRC, 2nd Edition, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. W. Boubel, D. L. Fox, B. Turner, A. C. Stern, Fundamentals of Air Pollution, Academic Press London/ Elsevier, 1994. 
2. S. K Fiendlander, Smoke, Dust and Haze: Fundamentals of Aerosol Dynamics, Oxford University Press, New York, 2000. 
3. C. S. Rao, Environmental Pollution Control Engg, Wiley Eastern Ltd, 1995. 
CE 336 ADVANCED	ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Engineered systems for water treatment: aeration, coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, softening, filtration, 
adsorption, Ion exchange, and disinfection. Water distribution systems.; Primary and secondary treatment of 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
186
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
wastewater; Wastewater disposal standards, Biological wastewater treatment systems: Aerobic processes - activated 
sludge process and its modifications, trickling filter, RBC, Anaerobic Processes - conventional anaerobic digester, 
High rate and hybrid anaerobic reactors.; Tertiary treatment of industrial wastewater including removal of nitrate, 
sulphate, phosphorous, pathogens, color, odor, TDS, COD and residual BOD; Sector specific issues in management 
of industrial wastewater including petrochemical, textile, food processing, pharmaceutical, fertilizer, pesticides etc.; 
Sludge digestion and handling. Disposal of effluents and sludge.; Policy and legislation including challenges posed by 
various sectors of industries and legislation framework and regulations in India; Case studies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. J. Hammer, Water and Wastewater Technology, Prentice Hall, 6th Edition, 2007. 
2. H. S. Peavy, D. R. Rowe, George Tchobanoglous, Environmental Engineering, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.; 7th Rev Edition, 1987. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Metcalf & Eddy Inc., G. Tchobanoglous, L. F. Burton, H. D. Stensel, Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Reuse, McGraw-Hill 
Higher Education; 4th edition, 2002. 
2. T. J. McGhee, E. W. Steel, Water Supply and Sewerage, Mcgraw-Hill College; 6th Edition, 1991. 
3. C. N. Sawyer, P. L. McCarty, G. F. Parkin, Chemistry for Environmental Engineering and Science, McGraw-Hill Inc., 5th Edition, 
2002. 
4. S. K. Friedlander, Smoke, Dust and Haze: Fundamentals of Aerosol Dynamics, Oxford University Press, New York, 2nd Edition, 
2000. 
CE 341 BASIC TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Highways: Introduction, Road Development plans and programmes; Principles of alignment; Geometric design: 
Cross-sectional elements, Camber and superelevation, Horizontal curve and extra widening, Gradient, Sight distance; 
Pavement materials: Aggregates and Bituminous binders; Bridges: Classification of bridges; Calculation of runoff under 
bridges; Determination of water way: Economic span; Bridge foundations, Piers and abutments, Superstructures; 
Temporary bridges and causeways; Railways: Introduction; Cross section and components of railway track; Problems 
of multi gauge system; wheel and axle arrangements, Coning of wheels; Geometric design: Horizontal curves, super 
elevation, equilibrium cant and cant deficiency, Gradients and grade compensation; Points and crossing; Airport; 
Aircraft characteristics; Typical layout and components; Runway- orientation and configuration, Basic runway length 
and corrections; Main and exit Taxiway; Apron and Terminal Building; Airport marking and lighting. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Khanna & C E G Justo, Highway Engineering, Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 8th edition 2001, Reprinted 2003
2. D. J. Victor, Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford & IBH, 6th ed., 2007. 
3. S. Chandra & M. M. Agarwal, Railway Engineering, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1st Ed. 2007. 
4. S. K. Khanna & M. G. Arora, Airport planning and Design, Nemchand Bros., Roorkee, 6th ed. reprint 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. P. Bindra, A Course in Highway Engg, Dhanpat Rai Publication
2. S. C. Saxena & S. P. Arora, A text Book of Railway Engineering, Dhanpat Rai & Sons. 
3. R. Horonjeff and F. X. McKelvey, Airport Planning and Design, McGraw-Hill Professional, 5 edition, 2009
CE 342 TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Highways: Introduction, Road Development plans and programmes; Surveys: Location surveys- Principles of alignment, 
Traffic surveys; Geometric design: Cross-sectional elements, Sight distance, Horizontal and vertical alignments, 
Channelization; Pavement materials: Subgrade soil, Aggregates, Bituminous binders; Construction: Embankment, Soil 
stabilization, Non-bituminous sub-base, Non-bituminous and bituminous base courses, bituminous surface courses, 
Concrete pavements; Basic principles of pavement design; Drainage, Evaluation and maintenance of highways, 
Salient features of hill roads; Bridges: Classification of bridges, Investigations and data collection for location of bridge 
site, Calculation of runoff under bridges, Determination of water way, Economic span, Bridge foundations, Piers and 
abutments, Superstructures, Loadings, Erection of bridge spans, Temporary bridges and causeways
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. Chakraborty & A. Das, Principles of Transportation Engg, PHI Publication, 1st Ed. 2nd reprint 2005. 
2. S. K. Khanna & C. E. G. Justo, Highway Engineering, Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 8th edition 2001, Reprinted 2003. 
3. D. J. Victor, Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford & IBH, 6th ed., 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
187
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
1. L. R. Kadiyali, Principles and Practice of Highway Engg, Khanna Publications, 4th Ed. 2003. 
2. C. S. Papacostas & P. D. Prevedouros, Transportation Planning and Planning, PHI, 3rd ed. 2002. 
3. C. J. Khisty & B. K. Lall, Transportation Engg: An introduction, PHI, 3rd ed. 2006. 
4. V. K. Raina, Concrete bridge practice – Vol I, II and III, Tata McGraw Hill Pub. Co. Ltd., New Delhi 1st Ed. 1996. 
CE 351 HYDRAULICS	AND	HYDRAULIC	MACHINES 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Dimensional Analysis and Model Testing: Dimensional homogeneity, Dimensional analysis, Rayleigh’s method and 
Buckinghum’s methods, Similarity laws and model studies, Distorted models; Impact of Jet on Vanes: Dynamic 
pressure on fixed and moving flat plates and Curved vanes, Work done and efficiency; Turbines: Various types, Study 
of Pelton, Kaplan and Francis turbines, Velocity triangles, Efficiency, Work done, Specific speed, Unit quantities, 
Performance of turbines, Governing of turbines, Cavitation in reaction turbines, Principle of similarity applied to 
turbines; Pumps: Centrifugal Pumps- Classification, Blade angle, Velocity triangle, Efficiency of centrifugal pumps, 
Specific speed, characteristic curves, Multistage pumps, Pumps in series and parallel, Principle of similarity applied to 
pumps, NPSH. Reciprocating Pumps- Principle of working. Slip, Work done, effect of acceleration, Frictional resistance, 
Separation, Air vessels; Measurements and Machines: Hydraulic ram, Hydraulic intensifier, Hydraulic accumulator, 
Hydraulic crane, Hydraulic lift, Hydraulic press. Point gauge, Pitot tube, Current meter, Venturi meter, Orifice meter, 
Orifices and Mouth pieces, Notches and Weirs. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Som and G. Biswas, Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Machines, Tata. McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 2004. 
2. R. J. Garde and A. C. Mirajgaokar, Engineering Fluid Mechanics, Scitech Publications India Ltd., 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. C. Patra, Engineering Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, 1st Edition, Narosa Publishing House, 2008. 
2. R. K. Rajput, Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines, S. Chand & Company ltd., New Delhi. 
3. S. R. Rutham, Hydraulic Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Machines, Dhanpat Rai Publishing Company, New Delhi. 
CE 352 ADVANCED	FLUID	MECHANICS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Dynamic of Fluid Flow, One-Dimensional method, The Nervier Stokes Equation, Limiting Case, Applications. 
Boundary Layer Theory for low and high Viscosity, Boundary Layer thickness, Prandtl’s Equation, Momentum Integral 
Equation, Pressure Distribution in boundary layer. Dimension analysis and similarities, Buckingham theorem, types 
of similarities, forces influencing hydraulic phenomenon, significance of dimensionless numbers, distorted model, 
and model proto type similarity law; Laminar and Turbulent Flow in Pipes, Reynolds experiment, mechanism of 
turbulent flow, Prandtls mixing length theory, Karmans similarity hypothesis, Universal velocity distribution near solid 
boundary, Hydro dynamically smooth and rough pipes. Power law for velocity distribution, Nikuradse experiment, 
Ageing of Pipes; Compressible Fluid Flow, Equation of motion, continuity equation and energy equation. Stagnation 
point and its properties, flow through ducts of varying areas, flow through convergent and divergent nozzles, effects 
of compressibility, shock waves, supersonic expansion and contraction; Ideal Fluid Flow, Circulation and Vorticity, 
Source and sink, combining flow field by super position, combined flow field for Engineering importance. Doublet in 
rectilinear flow and Doublet with Circulation. Flow past a cylinder curved flow and with circulation and their different 
combinations; Unsteady flow in bounded systems, Quasi-steady flow, unsteady flow in pipes and open channel flow. 
Finite difference representation of depth dependent-discharge, Simulation of unsteady flow in pipes, channels and 
ducts. Development of St. Venant equation of continuity and motion Non uniform flow in open channel flow, equation 
of gradually varied flow. Classification of water surface profiles, location of hydraulic jump. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. F. Douglas, J. M. Gasiorek, J. A. Swaffield, Fluid Mechanics, Pearson Education. 
2. R. J. Garde, A. G. Mirajgaoker, Engineering Fluid Mechanics, SciTech Publication, Chennai. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. L. Streeter, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw-Hill Book, New York, 1971. 
2. J. A. Liggett and D. A. Caughey, Fluid Mechanics: An interactive text, ASCE press. 
3. A. K. Jain, Fluid Mechanics, Khanna Publishers, Delhi. 
4. K. C. Patra, Engineering Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Narosa publishing house, New Delhi. 
5. Fluid Mechanics and Application with CD roams, CENGEL, Prentice Hall, New Delhi. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
188
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 371 GEOTECHNICAL	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Visual Identification of soil; Grain Size Analysis (Mechanical Sieve Analysis, Wet Analysis); Atterberg’s limit (Liquid 
limit, Plastic Limit, Shrinkage Limit ), Free Swell Test; Determination of Field Density by Core Cutter Method and by 
Sand Replacement Method; Specific Gravity of Soils (Fine and Coarse Grained); Determination of OMC & MDD by 
Using Light Compaction Test, Relative Density of Coarse Grained Soils; California Bearing Ratio Test; Direct Shear Test, 
Vane Shear Test; Unconfined Compression Shear Test; Permeability test (constant head and Falling head test); Triaxial 
shear Test; Consolidation Test. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory Manual. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Indian Standard Code IS: 2720
CE 372 STEEL	STRUCTURES	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Analysis and design of Roof trusses; Analysis and design of Plate Girder Bridge; Analysis and design of Elevated water 
tank. 
CE 373 ADVANCED	SURVEYING	FIELD	WORK 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Permanent adjustment of theodolite; Theodolite traverse; Tacheometry contouring; Triangulation; Trigonometrical 
leveling; Study of Total station and measurements
CE 374 TRANSPORTATION	ENGINEERING	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Design and drawing of a HPC culvert to cater to a given stream flow; Design and drawing of a RCC slab culvert on a 
highway; Design and drawing of superstructure of a T-Beam Bridge; Design and drawing of a RCC Box culvert to cater 
to a given stream flow and terrain condition; Design of suitable foundation for a pier/abutment of a bridge; Study 
of geometric design characteristics of highways; Practice on blending of aggregates; Calculation of earthwork for 
highways and railways; Setting out of horizontal and vertical curves; Design of flexible pavement
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Khanna and C. E. G. Justo, Highway Engineering, Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 8th edition 2001, Reprinted 2003. 
2. D. J. Victor, Essentials of bridge engineering, Oxford & IBH, 6th ed., 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. Chakraborty and A. Das, Principles of Transportation Engg, PHI Publication, 1st Ed. 2nd reprint 2005. 
2. V. K. Raina, Concrete bridge practice – Analysis, design and Economics, Tata McGraw Hill Pub. Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 2nd Ed. 2008. 
CE 375 STRUCTURAL	ENGINEERING	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Design and detailing of continuous beams and lintels; Design and detailing of one-way and two-way slabs; Design and 
detailing of staircases; Design and detailing of axially loaded and eccentric columns; Design and detailing of axially 
loaded and eccentric column footings. 
CE 376 ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Design of river intake and pump house; Design of water treatment plants: Mixing tank; Flocculator; Sedimentation 
tank; Rapid gravity filter; Wash water tank; Under drainage system. Design of effluent treatment plant: Screening 
tank; Grit chamber: Primary clarifier; Trickling filter; Aeration tank; Secondary clarifier; Design of septic tank and 
soakage pit; Design of Air pollution Control Systems; Particulate and Gaseous pollutant control. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. P. Sincero & G. Sincero, Environmental Engineering: A Design Approach, Prentice Hall. 
2. H. S. Peavy, D. R. Rowe & G. Tchobanoglous, Environmental Engg, McGraw Hill. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. L Davis and D. A. Cornwell, Introduction to Environmental Engg, McGraw Hill. 
2. G. Kiely, Environmental Engineering, McGraw Hill. 
3. C. D. Cooper and F. C. Alley, Air Pollution Control: A Design Approach, McGraw Hill. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
189
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 377 FLUID	MECHANICS	AND	HYDRAULIC	MACHINES	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Verifications of momentum equation; Verifications of stokes apparatus; Calibration of Venturimeter; Verifications 
of Bernoulli’s equation through a convergent and divergent passage; Study of Major losses in Pipes; Study of 
Minor losses in Pipes; Velocity distribution in a pipe flow; Velocity distribution in open channel flow; Flow through 
Pipes; Reynolds’s experiment; Calibration of Notch; Experimental calculation of Metacentric Height; To study the 
performance characteristics of a Pelton turbine; To study the performance characteristics of a Francis turbine; To 
study the performance characteristics of a Kaplan turbine; To study the characteristics of a single stage Centrifugal 
pump; To study the Overall efficiency and percentage slip of a Reciprocating Pump; To determine the Critical Cavitation 
Number of a test rig. 
CE 378 ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0-0-3]
A.	Water	Quality	 Analysis:	Determination of pH (Electrometric and Colorimetric); Determination of turbidity by 
using Nephelometer; Determination of alkalinity and acidity; Optimum dose of coagulants by jar test; Total Hardness; 
Total solids and suspended solids; Residual chlorine; Chlorides; Chemical Oxygen Demand; Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand; Dissolved Oxygen; B.	Ambient	Air	Quality	Analysis:	Respirable Particulate Matter (PM10).; Total Suspended 
Particulate matter (TSP); Determination of SO2 in ambient air; Determination of NOx in ambient air. C.	Noise	Pollution	
measurement: Indoor and ambient noise level analysis; D.	Microbiological	Analysis	of	Water:	Microbiological culture 
analysis of bacterial samples; MPN Test. 
Laboratory	Manual:	
1. Geotechncial Engineering Laboratory Manual. 
2. Environmental Engineering Laboratory Manual. 
3. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater- AWWA, APHA, WEF, (USA), 20th edition, 2001. 
CE 401 ESTIMATION,	COSTING	AND	CONSTRUCTION	MANAGEMENT 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Methods of Estimation: Estimation of quantities for building, Arches, Sanitary and water supply works, Irrigation 
works, Road works.; Specifications: General specification, Details specification for different building items; structural 
works, road works.; Analysis of Rate: Analysis of rates for Earth work, Cement concrete, RCC, Brick work, plastering, 
etc.; Contracts: Different methods of carrying out work contract system, Contract document, Types of contract, 
measurement book. Method of tendering; Construction management: Project, Project development process, project 
evaluation, Finance, material and man power development, project management, Construction scheduling, Bar 
charts, activity times, Network analysis, elements of PERT and CPM. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. N. Dutta, Estimating and Costing in Civil Engineering, UBS Publishers, 23rd Edition. 
2. B. Sengupta and H. Guha, Construction Management and Planning, TMG. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Chakraborti, Estimating, Costing, Specification and valuation in Civil Engineering, Published by author, Calcutta. 
2. B. M. Dhira & P. S. Gahlot, Construction planning and management, New Age International Pvt. Ltd. 
CE 403 OPTIMIZATION	METHODS	IN	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Need for engineering optimal design, Optimum design formulation: Design variable, objective function 
and constraints.; Unconstrained optimization methodsSingle variable optimization methods: Region elimination 
method – Golden section search, Interval halving method; Gradient based method – Newton-Raphson, bisection and 
secant method. Multi variable optimization methods: Direct search method: Hooke-Jeeve pattern search, simplex 
reflection search, Powell’s conjugate direction search. Gradient Based methods: Cauchy’s steeped descent, Newton’s 
method, Levenberg-Marquardt’s method, Fletcher- Reeve method.; Constrained optimization methods Kuhn Tucker 
condition, Penalty function method, Augmented Lagrangian method, sequential unconstrained minimization, cutting 
plane method. Linear Programming: Simplex method, Dual problem; Introduction to Evolutionary algorithms: Need 
for evolutionary algorithms, Type of evolutionary methods, Introduction to Genetic algorithm (GA), Difference and 
similarities between GA and traditional methods. Basic operations of GA: reproduction, crossover, mutation and 
elitism. Binary coded and Real coded GA. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. S. Arora, Introduction to Optimum Design, Elsevier, 2nd Edition, 2004. 
2. K. Deb, Optimization for Engg. Design: Algorithms & Examples, Prentice Hall India, 2006. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
190
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. S. Rao, Engineering Optimization: Theory & Practice, New Age International (P) Ltd, 3rd Edition, 1996, Reprint: June, 2008. 
2. K. Deb, Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms, John Wiley, 2003. 
CE 404 QUALITY	MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction; Cause and Effect Analysis; Failure Mode and Effect Analysis; Hypothesis Test; Introduction to Lean 
Principle; Introduction to Six Sigma; DMAIC methodology; Organization of Data, Pareto Analysis, Scatter Diagrams, 
Control Charts, Linear Regression; Statistical Applications and Methods; Probability Distributions; Basic Statistical 
Process Control
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. S. Pande et al, R. P. Neuman, R. R. Cavanagh, The Six Sigma Way: How GE, Motorola, and Other Top Companies are Honing 
Their Performance, McGraw-Hill
2. S. Taghizadegan, Essentials of Lean Six Sigma; Elsevier
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. S. Chalapathi, Developing Six Sigma Competencies, Institute of Sigma Learning
2. P. S. Pande, The Six Sigma Leader: How Top Executives Will Prevail in the 21st Century, Tata Mcgraw Hill
CE 405 DISASTER	MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Cyclones: Formation, Cyclonic precipitation, anti-cyclones, Flood: Flood and its estimation, Flood warning, Flood 
protection measures. Earthquake: Causes of earthquake, plate tectonics, seismic zoning map, Characteristics of 
strong ground motions & attenuation, progressive collapse of structures, damage assessment, rehabilitation and 
retrofitting of structures. Environmental disaster: Impact assessment studies, computation and preparedness. Disaster 
management: Developing appropriate technology for disaster mitigation, Role of management teams, importance of 
awareness, alertness and preparedness camp. Hazard resistant design of structures. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. C. Patra, Hydrology and Water Resources Engineering, CRC Press, Florida, USA, 2nd Edition 
2. N. Sharma, Earthquake resistant building construction, S. K. Kataria & Sons, New Delhi. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Subramanian, Engineering Hydrology, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi. 
2. V. P. Singh, Elementary Hydrology, Prentice Hall of India. 
3. P. C. Sinha, Disaster Mitigation, Preparedness, Recovery and Response, SBS Publishers & Distributors Pvt. Ltd. 
4. D. P. Coppola, Introduction to International Disaster Management, Butterworth-Heinemann. 
5. F. B. Friedman, Practical Guide to Environmental Management, McGraw Hill. 
CE 407 OPTIMIZATION	METHODS	&	ITS	APPLICATIONS	IN	CIVIL	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Need for engineering optimal design, Optimum design formulation: Design variable, objective function 
and constraints.; Unconstrained optimization methodsSingle variable optimization methods: Region elimination 
method – Golden section search, Interval halving method; Gradient based method – Newton-Raphson, bisection and 
secant method. Multi variable optimization methods: Direct search method: Hooke-Jeeve pattern search, simplex 
reflection search, Powell’s conjugate direction search. Gradient Based methods: Cauchy’s steeped descent, Newton’s 
method, Levenberg-Marquardt’s method, Fletcher- Reeve method.; Constrained optimization methods Kuhn Tucker 
condition, Penalty function method, Augmented Lagrangian method, sequential unconstrained minimization, cutting 
plane method.; Introduction to Evolutionary algorithms: Need for evolutionary algorithms, Type of evolutionary 
methods, Introduction to Genetic algorithm (GA), Difference and similarities between GA and traditional methods. 
Basic operations of GA: reproduction, crossover, mutation and elitism. Binary coded and Real coded GA.; Application 
of Optimization techniques: Water resource planning management, Structural Optimization, Transportation planning 
and Management, Slope stability and optimal dimensioning of foundations multi-objective optimization models
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. S. Arora, Introduction to Optimum Design, Elsevier, 2nd Edition, 2004. 
2. K. Deb, Optimization for Engg. Design: Algorithms & Examples, Prentice Hall India, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. S. Rao, Engineering Optimization: Theory & Practice, New Age International (P) Ltd, 3rd Edition, 1996, Reprint : June, 2008
2. K. Deb, Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms, John Wiley, 2003
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
191
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 411 PLATE	AND	SHELL	STRUCTURES 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Pure Bending of Plates: Slope & curvature of slightly bent plates, Relations between bending moments and curvature 
in pure bending of plates, Strain energy in Pure bending of plates.; Symmetrical bending of Circular plates: Differential 
equation for symmetrical bending of laterally loaded circular plates, uniformly loaded circular plates, Circular plates 
with circular hole at center, circular plate concentrically loaded.; Small deflections of laterally loaded plates: Differential 
equation of the deflection surface, Boundary conditions, Simply supported rectangular plates under sinusoidal load, 
Navier solution for simply supported rectangular plates, Further applications of the Navier solution, Alternate solution 
for simply supported and uniformly loaded rectangular plates, Concentrated load on simply supported rectangular 
plates; Classification of shell structures, importance of membrane theory of shells, shells in the form of a surface of 
revolution and loaded un-symmetrically with respect to their axes, spherical dome, conical shells, cylindrical shells, 
Elliptic paraboloid, hyperbolic parabolod and conoids.; General theory of cylindrical shells; Circular cylindrical shell 
loaded symmetrically with respect to its axis, particular cases of symmetrical deformations of circular cylindrical 
shells, cylindrical tanks of uniform wall thickness.; Design of spherical domes with/ without lanterns at top. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. P. Timoshenko & W. Kriegar, Theory of plates and shells, Mc Graw Hill International, New Delhi. 
2. G. S. Ramaswamy, Design and construction of concrete shells Roofs, CBS Publishers, Delhi. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. P. Billington, Thin shell concrete structures, Mc Graw Hill international, New York
2. W. T. Marshall, Design of cylindrical shell roofs, E & FN SPON, London. 
CE 412 PRE-STRESSED	CONCRETE 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Historical developments, Basic concepts, types, different systems, Materials- Steel, concrete and their properties; 
Losses of prestress, Design of simply supported beams- Basic assumptions, stress in concrete and steel due to load 
and prestress, pressure line and internal resisting couple, kern distance, cracking moment, general approach for 
service load design, graphical methods, Lin’s method, limit state design as per IS code, partial prestressing; Shear and 
principal stresses in homogenous elastic beams, Design of reinforcements for shear and torsion, Stress distribution in 
end block—Magnel’s method, Guyen’s method, Rowe’s method, IS code method; Design of pipes and tanks, railway 
sleepers, electric posts, composite construction. Beam deflection- short term and long term deflections; Design of 
continuous beam-Principles of design of prismatic continuous beams of two and three equal, unequal spans, with 
variable moments of inertia. Cap cables. Jaeques Muller’s theorem. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Y. Guyen, Prestressed concrete Vo1-I and II, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1960. 
2. T. Y. Lin and H. Burns, Design of prestressed concrete structures, Ned- John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1982. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. E. W. Bennet, Prestressed concrete: Theory and design, Chapman and Hall, London, 1962. 
2. N. Krishnaraju, Prestressed concrete, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2004. 
3. S. K. Mallik & A. P. Gupta, Prestressed concrete, Oxford and IBH, New Delhi, 1982. 
CE 413 ADVANCED	DESIGN	OF	REINFORCED	CONCRETE	STRUCTURES 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Design of combined footings, raft footing.; Design of cantilever and counterfort type retaining walls.; Design of water 
tanks-Underground, elevated and Intze type.; Design of portal frames and domes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. N. Sinha, Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw Hill. 
2. P. Dayaratham, Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, New Delhi, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. 
3. Relevant IS codes. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. J. Shah, Reinforced Concrete, Vol-I, Charotar Publishing House
2. B. C. Punmia, A. K. Jain and A. K. Jain, Comprehensive RCC Designs, Laxmi Publications
3. J. Krishna and O. P. Jain, Plain and Reinforced Concrete Vol-I & II, Nem Chand and Bros., Roorkee
CE 415 EARTHQUAKE	AND	WIND	RESISTANT	DESIGN	OF	STRUCTURES 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Review of damages to buildings due to wind and earthquake; SDOF Systems: Free and Forced Vibrations, Damping, 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
192
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Response Spectrum; MDOF Systems: Formulation of equations of motion, Natural Frequencies and Modes; Equivalent 
Static Analysis; Response Spectrum Analysis; Wind and Earthquake Resistant Design Philosophy; Ductility, Design and 
Detailing for Ductility; Code Provisions for Wind and Earthquake Effects. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Simiu & R. H. Scanlan, Wind Effects on Structures: Fundamentals and Applications to Design, Dover Publications
2. A. K. Chopra, Dynamics of Structures: Theory and Applications to Earthquake Engineering (3rd Edition), Prentice-Hall of India. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. IS 1893(Part 1), Criteria for Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures : Part 1 General provisions and Buildings, 2002
2. IS 13920, Ductile Detailing of Reinforced Concrete Structures Subjected to Seismic Forces – Code of Practice, 1993
CE 418 PROBABILITY	 AND	 RELIABILITY	 METHODS	 IN	 CIVIL	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
CE 421 GROUND	IMPROVEMENT	TECHNIQUES 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Engineering properties of soft, week and compressible deposits, Natural on land, off-shore and Man-
made deposits. Role of ground improvement in foundation engineering, methods of ground improvement, Selection 
of suitable ground improvement techniques; In-situ methods: In-situ densification soils, Dynamic compaction and 
consolidation, Vibrofloation, Sand pile compaction, Preloading with sand drains and fabric drains, Granular columns, 
Micro piles, Soil nailing, Ground Anchors, Lime piles, Injections, Thermal, Electrical and Chemical methods, Electro 
osmosis, Soil freezing; Reinforced Soil: The Mechanism, Reinforcement materials, Reinforcement - Soil Interactions, 
Geosynthetics, Principles, Analysis and Design of Reinforced Retaining Structures, Embankments and Slopes, soil 
nailing. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. M. Korner, Design with Geosynthetics, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 3rd Edn. 2002. 
2. P. P. Raj, Ground Improvement Techniques, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1995. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering Thomson, Indian Edition, 2003. 
2. G. V. Rao & G. V. S. Rao, Text Book on Engineering with Geotextiles, Tata McGraw Hill
3. T. S. Ingold & K. S. Miller, Geotextile Hand Book, Thomas Telfrod, London. 
4. N. V. Nayak, Foundation Design Manual, Dhanpat Rai and Sons, Delhi. 
CE 423 ADVANCED	FOUNDATION	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Shallow Foundation: Location and depth of foundation, Determination of bearing capacity of shallow foundation 
on cohesive and cohesionless soils, contact pressure and related study for rigid and flexible foundation. Floating or 
compensating foundations.; Deep Foundations: 
Piles: Load carrying capacity of single and pile group in cohesive and cohesionless soils (both end bearing end friction 
piles). Settlement of pile foundation. Negative friction and its effect on pile capacity. 
Well foundations: Types and components of well. Determination of depth, Size and number of wells under a heavy 
footing or pier, Phenomena of bottom heaving. Well sinking and related problems of sinking of well foundations. 
Foundation on Expansive Soils; Identification / Characteristics of expensive soils, Swelling pressure and its effect 
on foundations for single end multi-storeyed buildings. Under-reamed piles, Accepted precautionary measures.; 
Machine Foundations: Types of machines, Free and forced vibrations, vibration isolations, Design consideration for 
simple machine foundations under reciprocating, centrifugal and impact type machines.; Recent developments in 
foundation engineering. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Saran, Analysis and Design of Substructures, Oxford and IBH publication, New Delhi, 
2. B. M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomson, Indian Edition, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. E. Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, Mc Graw Hill (2001)
2. P. Srinivasulu & C. V. Vaidyanathan, Hand Book of Machine Foundation, Tata Mc Grow Hill Pub Co. Ltd., New Delhi. 
3. F. H. Chen, Foundations of Expansive Soil, Elsevier Science Publisher, Amsterdam. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
193
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 424 EARTHQUAKE	GEOTECHNICAL	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Earthquakes: Causes and characteristics (magnitude, intensity, accelarograms), response spectra, attenuation of 
ground motion. Estimation of seismic hazards (deterministic and probabilistic).; Introduction to vibratory motion: 
Waves in Elastic Medium; Dynamics of Discrete: Systems, Vibration of single and multiple degree of freedom 
systems. Free and forced vibrations (regular and irregular excitation).; Dynamic properties of soils: Determination 
of site characteristics, local geology and soil condition, site investigation and soil test, Laboratory and in-situ tests; 
Site response to earthquake. Seismic Microzonation.; Liquefaction of soils: Fundamental concept of liquefaction, 
assessment of liquefaction susceptibly from SPT and CPT,; Seismic response of soil structure system, seismic bearing 
capacity of shallow foundation, design of pile foundation in liquefiable ground. Pseudo-static analysis and design of 
earth retaining structures and soil slopes. Estimation of earthquake-induced deformation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. L. Kramer, Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Prentice hall, international series, Pearson Education (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd., 
2004. 
2. S. Saran, Soil Dynamics and Machine Foundation, Galgotia publications Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 1999. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. Ansal, Recent Advances in Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering and Microzonation, Springer, 2006. 
2. I. Towhata, Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Springer, 2008. 
CE 425 ENVIRONMENTAL	GEOTECHNICS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Forms of waste, engineering properties (determination and typical values), subsurface contamination.; 
Selection of waste disposal sites: Site selection – selection criteria and rating; Solid waste disposal: Ash Disposal 
facilities- Dry disposal, waste disposal, Design of ash containment system, Stability of ash dykes; Contaminant 
transport through porous media: mechanisms- addective and dispersion; Municipal and hazardous waste landfill: 
Types- Dry cell, wet cell, bioreactor, Design- clay liners, geosynthetic clay liners for waste containment, cover and gas 
collection system.; Remediation: Principle- planning, source control, soil washing, bioremediation. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. K. R. Reddy & H. D. Sharma, Geo - Environmental Engineering: Site Remediation, waste containment, and emerging waste 
management technologies, John Willey, 2004. 
2. R. N. Yong, Geoenvironmental Engineering: Contaminated Ground: Fate of Pollutions and Remediation, Thomson Telford, 
2000. 
Suggested Readings: 
1. L. N. Reddy & H. I. Inyang, Geoenvironmental Engineering: Principles and Applications, Marcel Dek, 2000. 
CE 426 SOIL	STRUCTURE	INTERACTION 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Soil-Foundation Interaction: Introduction to soil-foundation interaction problems, Soil behaviour, Foundation 
behaviour, Interface behaviour, Scope of soil foundation interaction analysis, soil response models, Winkler, Elastic 
continuum, Two parameter elastic models, Elastic plastic behaviour, Time dependent behaviour.; Beam on Elastic 
Foundation- Soil Models: Infinite beam, Two parameters, Isotropic elastic half space, Analysis of beams of finite 
length, Classification of finite beams in relation to their stiffness. Plate on Elastic Medium: Thin and thick plates, 
Analysis of finite plates, Numerical analysis of finite plates, simple solutions.; Elastic Analysis of Pile: Elastic analysis 
of single pile, Theoretical solutions for settlement and load distributions, Analysis of pile group, Interaction analysis, 
Load distribution in groups with rigid cap.; Laterally Loaded Pile: Load deflection prediction for laterally loaded piles, 
Sub grade reaction and elastic analysis, Interaction analysis, Pile-raft system, Solutions through influence charts. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. R. O. Davis, A. P. S. Selvadurai, Elasticity and Geomechanics, 1996, Cambridge University Press. 
2. H. G. Poulos and E. H. Davis, Pile Foundation Analysis and Design, John Wiley, 1980. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. L. C. Reese, Single piles and pile groups under lateral loading, Taylor & Francis, 2000
2. E. S. Melerski, Design Analysis of Beams, Circular Plates and Cylindrical Tanks on Elastic Foundation, Taylor and Francis, 2006. 
3. G. Jones, Analysis of Beams on Elastic foundation, Thomas Telford, 1997. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
194
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 428 SOIL	DYNAMICS	AND	INDUSTRIAL	FOUNDATIONS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Vibration of elementary systems, Analysis of systems with Single degree and multi-degree of freedom. Natural 
frequencies of continuous systems; Elastic Constants of soil and their experimental determination. Effect of vibration 
on soil properties; Bearing capacity of dynamically loaded foundations.; Principles of Machine foundation design, 
Experimental and analytical determination of design parameters.; Design of foundations for turbines, vertical and 
horizontal reciprocating engines; forge hammers, Effect of machine foundation on adjoining structures, vibration 
isolation. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. S. Saran, Soil Dynamics and Machine Foundations, Galgotia Publications Private Ltd. 1999. 
2. N. S. V. K. Rao, Vibration Analysis and Foundation Dynamics, Wiley New Delhi, 1998. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. B. M. Das, Principles of Soil Dynamics, Thomsons Engineering, 1992. 
2. K. G. Bhatia, Foundations For Industrial Machines, D-CAD Publishers, 2008. 
3. A. Major, Vibration analysis and design of foundations for machines and turbines: Dynamical problems in civil engineering, 
Akademiai Kiado Budapest Collets Holding Ltd., 1962. 
CE 432 ENVIRONMENTAL	BIOTECHNOLOGY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; Types of microorganisms; Metabolic classification of microorganisms. 
Microbial metabolism; Respiration and energy generation; Microbial growth; Enzyme kinetics and regulation; 
Bacterial genetics; Structure of DNA and RNA; Transcription and translation; Gene expression and regulation; Gene 
transfer and recombinant DNA technology; Microbial systems of bioremediation; Factors influencing bioremediation 
(environmental factors, physical factors and chemical factors); Genetic responses of microorganisms to the presence 
of pollutants (plasmid coded inducible degradative enzymes); Application of genetically engineered microorganisms 
for hazardous waste management; Microbial transformation reactions (aerobic and anaerobic biotransformations); 
Microbial detoxification of specialty chemicals (insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, polychlorinated biphenyls, 
heavy metals); Bioremediation systems and processes (solid, liquid and slurry phase bioremediation); Microbial 
cleaning of gases (biofiltration and bioscrubbing); In situ bioremediation; Laboratory scale biotreatability studies for 
bioremediation; Management of bioremediation project. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. E. Rittmann, P. L. McCarty, Environmental Biotechnology- Principles and Applications, Mc Graw Hill Int. 2000. 
2. B. B. C. Banerjee, Environmental Biotechnology, Oxford University Press, 2008. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. Scragg, Environmental Biotechnology, Oxford Univ Press, 2005. 
2. G. M. Evans, Environmental Biotechnology: Theory and Application, Wiley, 2002. 
3. R. M. Maier, I. L. Pepper, and C. P. Gerba, Environmental Microbiology, Academic Press, 2000. 
4. D. A. Vaccari, P. F. Strom, J. E. Alleman, Environmental Biology for Engineers and Scientists, Wiley-Interscience, 2005. 
CE 436 ENVIRONMENTAL	MANAGEMENT	IN	INDUSTRY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Nature and characteristics of industrial wastes; Prevention versus control of industrial pollution; Linkage between 
technology and pollution prevention; Tools for clean processes, reuse, recycle, recovery, source reduction, raw 
material substitution, toxic use reduction and process modifications; Unit operations in separation technology; 
Separation technologies as tools for waste minimization. Process optimization for cleaner industrial processes; 
Flow sheet analysis; Energy and resource (material and water) audits for efficient usage and conservation; Waste 
audits, emission inventories and waste management hierarchy for process industries; Environmental regulations and 
policies; Environmental protection laws and acts; Environmental management systems; Strategies for management of 
resources, Corporate and international charters and protocols; Risk assessment; Environmental impact assessment; 
Industrial ecology, Pollution prevention; Waste minimisation and sustainable development; Life cycle assessment; 
Environmental audits; Eco-labelling of products; Performance indicators; Environmental economics. Case studies 
on industrial applications of cleaner technologies in chemical, metallurgical, pulp and paper, textile, electroplating, 
leather, dairy, cement and other industries. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. J. Barrow, Environmental Management: Principles and Practice (Routledge Environmental Management Series) Routledge, 
1st edition, 1999. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
195
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. R. Sullivan, Hugh, Wyndham, Effective Environmental Management: Principles and Case Studies, Allen & Unwin Academic, 
2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. F. B. Friedman, Practical Guide to Environmental Management, Environmental Law Institute, USA, 9th edition 2003. 
2. G. Burke, Ben R. Singh and L. Theodore, Handbook of Environmental Management and Technology, Wiley-Interscience, 2nd 
edition, 2000. 
3. B. Taylor, Effective Environmental, Health, and Safety Management Using the Team Approach, Wiley-Interscience, 2005. 
4. D. L. Goetsch and S. B. Davis, ISO 14000: Environmental Management, Prentice Hall, 2000. 
CE 441 ADVANCED	TRANSPORTATION	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Railway; Introduction: History, Cross section and components of railway track, Problems of multi gauge system, 
wheel and axle arrangements, Coning of wheels, Train resistances, hauling capacity and tractive effort, Stresses in 
rail, sleepers, ballast and formation.; Components of Permanent way : Rails - Types of rail section, wear and failure in 
rails, Creep, Rail joints, Rail fittings, check and guard rails, Sleepers – types and specifications, Ballast - specifications, 
Formation, drainage of track; Geometric design: Alignment, horizontal curves, super elevation, equilibrium cant and 
cant deficiency, Length of transition curves, Gradients and grade compensation, vertical curves; Points and crossing: 
Design and layout of turn-out, various types of track junctions and their configurations; Signaling and Interlocking: 
Control of train movements, Signals, Principles of interlocking; Airport; Air Transport Development, Aircraft 
characteristics, Airport planning and site selection, Obstruction and zoning laws - imaginary surfaces, approach zones 
and turning zones, Visual Flight Rules and Instrumental landing systems; Geometric Design of Runways and Taxiways: 
Runway- orientation and configuration, Basic runway length and corrections, Geometric design elements, Taxiway 
design, Main and exit Taxiway, Separation clearance, Holding aprons, Typical airport layouts, Terminal building, gate 
position; Airport marking and lighting.; Tunnel; Necessity, Tunneling vs open cut, Size and shape, Transfer of surface 
alignment tunneling in hard rock, soft soil and under water bodies- Use of shafts, shuttering and linings drainage and 
ventilation
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Chandra & M. M. Agarwal, Railway Engineering, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1st Ed. 2007. 
2. S. K. Khanna & M. G. Arora, Airport planning and Design, Nemchand Bros., Roorkee, 6th ed. Reprint 2006. 
3. R. Srinivasan, Harbour Dock and Tunnel Engineering, Charotar Publishing House, 20th Ed. 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. M. Agrawal, Railway Engineering, Standard Publishers New Delhi, 2002. 
2. S. C. Saxena & S. P. Arora, A text Book of Railway Engineering, Dhanpat Rai & Sons. 
3. R. Horonjeff and F. X. McKelvey, Airport Planning and Design, McGraw-Hill Professional, 5 edition, 2009. 
4. S. C. Saxena, Tunnel Engineering, Dhanpat Rai & Sons, 2006. 
CE 442 TRAFFIC	ENGINEERING	AND	TRANSPORTATION	PLANNING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Traffic Engineering: Importance of Traffic engineering; Road User Characteristics, Human factors governing road user 
behaviour, vehicle characteristics, slow moving traffic characteristics in Indian conditions; Traffic Engg. Studies: Traffic 
Volume, Origin and Destination, Speed and delay: Measurements; Speed- density-volume relationships; Shock waves 
in Traffic flow, Headway Distribution; Highway capacity analysis- cases of different types of highways; Intersection; 
Parking types; Off street parking; Facilities; Traffic control devices: channelisation, rotary and Traffic signals, Traffic 
Signs and making.; Transportation Planning: Brief ideas about urban and regional transportation systems; Components 
of Transportation system planning; Land use planning, Trip generation and distribution, Traffic assignment and modal 
split, Optimal scheduling; Economic evaluation of transportation plans. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. R. Kadyali, Traffic Engg & Transportation Planning, Khanna Publishers, 4th Ed. 2003
2. C. S. Papacostas and P. D. Prevedouros, Transportation Planning and Planning, PHI, 3rd Ed. 2002
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. J. Khisty & B. K. Lall, Transportation Engg: An introduction, PHI, 3rd Edition. 2006. 
2. P. Chakraborthy and A. Das, Principles of Transportation Engg, PHI, 1st Edition, 2nd reprint 2005. 
3. R. J. Salter, Highway Traffic Analysis and Design, ELBS Macmilan, 2nd Edition, 1990. 
4. Relevant I. R. C. Codes. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
196
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 443 PAVEMENT	DESIGN 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Classification of pavements, Difference between highway and runway pavements, Factors affecting 
Reinforced Concrete Design, Characteristics of traffic loading, Concept of VDF and Computation of design traffic; 
Principles of pavement design: Concepts of structural and functional failures, Performance criteria; Analysis of 
pavements: ESWL, Analysis of flexible and concrete pavements; Design of pavements: IRC, AASHTO and other 
important methods of design of bituminous and concrete pavements; Pavement evaluation techniques: Benkleman 
beam, Falling weight deflectometer and other equipments, Concepts of pavement maintenance management
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. J. Yoder & M. W. Witzack, Principles of Pavement Design, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2nd Ed. 1975. 
2. P. Chakroborty & A. Das, Principles of Transportation Engineering, PHI Publication, 1st Ed., 2nd reprint 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. Croney & P. Croney, Design and Performance of Road Pavements, McGraw-Hill Professional; 3 rd edition, 1997. 
2. P. Chakroborty & A. Das, Principles of Transportation Engineering, PHI Publication, 1st Ed., 2nd reprint 2005. 
3. S. K. Khanna & C. E. G. Justo, Highway Engineering, Nemchand Bros, Roorkee, 8th edition 2001, Reprinted 2003. 
4. Y. H. Huang, Pavement Analysis and Design, Prentice Hall, 2nd Ed. 2003. 
5. Relevant I. R. C. and AASHTO Codes
CE 444 PAVEMENT	MATERIALS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Conventional aggregates: Source, preparation, grading, testing and their evaluation, Bituminous binders- Properties, 
testing and applications.; Bituminous mixes- Design, testing and evaluation; Modeling of bituminous binders and 
mixes; Materials for cement concrete and semi-rigid pavements, Design of mixes for stabilized roads; Non-conventional 
and new pavement materials- their application and limitations; Modern methods of testing and evaluation of paving 
materials
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. Chakraborty and A. Das, Principles of Transportation Engg., PHI Publication, 1st Ed. 2nd reprint 2005
2. G. V. Rao, Principles of Transportation and Highway Engineering, Tata Mc. Graw Hill, 1st Ed. 1995
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Indian Roads Congress, Manual for Construction and Supervision of Bituminous works, New Delhi, 2005. 
2. Relevant IRC, ASTM and AASHTO codes and specifications. 
CE 445 DESIGN	OF	AIRPORTS	AND	HILL	ROADS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Airport: Aircraft characteristics related to Airport Design, Geometric design of airport components, Reinforced 
Concrete Design of Airport Pavements, Maintenance and rehabilitation of airport pavements, Airport Drainage; Hill 
Roads: Introduction, Common problems, Geometric design and alignment surveys, Construction and maintenance, 
Protective structures and CD works, Drainage. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Horonjeff and F. X. McKelvey, Airport Planning and Design, McGraw-Hill Professional, 5 edition, 2009. 
2. S. K. Khanna, M. G. Arora and S. S. Jain, Airport Planning and Design, Nem Chand Brothers, 6th Ed. reprint 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. N. Ashport & P. H. Wright, Airport Engg, Willey-Interscience, 3rd Ed. 1992. 
2. S. K. Khanna & C E G Justo, Highway Engineering, Nem Chand Bros, Roorkee, 8th Edition 2001, Reprinted 2003. 
3. R. S. Gahlowt (Padam Shree), V. P. Gupta, Treatise on Hill Roads, Standard Book House, New Ed., 2005. 
4. Relevant IRC and AASHTO Codes and Specifications. 
CE 451 IRRIGATION ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
ntroduction: Necessity of Irrigation in India, Advantages and disadvantages of Irrigation, Techniques of water 
distribution in firms. Quality of irrigation water. Crops and crop season, Consumptive use, Irrigation requirements, 
Estimation of consumptive use of water by climatic approaches, Irrigation efficiencies, Soil moisture-irrigation 
relationship; Canal Irrigation: Classification of canals, Canal losses, Alignment of canals. Design of Irrigation Canals: 
Design of stable channels using Kennedy’s and Lacey’s theory, Garret’s diagram, Cross section of irrigation canals, 
Lining of Irrigation Canals: Advantages and economics of lining, Various types of lining, Design of lined canals, Types 
of Cross-Drainage Works: Types of CD works, Selection of a suitable type to suite a particular condition, Design 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
197
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
consideration for CD works, Canal Falls: Necessity, Proper location, Types, Design and detailing of one type of fall; 
Weirs and Barrages: Weirs and Barrages, Types of weirs and barrages, Layout of a diversion head work, Introduction 
of different components of a diversion head works, Design of weirs and barrages: Bligh’s creep theory, Design of 
weir using Bligh’s theory, Lane’s weighted creep theory, Khosla’s theory, Khosla’s method of independent variables, 
Exit gradient; Dams: Typical cross section, Various forces acting on gravity dam, Combination of forces for design, 
modes of failure and criteria for structural stability, High and low gravity dam, Design of high dam, Typical section of 
low gravity dam, Earth and Rock fill Dams: Types, Causes of failure, Preliminary section of an earth dam, Preliminary 
section of an earth dam, Seepage control in earth dams, Spillways: Descriptive study of various types of spillways; 
Reclamation of Water Logged and Saline Soils: Causes and control of water logging. Reclamation of saline and alkaline 
land, Surface and Sub-surface drainage. River training works. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Garg, Irrigation Engineering and hydraulics structures, Khanna Publishers, 16th Edition. 
2. B. Singh, Irrigation Engineering, Nem Chand and Sons, Roorkee. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Varshney & Gupta, Theory and Design of Irrigation Structures, Nem Chand and Bros, Roorkee. 
2. I.e.Hook, Irrigation Engineering, John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
3. J. D. Zimmerman, Irrigation, John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
CE 452 WATER	RESOURCES	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Precipitation, its Measurement, analysis and losses: Hydrologic cycle, catchment area and watershed, Rainfall and 
its characteristics, Rain gauges, Non-Recording and Recording type, average rainfall over a catchments, Evapo-
transpiration, Pan evaporation, pan coefficient Infiltration, W-Index and φ - Index; Hydrographs: Discharge formulae, 
characteristics of a Run off hydrograph, Unit hydrograph, S-hydrograph, Instantaneous hydrograph, synthetic Unit 
hydrograph, Duration Curve, Mass Flow hydrograph, Stream gauging, Flow rating curve, use of current meters for 
velocity measurement, Dye-dilution method of discharge measurement; Flood Control: Flood flows, Frequency 
studies, Statistical analysis for flood prediction, Method of flood control, Flood routing, Reservoir routing and Channel 
routing, River training works; Dock and Harbours: Natural and artificial Harbours, Selection of site, study of winds, 
tides and wave actions, Accretion and denudation, Principle of construction of Breakwaters, Quays and jetties, Wet 
and Floating Docks. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. C. Patra, Hydrology & Water Resources Engg., Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2nd Edition. 
2. K. Subramanya, Engineering Hydrology, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nd Edition. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Srinivasan, Harbour, Dock and Tunnel Engineering. 
2. V. T. Chow, Hand book of Applied Hydrology, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York. 
3. R. K. Linsely, M. A. Kohlar, J. L. H. Pauluhus, Hydrology for Engineers, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi. 
4. R. S. Varshany, Engineering Hydrology, Nem Chand and Brothers, Roorkee. 
5. E. M. Wilson, Engineering Hydrology, Macmillan, ELBS, London. 
CE 453 COMPUTATIONAL	FLUID	DYNAMICS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, overview of the numerical simulation of flood flows in river channels, governing equations in flood flows 
in river channels. Finite difference approach, Explicit finite difference schemes, Implicit finite difference schemes, 
significance of model boundary conditions, affect of flow conditions within river channels and its numerical models, 
data requirements for numerical models of flood flows in river channels, Model calibration, understanding of the data 
checks necessary to ensure correct representation of the river geometry in a numerical model, calibrating numerical 
models of flood flows in river channels, Fundamental of Finite Volume Method and its application in water resources 
engineering, . Conveyance Estimation, prediction of conveyance within river channels, new Conveyance Estimation 
System (CES). 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. D. Anderson Jr. . Computational Fluid Dynamic, Mc Graw Hill publications
2. K. A. Hoffman and S. T. Chang, Computational Fluid Dynamics Vol-1 and Vol-II. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Weiming Wu. . Computational River Dynamic
2. Rolland Jeppson, Open Channel Flow: Numerical methods and Computer applications. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
198
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CE 454 GROUND	WATER	HYDROLOGY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Hydrologic cycle, Water balance, Occurrence of ground water: Origin, geological formations as aquifers, type 
of aquifers, groundwater basins, springs. Darcy’s Law, validity of Darcy’s Law permeability, laboratory and field 
measurement of permeability, groundwater Flow lines. Steady flow to a well, steady radial flow to a well in confined 
aquifer and unconfined aquifer, Unsteady radial flow into a confined aquifer, Non equilibrium Theis equation, Theis 
method of solution, multiple well system; Methods of constructions of deep and shallow wells: The percussion (or 
cable tool) method of drilling, Direct circulation hydraulic rotary method, Down the hole hammer method, well logs-
receptivity logging, testing of wells for yield, Effect of irrigation, stream flow, rainfall on groundwater fluctuations, 
seasonal and secular variations, fluctuation due to miscellaneous causes; Surface and Subsurface investigations of 
groundwater: Geophysical exploration, Electrical resistivity method, aerial photo interpretation, remote sensing 
applications to ground water exploration, test drilling, Artificial recharge by water spreading, through pits and shaft, 
recharge through other methods; Ground water pollution: Municipal sources, liquid wastes from domestic uses, solid 
wastes, Industrial sources, tank and pipeline leakage, Mining activity, agricultural sources, septic tank and cesspools, 
saline water intrusion in coastal aquifers, methods to control saline water intrusion; Groundwater management: 
Concepts of Basin management, Equation of hydrologic equilibrium, groundwater basin investigations, conjunctive 
use of surface and groundwater. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. C. Patra, Hydrology and Water Resources Engg., Narosa Publishing house, New Delhi. 
2. D. K. Todd, Groundwater Hydrology, John Wiley and Sons. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. M. Raghunath, Ground Water. 
2. S. P. Garg, Groundwater and Tube Wells, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co., New Delhi. 
3. V. T. Chow, Hand book of Applied Hydrology, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York. 
CE 455 OPEN	CHANNEL	FLOW 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Open- channel flow and its classifications, measurement of velocity, velocity distribution, pressure distribution, 
specific energy, Specific force and critical state of flow, section factor for critical flow; Uniform flow, determination 
of roughness coefficients and the factors affecting the roughness, computation of uniform flow, flood discharge, 
determination of normal depth and velocity, flow in composite roughness; Design of channels for uniform flow in non-
erodable and erodable with grassed channels; Dynamics of Gradually varied flow and classification of flow profile, 
methods of computation, Dynamics of spatially varied flow - analysis of flow profile and computation by method of 
numerical integration; Rapidly varied flow, classification, flow over spillway, Hydraulic Jump, types with characteristics 
of jump, the surface profile and location of the jump, jumps as energy decapitator, Rapidly varied flow through non-
prismatic channels; Unsteady flow, dynamics of gradually varied unsteady flow, solution of unsteady flow equations, 
rapidly varied unsteady flow, positive and negative surges, flood routing, principle and methods of flood routing. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. T. Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New Delhi, 1993. 
2. F. M. Henderson, Open Channel Flow, MacMillan Publishing Company, 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. G. Rangaraju, Flow through Open Channel, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi. 
2. H. Chanson, The Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow: An Introduction, Elsevier. 
3. K. Subramanya, Flow in Open Channel, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi. 
4. River Hydraulics, (Technical Engineering and Design Guides as adapted from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, No. 18) New 
York: ASCE Press. 
5. H. Rouse, Engineering Hydraulics, John Wiley and Sons. 
CE 456 WATER	RESOURCES	PLANNING	AND	MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Hydrologic Cycle: Rainfall, Rain gauge, Evaporation, Transmission, Infiltration, Rainfall excess, Base flow, Average 
rainfall, Runoff, DRH; River basins: Catchment area, River stages in hilly-plain and deltaic area. Storage structures: 
Dams, Weirs, Barrages their location. Classification of dams and Multipurpose dams; Requirement of water for 
various needs: Domestic, Irrigation, Power generation etc, Reservoir planning. Rain water harvesting for Domestic 
Industrial and Irrigation Uses; Ground water: Types of aquifers, their properties, ground water table, Ground water 
yield, well hydraulics. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
199
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. C. Patra, Hydrology and Water Resources Engineering, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2nd Edition, 2007
2. K. Subramanian, Engineering Hydrology, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. P Singh, Elementary Hydrology, Prentice Hall of India. 
CE 471 COMPUTER	AIDED	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Revisiting different methods of analysis of beams and frames, different philosophies of design of RCC structures.; 
Concept of computer aided design, introduction of software packages used for analysis and design of structures 
including STAAD and SAP.; Analysis and design of a double storied frame using STAAD, SAP and check by any of 
analytical methods including Kani’s method.; Drawing of any utility building (two storied and above) like residential 
complex, software office, Hotel, hospital, Bank, post office at different places of the country using any graphical 
package including Autocad, analysis and design using software like STAAD Pro, SAP etc.; Concept of earthquake 
resistant design of structures in the above design of utility buildings. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Online manuals of the software used for drawing and design. 
CE 472 STRUCTURAL	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Basic tests for cement and concrete; Mix design of concrete of different grades; Tensile strength of different types of 
steel rebars; Tensile and Flexural strength of concrete of different grades; Testing of simply supported RCC beams for 
flexural failure; Testing of simply supported RCC beams for shear failure; Testing of RCC column; Non-destructive test 
of concrete; Permeability of concrete; Vibration analysis of plates. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Structural Engineering laboratory manual
2. Relevant BIS Codes of practice for mix design, rebar testing, concrete design etc. 
CE 473 GEOTECHNICAL	ENGINEERING	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Interpretation and use of In-situ tests (SPT, CPT, PLT, PMT, DMT) for design of foundations; Geotechnical Design of 
shallow footing for compression, bending and uplift; Design of piles under compression, lateral and uplift forces; 
Design of well foundation; Design of soil slopes; Concept of Computer aided design and use of software packages for 
analysis and design of : Soil slopes with and without reinforcement; Sheet pile; Pile foundation; Liquefaction analysis
Essential	Reading:	
1. Online manuals of the software used for drawing and design. 
CE 474 WATER	RESOURCES	ENGINEERING	DESIGN	PRACTICE 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Design of unlined canal using Kennedy’s theory; Design of unlined canal using Lacey’s theory and comparing the 
design using Garret’s diagram; Economics of canal lining-finding the cost-benefit ratio by lining an unlined canal; 
Design of a trapezoidal concrete lined canal section; Calculation of balancing depth of cut for a canal section; Draw 
the phreatic line for a homogeneous earth dam without filter; Draw the phreatic line for an earth dam with horizontal 
filter and that for a zoned section; Design of a strainer type tube-well; Design of an unflumed, non-metered straight 
glacis fall
Essential	Reading:	
2. Water Resource Engineering laboratory manual. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Detail Syllabi
200
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Detail Syllabi
201
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	CHEMICAL	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
CH 211 Processing and Handling of Materials 3-0-0 3
CH 212 Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 220 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 221 Fundamentals of Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3. 
CH 223 Chemical Process Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 224 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 225 Chemical Process Calculations 3-1-0 4
CH 226 Fuels and Combustion 3-0-0 4
CH 227 Fertilizer Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 228 Treatment of Industrial Effluents 3-0-0 3
CH 229 Basic Chemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 270 Materials Handling Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 271 Process Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 272 Fluid Dynamics Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 273 Fuels and Combustion Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 311 Heat Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
CH 312 Transport Phenomena 3-1-0 4
CH 315 Mass Transfer Operations 3-1-0 4
CH 321 Fundamentals of Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 322 Environmental Biotechnology 3-0-0 3
CH 323 Energy Conservation and Renewable sources of Energy 3-0-0 3
CH 324 Particulate Science and Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 329 Process Plant Safety 3-0-0 3
CH 330 Petroleum Refinery Engineering and Petrochemicals 3-0-0 3
CH 331 Polymer Science and Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 334 Process Dynamics and Control 3-1-0 4
CH 335 Applied Statistics for Chemical Engineers 3-0-0 3
CH 336 Chemical Engineering Mathematics 3-1-0 4
CH 337 Equipment Design (Mech. Aspects) 3-1-0 4
CH 338 Industrial Instrumentation and Process Control 3-0-0 3
CH 370 Computer Aided Design Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
CH 371 Heat Transfer Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 372 Heat Transfer Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 373 Mass Transfer Fundamentals Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 374 Mass Transfer Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 375 Biotechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 376 Process Instrumentation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 377 Fluid Dynamics Applications Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 414 Nanotechnology in Catalysis 3-0-0 3
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
202
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 415 Fluidization Engineering 3-1-0 4
CH 417 Modern Separation Processes in Chemical Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 418 Recent Separation Technologies 3-0-0 3
CH 419 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3-1-0 4
CH 421 Reaction Kinetics and Catalysis 3-1-0 4
CH 422 Simulation, Modeling and Optimisation of Chemical Process 3-1-0 4
CH 425 Environmental Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 426 Coal Processing Technology 3-0-0 3
CH 427 Colloid and Interfacial Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 428 Disaster Management in Chemical Industries 3-0-0 3
CH 432 Optimization Techniques in Process Design 3-0-0 3
CH 434 Project Engineering 3-0-0 3
CH 439 Non-Traditional Optimization Techniques 3-0-0 3
CH 470 Process Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 471 Chemical Reaction Engg. Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CH 473 Computer Aided Design Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
CH 475 Process Dynamics and Control Laboratory 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech.	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech.	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
CH 211 PROCESSING	AND	HANDLING	OF	MATERIAL 3 credits [3-0-0]
Characteristics of a single particle: Size, shape, surface area, volume, Properties of solids.; Characteristics of a collection 
of particles: Particle Size Distribution: Specific surface of mixture, average particle size, Number of particles, Screen 
analysis: Effectiveness of screen, Industrial screening equipments, Size reduction: Factors affecting comminution, 
Laws of comminution, Industrial equipments; Particle Dynamics: Single Particle: Settling velocity, Effect of shape, Wall 
effect, Mixture of Particles: hindered settling; Separation of particles: Solid-solid separation: Classification, Jigging, 
Magnetic and Electrostatic separations, Liquid-solid separation: Sedimentation, Filtration, Hydro-Cyclones, Gas-solid 
separation: Flotation; Mixing and Agitation: Phenomena of mixing and agitation, Circulation, velocities and power 
consumption in agitated vessels, Solid-liquid mixing, solid-solid mixing; Particle transport and storage: Storage of 
solids: Hopper, Bins & Silos, Mechanical conveyers, Gas-solid: Pneumatic transport in horizontal and vertical pipelines, 
Liquid-solid: Hydraulic transport Beneficiation circuits of Minerals: Chalcopyrites, Sphalerites, Galena and Bauxite. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. M. Narayanan & B. C. Bhattacharyya, Mechanical Operation for Chemical Engineers (Incorporating Computer Aided 
Analysis), Khanna Publisher, Third Edition, 2005. 
2. W I McCabe & J C Smith, P. Harriot, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, McGraw-Hill publication, 2005
Suggested Reading: 
1. M. C. Fuerstenau and K. N. Han, Principles of Mineral Processing, John Wiley, N. Y, 2003
2. J. F. Richardson, J. H. Harker & J. Backhurst, Chemical Engineering Volume 2, Butterworth-Heinemann, 1st edn, 2002. 
CH 212 FLUID	DYNAMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Fluid mechanics: Nature of fluid, Pressure concept & various pressure measuring devices.; Fluid dynamics : Fluid flow 
phenomena, Nature and classification of flow, Dynamic properties of fluid, Boundary layer formation in straight tube, 
Universal velocity profile, Haugon and Poiseulle equation, Measurement of viscosity, Dimensional analysis applied 
to fluid flow problems, Buckingham’s theorem, Physical significance of Reynold’s number.; Transportation of fluids: 
Bernoulli’s equation for friction less flow and correction for frictional flow; Pumps: Types, Selection, Applications, 
Performance characteristics of centrifugal and reciprocating pumps; Flow past immersed bodies: Flow through packed 
beds, kozney Carman equation, Filtration and Centrifugation, Motion of particles through fluids, Terminal settling 
velocity, Hydraulic and Pneumatic classification; Fluidization: Types of fluidization, Prediction of minimum fluidization 
velocity and bed pressure drop, bubbling, slugging and distributors; Introduction to Non-Newtonian fluids. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
203
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. L. McCabe, J. C. Smith, P. Harriot, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, McGraw-Hill Publication, 2005. 
Suggested Reading: 
1.  G. K. Batchelor, Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Oxford University Press, 2000. 
2. Pre-requisite: Knowledge in under graduate “Fluid Mechanics”
CH 220 CHEMICAL	ENGINEERING	THERMODYNAMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
First law: Evaluation of PVT properties of fluids, Law of corresponding states, Residual volume, Compressibility factor, 
Equations of state; Heat effect – Clausious Clepeyren equation; Second law: Entropy, Work function, Free energy; 
Phase rule: Theoretical and experimental aspects of phase rule and its use in study of multi-component system; 
Refrigeration: Thermodynamic efficiency, production of work from heat. Partial molal properties, Chemical potential, 
Fugacity. Gibbs-Duhem equation. Determination of activity coefficients from van Laar equation; Chemical reaction 
equilibria, Introduction to third law.; VLE and LLE calculations. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. M. Smith & H. C. V Ness and M. M. Abbot, Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, Mc Graw and Hills 
Publication, 2005
Suggested Reading: 
1. K. Denbigh, The principles of Chemical equilibria with applications in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 1981
2. S. I. Sandler, Chemical and Engineering Thermodynamics. John Wiley publication, 3rd edition, 2003
CH 223 CHEMICAL	PROCESS	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction of CPT with reference to Indian resources, industries, trade and export potential, small scale industries 
and rural development. Preparation of process flow diagrams, Instrumentation diagrams and Process symbols.; 
Introduction to the following industries lying emphasis on process flow sheet, material requirements, process 
conditions, material of construction and design aspects. 
Chlor-Alkali Industries: Manufacture of Soda ash, Caustic soda and Chlorine. 
Acids; Manufacture of Sulphuric acid, Hydrochloric acid and Nitric acid. 
Electro thermal Industries: Manufacture of Silicon Carbide and Calcium Carbide. 
Extraction and Refining of edible oil, Fat splitting and Hydrogenation of oil. 
Soaps and Detergents, recovery of Glycerin. 
Production of Pulp, Paper and Rayon. 
Fermentation Industries: Manufacture of Industrial alcohol, Absolute alcohol and allied products. 
Manufacture of Sugar, Starch and its derivatives. 
Coal based Chemical Industries. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. E. Dryden, Dryden’s outlines of Chemical Technology for the 21st century, (Edited & revised by M. G. Rao and M Sitting) 2006
2. G. T. Austin, Shreve’s Chemical Process Industries, 5th edition, McGraw Hill Book Co., New York, 1984
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. D. Shukla & G. N. Pandey, A Text Book of Chemical Technology, Vol. II, Sangam Books, 2000. 
2. W. V. Mark edited by S. C. Bhatia, Chemical Process Industries Vol. I & Vol. II 2nd edition, CBS Publisher and Distributor, 2007. 
3. R. E. Kirk and D. F. Othmer, Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 4th edition, Interscience, New York, 1991 (In our library). 
CH 224 POLYMER	SCIENCE	AND	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Historical Background, Classification and forms of Polymers, Tacticity, Functionality, Degree of Polymerization, 
identification of Polymers and end uses; Chemistry of Polymerization: Chain and Step Polymerization and their 
Kinetics Techniques of Polymerization: Bulk, Solution, Suspension and Emulsion Polymerization; Molecular Weight 
and its determination by Viscometry, Light-scattering and Osmometric methods; Crystallization in Polymers; Polymer 
Degradation; Manufacture and Uses of PF, UF, Vinyl Resins, Acrylic Resins, PS and PE; Polymer additives, Blends and 
Alloys; Polymer Processing; Plastics as materials of construction in chemical equipments. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
204
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Mann, Introductory Polymer Science, Dhanpat Rai Publications. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. S. K. Bhasin and J. R. Fried, Polymer Science and Technology, Prentice-Hall. 
2. F. W. Billmeyer, Textbook of Polymer Science, John Willey & Sons
3. R. Sinha, Outlines of Polymer Technology-I, II, Prentice-Hall. 
4. Pre-requisite: Knowledge in under graduate “Basic chemistry”
CH 225 CHEMICAL	PROCESS	CALCULATIONS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Chemical reactions: Excess reactant, Degree of completion, Composition of mixtures and solutions; Material balance: 
Calculations for (a) unit operations like mixing evaporation, crystallization and distillation, (b) Chemical reactions and 
(c) Recycling; Behaviour of ideal gases: Various equations of state, Law of Dalton and Amagat, Densities of gaseous 
mixture.; Vapour pressures: Liquefaction, Vaporisation, Boiling point, Vapour pressures of solids and liquids, Roult’s 
law, Polar and non-polar compounds; Energy balance: Heat capacity of gases, liquids, solids and solutions, Kopp’s 
rule, Heats of fusion and vaporisation, Trouton’s rule and Kistia Kowaky equation, calculation of heat of reaction, 
combustion, formation and neutralisation, enthalpy concentration charts, Flame temperatures; Material and energy 
balance in industrial processes: Simple material and energy balance calculations for the following manufacturing 
processes – (a) Sulphuric acid, (b) Nitric acid, (c) Phosphoric acid, (d) Lime and Alkali; Numerical techniques for solving 
material and energy balance equations; Vapour – liquid equilibrium calculations. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. O. A. Hougen et. al, Chemical Process Principles (Vol. 1). 
2. R. M. Felder and R. W. Rousseau, Elementary Principles of Chemical processes, John Wiley, 2004
Suggested Reading: 
1. R. K. Dave, Chemical Reactions and Stoichiometry, Campus books International, 2000
2. M. Sylvin, Problems in stoichiometry, Sarup & Sons, 2003
3. Pre-requisite: Knowledge in under graduate “Basic chemistry & Mathematics”
CH 226 FUELS	AND	COMBUSTION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Solid fuels: Coal origin, Chemical composition, Calorific value, Classifications, Characteristics and Distribution of Indian 
coals, Storage and spontaneous combustion of coal, Coal washing and blending, Petographic constituents of coal, 
Carbonization of coal, Manufacture and properties of metallurgical coke, Recovery of byproducts; Liquid fuels: Origin 
and composition of crude oil, Crude oil distillation and it’s products with special reference to gasoline, kerosene and 
diesel oil, Cracking and reforming, Shale oil; Gaseous fuels: Natural gas, Coal gas, Coke oven and blast furnace gas, 
Manufacture of water gas and producer gas, Carbureted water gas; Synthetic fuels: Hydrogenation of coal, Fischer 
– Tropsch synthesis; Combustion: Combustion of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, combustion stoichiometry and 
thermodynamics, Calculation of volumes and weights of air required for combustion, the gas analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Sarkar, Fuels and Combustion. 3rdEdn., Universities Press (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
2. S. N. Saha, Fuel Combustion Energy Technology, Dhanpat Rai Pub. Co. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. Himus, Elements of Fuel technology. 
2. J. Brame and King, Fuels: Solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, Kessinger Publishing, LLC, 2007. 
3.  O. P. Gupta, Elements of Fuels, Furnaces and Refractories. 
CH 227 FERTILIZER	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fertilizers: Chemical fertilizers, Types of chemical fertilizers, Fertilizer applications and agronomical details; 
Nitrogenous fertilizers: Feedstock for production of Ammonia gas, Associated gas, Coke oven gas, Naphtha, Fuel oil, 
Petroleum heavy stock, Coal, Lignite, Water, Coke, methods of production, Characteristics, Specification and storage 
of ammonium sulphate, nitrate, urea, calcium ammonium nitrate and ammonium chloride; Phosphatic fertilizers: 
Raw materials – Phosphate rock, Sulphur, Pyrirites. Methods of production, Characteristics, Specification and storage 
of single super phosphate, triple super phosphate; Potassic fertilizers: Methods of production, Characteristics, 
Specification and storage of potassium chloride, potassium sulphate and potassium schoenite; Complex and NPK 
fertilizers: Methods of production, Characteristics, Specification and storage of ammonium phosphate sulphate, 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
205
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Diammonium phosphate, Nitrophosphates, Urea ammonium phosphate, Mono ammonium phosphate and various 
grades of NPK fertilizers; Others: Secondary nutrients, Micro nutrients, Fluid fertilizers, Controlled release fertilizers; 
Technology of compound fertilizers, Nitrogeneous fertilizers, Phosphate fertilizers, Potash and mixed fertilizers, 
Fertilizer applications and agronomical details, Technology of ammonia manufacture, Fertilizer raw materials and 
availability. 
Essential	Reading:	
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Nielssion, Manual for Fertilizer Technology Series
2. S. Lee, J. G. Speight, and S. K. Loyalka, Handbook of Alternative Fuel Technology, CRC, 2007
CH 228 TREATMENT	OF	INDUSTRIAL	EFFLUENTS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Characterisation of waste waters - quality of various industrial effluents; permissible limits; Fundamentals of waste 
water treatment technologies; water treatment equipments; Biological waste water treatment: - completely mixed 
aerated lagoons, oxidation ditches and waste stabilisation ponds - activated sludge - microbial community in 
activated sludge - aerobic digestion, trickling filters - rotating biological contactors - nitrification - biological fluidised 
bed reactors for treatment of sewage and industrial effluents - anaerobic digestion and anaerobic contact process - 
denitrification - fluidised bed anaerobic reactors - anaerobic down flow stationary fixed film reactors.; Case studies of 
waste water treatment and disposal of tannery-dye factory-sugar industry-paper and pulp industry -viscose industry 
- agro chemical industries- fertilizer industries - petro chemical industry and pharmaceutical industries.; Treatment 
of gaseous pollutants: Ambient air sampling, analysis methods and measuring devices; air pollution standards, air 
pollution control equipments; Case studies of gaseous effluent treatment in typical industries: steel plants, power 
plants etc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. N. W. Jern, Industrial waste water Treatment, Imperial College Press, 2006. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. R. S. Ramalho. 1983. Introduction to Waste Water Treatment Process. Academic press. New York. 
2. S. D. Lin and C. C. Lee, Waterand Waste Water Calculation Manual, McGraw-Hill, 2001. 
CH 229 BASIC	CHEMICAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Units and dimensions, basic laws, unit operations and unit processes; Physico-chemical calculations: 
Material and energy balance for different unit operations; nit processes.; Fluid flow and flow measurement: Nature of 
fluid, viscosity, friction factor, flow through; porous media, fluidization, flow measuring devices; Heat transfer: Modes 
of heat transfer, calculation of heat transfer coefficient, heat exchangers and evaporators.; Mass transfer: Transfer 
mechanism, mass transfer coefficient, introduction to mass transfer operations viz. gas absorption, distillation, 
leaching and drying, stage and continuous contactors.; Chemical kinetics: Rate equation, catalysis, tyre of reactors; 
Natural resources and their utilization: Important chemical industries based on natural resources viz. paper (wood), 
soap and detergents(oil seeds), cement(minerals), fertilizers; (water, coal and minerals)and petroleum refinery(crude 
oil).; Chemical process instrumentation: Elements of instruments, static and dynamic characteristics, dynamic 
response of process instruments, recording, indicating and signaling instruments.; Pollution from chemical industries 
and its abatement: Solid, liquid and gaseous effluents from chemical industries and their abatement. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. L. McCabe, J. C. Smith and P. Harriott, Unit Operations of chemical Engineering, McGraw-Hill, Inc., Sixth Edition, 2005
Suggested Reading: 
1. J. M. Coulson, J. F. Richardson, J. R. Backhurst and J. H. Harker, Chemical Engineering, Vol. 1 and 2, Pergamon Press, Fourth 
Edition, 1990. 
2. G. T. Austin, Shreve’s Chemical Process Industries, McGraw Hill Book Co., Fifth Edition, (Latest)
CH 270 MATERIAL	HANDLING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of average particle size of a mixture of particles by sieve analysis.; Study and operation of Jaw crusher 
and thereby verification of Ritinger’s constant; Determination of reduction ratio, maximum feed size and theoretical 
capacity of crushing rolls; Determination of the effect of no. of balls on grinding in a Ball mill and comparison of its 
critical speed with the operating speed; To find out the effect of time on grinding and amount of undersize at zero 
time of grinding in a ball mill and to compare its operating speed with the critical speed; To find out enrichment of the 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
206
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
coal sample using a froth flotation cell; Determination of the effectiveness of a vibrating screen; To find the efficiency 
of Wilfley Table and the effect of water flow rate on efficiency of separation; Study and operation of a Hammer 
mill thereby finding its reduction ratio; Study and operation of a Pulverizer and thereby finding its reduction ratio; 
Study and operation of a cyclone separator and thereby finding its efficiency of separation; Study and operation of a 
Magnetic separator and thereby finding its efficiency of separation; Study and operation of a Gyratory Crusher and 
thereby finding its reduction ratio. 
CH 271 PROCESS	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Preparation of soap from oil and Determination of alkali content in the soap: Commercial soap; Prepared soap. 
Determination of saponification value of oil; Determination of fat content in the food stuff using Soxhlet apparatus; 
Preparation of activated carbon; Determination of Total organic carbon in the water sample; Determination of 
surface area using BET apparatus; Determination of Bromine no of oil sample; Distribution Coefficient determination 
for iodine in organic solvent and water; Determination of iron content in a given salt solution; Determination of 
lime% in a Portland cement; Determination of COD in the water sample; Determination of dye concentrates using 
spectrophotometric analysis. 
CH 272 FLUID	DYNAMICS	FUNDAMENTAL	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
To find the cake and filter medium resistance of Plate and Frame Filter press; To find the filter medium resistance of 
a Vacuum Leaf Filters; To find the flow rate using a V notch; To find the friction losses in a Straight pipe; To find the 
friction losses in a Bend pipe; Study of Pipe fittings and Valves; To study the principle of a hydro-cyclone and find out 
the efficiency of separation; To study the Reynold’s apparatus and verify experimentally; To study the working principle 
of a reciprocating pump and to determine the percentage of slip; To study the working principle of a centrifugal pump 
and determine its efficiency experimentally; To determine the cake resistance of a batch basket centrifuge; To find 
out the flow profile of water from hook’s gauge and determination of coefficient of velocity, coefficient of discharge, 
coefficient of resistance, coefficient of contraction. 
CH 273 FUELS	AND	COMBUSTION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of composition of the supplied sample of Coal by Proximate Analysis; Determination of Caking Index 
of the supplied sample of Coal by Grey – campredon method; To determine the washability characteristics of the 
supplied sample of Coal using Float and Sink test; To find the effect of temperature on viscosity of the supplied 
samples of liquid fuel using Red wood viscometer; To find the effect of temperature on viscosity of the supplied 
samples of lubricating oil using Engler’s viscometer; To find the Flash and Fire point of the supplied samples of liquid 
fuel using: Penslery Martein closed cup apparatus; Abel open cup apparatus; To find the Aniline point of the supplied 
samples of liquid fuels using Aniline point apparatus and hence find out the Diesel Index Number of the Diesel oil; 
To find the Carbon Residue of the supplied sample of lubricating oil / oil mixture using Conradson apparatus; To find 
the moisture content of the supplied samples of liquid fuel / Crude oil using Dean and Stark apparatus; To find the 
Pour point and Solidfication point of the supplied samples of liquid fuels; To find the Calorific value of LPG using: Boy. 
s Gas calorimeter, Junker’s Gas calorimeter; To find the composition of the gas using Gas Chromatograph and hence 
determine the percent of excess air used for combustion of the fuel used; To determine the ultimate analysis of the 
supplied sample of coal and hence find the theoretical GCU of given coal; To determine the Swelling Index of the 
supplied sample of coal and ascertain the agglomerating characteristics of the coal sample; To determine the Gross 
calorific value of the supplied sample of coal using Bomb Calorimeter (on ash free basis); To determine the Smoke 
Point of kerosene oil using Smoke Point Apparatus. 
CH 311 HEAT TRANSFER OPERATIONS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mechanism of heat transfer: Conduction – Fourier’s law, Steady state conduction of heat through plane, cylindrical 
and Spherical solids - single and in series. Convection – Steady state heating and cooling of fluids without phase 
change, Heat transfer from condensing vapours and to boiling liquids – filmwise and dropwise condensation, boiling 
coefficients. Radiation – Kirchhoff’s law, Stefan-Boltzman law, Simple case of radiation heat transfer between surfaces; 
Applications of heat transfer: Evaporation – Effect of liquid characteristics, Single and multi-effect evaporation, Types 
of evaporation and their attachments, Performance of single effect evaporation, Boiling point rise, Multiple effect 
evaporation – forward, backward, mixed and parallel feed, Performance of multiple effect evaporation in comparison 
to that of single effect evaporation, Vapour compression evaporation, Calculations for single effect evaporators; 
Different types of Heat Exchangers; Heat transfer augmentation. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
207
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Q. Kern, Process Heat Transfer, Mc Graw & Hills, 1982
2. F. P. Incropera, Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons, 2007
Suggested Reading: 
1. W. L. McCabe and J. C. Smith, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, Mc Graw & Hills, 2005. 
2. R. W. Serth, Process Heat Transfer: Principle and Applications, Academic press, 2007. 
CH 312 TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 4 credits [3-1-0]
Momentum transport: Viscosity and mechanism, Newton’s law and viscosity, Non-Newtonian fluids, Temperature 
and pressure dependence of viscosity (gases at low density); Velocity distributions in laminar flow, Shell momentum 
balances, Flow of falling film, Flow through circular tube and annulus as adjacent flow of two immiscible fluids and 
creeping flow around a solid sphere, Equations of changes for isothermal system (compressible), Unsteady state 
viscous flow, Interphase transportations in isothermal system, Friction factor; Energy transport: Thermal conductivity 
in solids, Fouriors law of heat conduction, Temperature and heat dependence of thermal conductivity in gases and 
liquids; Temperature distributions in solids and in laminar flow, Shell energy balances, Heat conduction with electrical, 
viscous and chemical sources, Heat conduction through composite walls and in cooling fin forced and free convection; 
Equations of change for non-isothermal systems, Equations for energy in rectangular coordinates. Unsteady state 
heat conduction in solids; Mass transport: Diffusivity and mechanism, Temperature and pressure dependence of mass 
diffusivity; Concentration distributions in solids and in laminar flow, Shell mass balances, diffusion through a stagnate 
gas film, Diffusion with homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactions, diffusion into a falling liquid film, 
Diffusion and chemical reaction inside a porous catalyst. Equations of continuity for a binary mixture in rectangular 
coordinates; Inter-phase transport in multi-component system, Definition of binary mass transfer coefficients in one 
phase, Correlations of binary mass transfer coefficients in one phase at low mass transfer coefficients and in two 
phase at low and high mass transfer rates. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. B. Bird, W. E. Stewart, and E. N. Lightfoot Transport phenomena, John Wiley & Sons; Revised 2nd Edition edition, 2007
Suggested Reading: 
1. Bennett and Myers, Mass, Heat and Momentum transport. 
2. J. Welty, C. E. Wicks, G. L. Rorrer, and R. E. Wilson Fundamentals of Momentum Heat and Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons; 
5th Edition edition, 2008
3. R. S. Brodkey & H. C. Hershey, Transport Phenomena. 
4. Pre-requisite: Knowledge in under graduate “Basics of Heat & Mass transfer & Fluid Dynamics” 
CH 315 MASS TRANSFER OPERATIONS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mechanism of Transfer; Diffusion in gases and liquids. Analogy between mass momentum and heat transfer, Theories 
of Interphase Mass transfer, Coefficients and their correlations; Gas – Liquid Operations; Absorption: Choice of 
packings & solvent, M. I. R., N. T. U., H. T. U. and H. E. T. P. : calculation of height and diameter for packed towers.; 
Distillation: Boiling point diagram, Flash, Differential, vacuum steam, azcotropic and extractive distillation, Rectification 
and stripping, calculation of number of ideal stages by McCabeThiele and Ponchan - Savarit methods; Liquid – liquid 
operation; Extraction: batch and continuous, calculation of number of ideal stages, multistage extraction, equipment 
and their design principles; Gas – Solid Operation; Humidification and Drying: Wet and dry bulb hygrometry, spray 
chamber, cooling towers. Theory, mechanism and rate of drying, design and working principles a few types of dryers 
viz. shelf dryer, drum dryer, rotary dryer and fluidized bed dryer; Crystallization: Theory and applications, Various 
types of crystallizers
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. E. Treybal, Mass Transfer Operations, Mc Graw and Hills, 1980. 
2. W. L. McCabe & J. C. Smith, Unit Operation of Chemical Engineering, Mc Graw & Hills, 2005. 
3. B. K. Dutta, Principles of Mass Transfer and Separation Processes, Prentice Hall, 2005. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. T. K. Sherwood and R. L. Pigford, Absorption and Extraction. 
2. V. Winkle; Distillation. 
3. Sherwood, Pigford and Wilke; Mass Transfer. 
4. J. Benitez, Principle and Modern Application of Mass Transfer Operation, Wieley and Interscience, 2002
5. A. F. Mills, Mass Transfer, Prentice Hall, 2001
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
208
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 321 FUNDAMENTALS	OF	BIOCHEMICAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Microbiology: Structure of cells, types of cells; Introduction to Biochemical process industries: Industrial 
alcohols, anti biotic, enzymes, vitamins, single cell process; Fermentation mechanisms and kinetics: Kinetic models of 
microbial growth and product formation; Fermention types: Batch and continuous fermentation; Bioreactors: Types 
of bioreactor and design; Sterilization; Sterilization of media and air, equipment, batch and continuous sterilizer 
design; Biochemical product separation and recovery: Membrane separation process, chromatographic method; 
Application to waste water treatment: Activated sludge process, aerobic and anaerobic processes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. Najafpour, Biochemical Engineering & Biotechnology, Elsivier Science, 2006. 
2. J E Bailey and D F Ollis; Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, Mc Graw & Hills Publication, 1986. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. M. L. Shuler and F. Kargi, Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Prentice Hall of India, 2001. 
2. R. Dutta, Fundamentals of Biochemical Engineering, Springer, 2008. 
CH 322 ENVIRONMENTAL	BIOTECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
General effluent treatment – nature of sewers, sewage; Methods adopted in effluent treatment; Legal Consideration 
– Royal Commissions. Current situation in laying of charging ownership, regulations, legislation; Activated sludge 
process equipment, plant kinetics, CSTR modeling. PFR modeling, recycle stability, washout; Advanced Process – 
Trickling fitter, moving medium system; Biology of effluent treatment process: Roles of bacteria, fungi and protozoa. 
Extracellular Polymers, films, flocs, Analysis of effluent; Nutrition, Carbon removal, influences of loading ratio, 
retention times, season on kinetics and performance, Nitrogen and Phosphorous requirement for adequate plant 
performance. Nitrification and De-nitrification Anoxic process, extended aeration, high rate process; Sludge disposal 
methods; Anaerobic processes. Sludge digestion (contact digester), Management of digester sludge. Aerobic effluent 
treatment. Gas production and utilization, related problem. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. J. Waites, N. L. Morgan, J. S. Rockey, and G. Higton, Industrial Microbiology, Wiley Blackwel, 2001. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. W. Grueger and A. Crueger, Biotechnology a Text book of Industrial Microbiology, Mc Graw Hill, 1990. 
2. J. E. Bailey and D. F. Ollis, Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, Mc Graw-Hill, 2005. 
CH 323 ENERGY	CONSERVATION	&	RENEWABLE	SOURCES	OF	ENERGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Energy Science and Energy Technology; Energy Science and Energy Technology, world energy future, 
Energy sources and their availability. Renewable energy sources. Prospects of Renewable energy sources; Solar energy 
fundamentals and application; Geothermal energy: Introduction, Utilization of Geothermal energy, Geothermal 
energy resources, geothermal gradient, Different types of Geothermal Electric power plant and their operations for 
Geothermal Energy systems in India; Wind energy: Fundamentals and application, Basic principles of Wind Energy 
Conversion, Wind Energy conversion system, Performance of wind machines, Electric generation for wind; Biomass 
Energy Resources: Introduction, Biomass Conversion Process. Biogas from plant wastes, communities bio-gas plants. 
Biochemical conversion, Fermentation, liquid fuels for biomass; Urban Waste: A source of Energy. Urban solid waste, 
waste incineration process. Environmental consideration, Fluidized bed combustion boilers for burning solid waste 
and fossil fuels; Energy from the oceans: Introduction Ocean Energy conversion Technologies. Types of Ocean Thermal 
Electric Power Generation system and their operation. Tidal power plant; Hydro Energy: Introduction, types hydro-
electric plants and energy conversion scheme, Impulse turbine and Reaction turbine. Classification of Hydro-Energy 
plants; Energy Conservation: Principle of energy conservation and Energy Audit. Energy conservation Technologies. 
Co-generation, waste heat utilization, Heat recuperates, Heat regenerators, Heat pipes, Heat pumps, Energy storage. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Rao and Dr. B. B. Parulekar, Energy Technology, Non convential, Renewable and Conventional, Khanna Publishers. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. G. D. Rai, Non-conventional Energy Sources, Khanna Publishers. 
2. D. S. Chauhan and S. K. Srivastava, Non- Conventional Energy Resources, New Age International Pvt Ltd. 
3. G. N. Tiwari, Fundamentals of Renewable Energy Sources, Narosa Publishing House. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
209
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 324 PARTICULATE	SCIENCE	&	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Study of particles: Definition of a particle, Qualities of particles; The industrial revolutions: explosion of particle 
related advances (from advanced mining techniques to abrasives, cutting tools, and mass production of chemicals 
and agricultural products). Modern scientific advances in paints and coatings and other particles in various base 
solvents, Particles in fluids.; Composite materials, the design and manipulation of matter on the nanoscale and into 
nanostructures.; Particle Science as an enabling technology to create new energy sources, clean our air and water 
and build stronger and lighter materials. Advances in particle sciences in particular in the area of human healthcare. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. J. K. Beddow, Particulate Science and Technology. 
2. R. B. Bird, W. E. Stewart, and E. N. Lightfoot Transport phenomena, John Wiley & Sons; Revised 2nd Edition Edition, 2007
3. M. Leva, Fluidization. 
CH 330 PETROLEUM	REFINERY	ENGINEERING	AND	PETROCHEMICALS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Origin of Petroleum: Mendeleev and Englers’ theories, Composition of petroleum, Indian oil fields, Composition of 
Indian crudes, Properties of crude and products; Evaluation of oil stocks: Base of crude oil, Characterisation factor 
– TBP apparatus, Gravity and mid-percent curve, Yield curve, Equilibrium flash vaporisation curve, ASTM distillation 
characteristics of products, ASTM end points and TBP cut point; Crude oil processing: Desalting and dehydration of 
crude, Tropping, Atmospheric and vacuum distillation; Cracking and Reforming: Important cracking and reforming 
reactions, Thermal cracking, Fixed bed, Moving bed and Fluidized bed catalytic cracking, Catalytic reforming, Processes 
like Polyforming and hydroforming; Conversion of petroleum gases into motor fuels with special references to 
Alkylation, Polymerisation and Isomerisation; Chemical treatment: Sulphuric acid treatment, Sweetening treatment 
like Solutizer process, Doctor’s treatment and Catalytic desulphurization; Solvent extraction: Selection of solvents, 
Eldeleanu process, Furfural processes; Characteristics of important products like gasoline, kerosene, diesel, jet fuels 
and lubricating oils. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. L. Nelson, Petroleum Refinery Engineering. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. J. H. Gary, H. Hanwerk and M. J. Kaiser, Petroleum Refining Technology and Economics, CRC, 2007
2. R. J. Hengstebeck, Petroleum Processing. 
3. B. Rao, Petroleum Refinery Engineering. 
CH 331 PROCESS	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Basic principles: Elements of instruments, Static characteristics, Dynamic characteristics, Applications of Laplace 
transforms in instruments, Responses of first & second order instruments and capacitance; Temperature 
measuring instruments like Bimetallic, Vapour pressure, Thermocouples, Automatic Potential Recorders, Resistance 
thermometers, Radiation pyrometers, Optical Pyrometers, Photo-electric Pyrometers, Thermistors, Responses 
of these instruments; Composition measuring instruments: Spectroscopic methods, Thermal conductivity cells, 
Carbon dioxide analyser, Humidity measurement, Moisture in paper and lumber, pH meter, Oxygen analyser, 
polarograph, Refractometer, Chromatography, Colorimetry, Combustible gas analysers; Measurement of pressure 
and vacuum: Manometers, Pressure spring, McLeod gauge, Pirani Gauge, Ionization Gauge, Thermocouple Gauge, 
Responses of these instruments; Measurement of flow properties: Viscosity and specific gravity measurement, Level 
measuring devices, Flow measuring devices, measurement of displacement; Biosensors and its applications; Process 
instrumentation diagram, Circular chart, Strip chart recorders, Electric transmission, Pneumatic transmission with 
examples, Basic idea of automatic control and Instrumentation diagrams for equipments like distillation coloumns, 
evaporators, crystallisers, dryers and chemical reactors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Krishnaswamy, Industrial Instrumentation, New Age Publishers, 2003
Suggested Readings: 
1. A. Suryanarayana, Outline of Chemical Instrumentation and Process Control, Khanna Publisher, 1995, upcoming ed. 2008
2. J. Curtis, Process Control Instrumentation Technology, Prentice-Hall of India, 2005. 
3. R. S. Sirohi, H. C. Radha Krishna, Mechanical Measurements, New Age Publishers, 1991. 
4. N. A. Anderson, Instrumentation for Process Measurement and Control, CRC Press, 1997. 
5. W. Dunn, Fundamentals of Industrial instrumentation and control system, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2005. 
6. Pre-requisite: Knowledge in under graduate “Basic electronics & Mathematics” 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
210
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 332 PROCESS	EQUIPMENT	DESIGN 4 credits [3-1-0]
Detailed process design of the following equipments; Heat exchangers – concentric tube, shell and tube types, 
Condensers – condenser coolers and superheater condensers for single vapour only, Evaporators – single and multi 
effects, Absorbers – for binary systems without reactions, Distillation columns – for binary mixtures along with tray 
hydraulics, Rotary dryers; Multi-component Distillation Column Design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Q. Kern, Process Heat Transfer. 
Suggested Reading: 
J. H. Perry, Chemical Engineers Handbook. 
R. E. Treybal, Mass Transfer Operations. 
CH 334 PROCESS	DYNAMICS	AND	CONTROL 4 credits [3-1-0]
Process modeling, Process variables and process degrees of freedom, writing block diagrams, Signal flow diagrams 
and their algebra, Process dynamics of simple equipment like heat exchanger, chemical reactors and their transfer 
function; Linear open loop systems: Analysis of first order systems in series and second order system with respect 
to liquid level, flow, thermal systems and simple chemical processes, Transportation lag; Linear closed loop system: 
Feedback control, Closed loop transfer functions, Transient response of simple control system, Cascade control, 
Ratio control, Feed forward and Adaptive control; Frequency response analysis: Introduction, Control system 
design. Stability of control systems: Ruth, Nyquist, Milkhalov, Bode and Root locus methods; Optimum controller 
settings: Ziegler Nicholas methods, Continuous cycling, Damped oscillation and Reaction curve method; Controller 
instruments: Self operated, Pneumatic, Hydraulic, Simple electronic controllers and their uses in level, temperature 
control, etc; Control valves: Various types of valves, sizing and characteristics of control valves. Basic idea on state 
equations and state variables and their use in process control. Digital computer control loops and control works, 
Application – Z transforms, transmitters, sensors. MIMO systems, Digital control. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. G. Stephenanopoulos, Chemical Process Control–An Introduction to Theory & Practice, Prentice-Hall India, 2002. 
2. D. R. Coughanowr, Process Systems Analysis and Control, McGraw-Hill International, 1991, upcoming ed. Oct. 2008. 
Suggested Readings: 
1. B. B. Wayne, Process Control: Modeling, Design, and Simulation, Prentice-Hall India, 2006. 
2. C. A . Smith, A. B. Corripio, Principles and Practice of Automatic Process Control, Wiley, 2005. 
3. S. K. Singh, Computer Aided Process Control, Prentice-Hall India, 2004. 
4. M. L. Luyben, W. L. Luyben, Essentials of Process Control, McGraw-Hill, 1996
CH 335 APPLIED	STATISTICS	FOR	CHEMICAL	ENGINEERS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to probability, distributions, moments, statistical inference estimation, variance and regression analysis. 
Statistical Process Control and Reliability, error analysis, point estimation and confidence intervals, design of 
experiments, process monitoring based on statistical quality control techniques. Taguchi Approach, Case studies and 
use of Microsoft Excel. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. R. M. Bethea, B. S. Duran, Statistical Methods for Engineers and Scientists, Marcel Dekker, New York, 3rd Edition, 1995. 
2. Z. R. Lazic, Design of Experiments in Chemical Engineering: A Practical Guide, ISBN: 978-3-527-31142-2, Wiley Publisher, 2005. 
Pre-requisite:	Knowledge	in	under	graduate	“Mathematics”	
CH 336 CHEMICAL	ENGINEERING	MATHEMATICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Treatment of engineering data: Numerical integration (Simpson, Trapezoidal and Gauss methods), Interpolation 
(Newton, Lagrange, Stirling), Empirical equations and least squares; Ordinary differential equations: Formulation of 
the physical problems for mass, energy, rate equations and flow systems. Solutions using analytical and numerical 
methods; Partial differential equations: Formulation of chemical engineering problems, Coordinate transformation, 
Solutions of partial differential equations using separation variable method and Fourior series and limited to two 
dimensional cases; Laplace transforms: Applications to Laplace transforms to simple chem. engg. problems. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
211
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. S. Mickley, T. S. Sherwood, C. E. Reid, Applied Mathematics in Chemical Engg. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. V. G. Jenson and G. V. Jeffrey, Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engg. 
2. S. Pushpavanam, Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, Prentice Halls, 2004. 
3. Pre-requisite: Knowledge in under graduate “Mathematics” 
CH 337 EQUIPMENT	DESIGN	(MECHANICAL	ASPECTS) 4 credits [3-1-0]
Storage tank and pressure vessel: Design of storage tanks, pressure vessels and auxiliaries along with important 
accessories viz. joints, flanges, heads and nozzles; Supports: Guy wire and saddle supports, Design of bearing plate 
and anchor bolts; Piping: Various types of pipes and pipe fittings, Pipe supports and expansion joints, Design of pipe 
line; Materials of construction of process equipments; Introduction to various design codes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Kenneth and J. N. Harb, Introduction to Chemical Process: Fundamentals and Design, Mc Graw and Hills, 2005. 
2. B. C. Bhattacharya, Introduction to Chemical Engineering Process Design. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. B. E. Brownell & E M Young, Process Equipment Design. 
2. M. V. Joshi, Process Equipment Design. 
3. H. C. Hesse and J H Ruston, Process Equipment Design. 
4. J. H. Perry, Chemical Engineers Handbook. 
5. P. C. Sharma & D. K. Agarwal, Machine Design. 
6. Relevant Indian Standard Codes. 
Pre-requisite:	Knowledge	in	under	graduate	“Mechanics”	
CH 338 INDUSTRIAL	INSTRUMENTATION	AND	PROCESS	CONTROL 3 credits [3-0-0]
Basic principles, Elements of instruments, Static characteristics, Dynamic characteristics, Errors, Laplace transforms, 
Responses of first & second order instruments and capacitance; Transducers, Temperature measuring instruments 
and there responses. Composition measuring instruments, Measurement of pressure and vacuum: Instruments and 
there responses. Measurement of flow properties: Measurement of displacement; Measurement of Head and Level, 
Biosensors and its applications; Signal conditioning, Transmission, Display and recording devices.; Fundamentals of 
automatic control, Time delay, Feedback control, Stability (Routh array & root locus), Frequency response analysis 
(Bode and Nyquist plots), Design of feedback controllers, Digital control. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. K. Ghosh, Introduction to Instrumentation and Control, Prentice-Hall of India, 2005. 
2. J. Curtis, Process Control Instrumentation Technology, Prentice-Hall of India, 2005
Suggested Readings: 
1. K. Krishnaswamy, Industrial Instrumentation, New Age Publishers, 2003. 
2. G. Stephenanopoulos, Chemical Process Control–An Introduction to Theory & Practice, Prentice-Hall India, 2002. 
3. N. A. Anderson, Instrumentation for Process Measurement and Control, CRC Press, 1997. 
4. W. Dunn, Fundamentals of Industrial instrumentation and control system, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2005. 
CH 370 COMPUTER	AIDED	DESIGN	LABORATORY	-	I 2 credits [0-0-3]
Application of Gauss elimination Technique to solve coupled linear algebraic equations; Application of Newton 
Raphson Technique to solve coupled non-linear algebraic equations; Finding out the roots of an algebraic equation 
using “Interval-having”; Integration of ordinary differential equation using “Explicit Euler integration” algorithm; 
Integration of ordinary differential equation using “Renga-ktta(forth-order)” algorithm; Finding out the Eigen values 
of a matrix; Finding out the Rank of a matrix; Finding out the Inverse of a matrix; Bubble point calculation using 
“Interval-having” algorithm. Bubble point calculation using “Newton-Raphson” Technique; Parameter estimation 
using least-square technique. 
Note:	The	aforesaid	problems	have	to	be	solved	by	writing	codes	in	‘C’	language.	
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
212
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CH 371 HEAT	TRANSFER	FUNDAMENTAL	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
To find out the thermal conductivity of liquids; To find out the thermal conductivity of a metal rod; Find out the Heat 
Transfer Coefficient during drop wise and film wise condensation; Find out the Heat Transfer Coefficient in a vertical 
and a horizontal condenser; To find out the emissivity of a surface; To find out the overall thermal conductance and 
plot the temperature distribution in case of a composite wall; To find out the average heat transfer co-efficient of 
vertical cylinder in natural convection; To find out the Stefan Boltzman’s constant and compare with the theoretical 
value; To find out the relation between insulation thickness and heat loss; To find out the overall heat transfer co-
efficient of a double pipe heat exchanger; To find out the overall heat transfer co-efficient of 1-2 shell & tube heat 
exchanger; Study and operation of a long tube evaporator. 
CH 372 HEAT	TRANSFER	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design of heat exchangers; Shell and Tube; Plate type; Fin tube; Optimization of shell & tube heat exchanger using 
ASPEN PLUS; Optimization of double pipe heat exchanger using ASPEN PLUS; Design and optimization of condenser 
using ASPEN PLUS; Design of multiple effect evaporator system; Design of 1-2 shell & tube condenser; Design of 
jacketed vessel for unsteady state heating state heating of water; Design of stirred tank for unsteady state heating 
and cooling of water; Design of insulation; Study the effect of heat transfer augmentation on the heat transfer surface
CH 373 MASS	TRANSFER	FUNDAMENTAL	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
(a) Determination of diffusivity of acetone in air.; (b) Determination of mass transfer coefficient in an agitated 
vessel; (a) Determination of mass transfer coefficient for steady state surface evaporation of water at different 
temperature; (b) Determination of mass transfer coefficient in a wetted wall column; Determination of T-x-y diagram 
for a binary batch distillation; Verification of Rayleigh equation in a binary batch distillation process; Verification of 
steam distillation equations; Determination of ternary curve for the system acetic acid-water-carbontetrachloride; 
Determination of distribution coefficient of a solute in two immiscible liquids; Solid-Liquid extraction – Soxhlet’s 
experiment; Liquid - liquid extraction in packed bed; Determination of adsorption kinetics and isotherm at solid-liquid 
interface; Determination of the rate of drying in a tray dryer; Estimation of efficiency of the fluidized bed dryer
CH 374 MASS	TRANSFER	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Scope: The course includes process design and mechanical equipment design aspects of a few mass transfer 
equipments: Design of mass transfer equipments; (i) Continuous contractors; (ii) Stage contractors for various mass 
transfer operations viz absorption, leaching and Liquid-Liquid extraction; Design of equipments for combined heat 
and mass transfer operations viz. distillation, drying and humidification; Acquaintance with software in the design of 
various mass transfer equipments. 
CH 375 BIOTECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Different sterilization and inoculation techniques; Preparation of various types of media; Effect of pH, Substrate conc. 
on cell growth; Effect of temperature on cell growth; Determination of volumetric mass transfer co efficient (Kla); 
Determination of mixing time; Determination of size and density of the microbial cells; Determination of thermal 
death rate constant; Preparation of immobilized whole cell system; Substrate degradation, cell growth and product 
formation kinetics using free cells and whole cell immobilization; Treatment of sample waste water in a bioreactor; 
Production of Acetic acid using fermentor. 
CH 376 PROCESS	INSTRUMENTATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
(a) To study the operation of Flow well magnetic level switch to keep constant level in a tank; (b) Operation & working 
of ROTOLARM; (a) Study the principle, Callibration & measurement of P+1 of unknown sample using digital pH meter; 
(b) Circular chart recorder; Study the operation of a turbidity meter & to find out the turbidity of a unknown chalk 
powder from calibration plot; Study the operation of conductivity meter, measuring specific conductance of solutions 
& determining the compositions of unknown solution from calibrated plot; (a) Study the operation of potentiometric 
recorder; (b) Study the operation of a temperature recorder, with strip chart; To study the static & dynamic 
characteristics of bimetallic, vapor pressure, thermometer, optical pyrometer & radiation pyrometer; Study of the 
characteristics of different thermocouples & RTD sensors; Determination of transient response of a vapor pressure 
& bimetallic thermometer. (With & without cover); (a) Determination of Dissolved oxygen using DO meter; (b) 
Determination of gas-fraction in gas-liquid mixture using conducting probe; Concentration analysis of hydrogen using 
gas-liquid chromatograph; Concentration analysis using U-V-visible spectrophotometer & to study its principle of 
action; Particle-size analysis using Malvern-Particle size analyzer & to study its principle of operation; (a) Composition 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
213
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
analysis using digital refractometer & to study the principle of operation; (b) Determination of moisture content using 
IR-moisture balance; (a) Determination of viscosity of slurry using Brook-field viscometer & to study its principle of 
operation; (b) Measurement of Humidity using hair hygrometer & to study its principle; Pressure measurement using 
different pressure gauges, U-tube manometer, pressure transducer and study their characteristics. 
CH 377 FLUID	DYNAMICS	APPLICATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
To determine the pressure drop in a packed bed by Leva’s and Ergun’s equation and verify experimentally; To determine 
the minimum fluidization velocity in a fluidized bed and verify experimentally; To determine the minimum fluidization 
velocity and pressure drop in a tapered fluidized bed; Determination of discharge coefficient with Reynold’s Number 
in case of an orifice meter and a venturi meter; Determination of the minimum fluidization velocity and pressure drop 
in a square bed; Study of D’e laval Centrifuge and to find out its efficiency using it as a Clarifier and Purifier; Study 
and verification of the flow pattern in a Bernoulli’s apparatus; Determination of the mixing and segregation index 
of the given sample of bed materials in a fluidized bed; Determination of the fluidization index of the given sample 
of bed materials in a fluidized bed; Acquaintance of Fluent Soft Ware (Part-I); Acquaintance of Gambit Soft Ware; 
Acquaintance of Fluent Soft Ware for the cylindrical tube. 
CH 414 NANOTECHNOLOGY	IN	CATALYSIS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to nanotechnology, definition, history. What makes the nanoscale so different from the other lengthscales 
by considering the underpinning science (i.e.nanoscience) and some key examples of nanotechnology. Methods of 
synthesis of nanomaterials fabrication-“Top-down” vs. “bottom-up” approaches. Equipment and processes needed to 
fabricate nanodevices and structures. Fundamental understanding of catalysis at nano-scale. Wet chemical synthesis, 
preparation and properties of iron, platinum, gold, cadmium, silver, copper and nickel nano-particles. Synthesis and 
properties of composite nano-particles and coated nano-particles. Characterization of nano particles by Scanning 
probe microscopes (Atomic Force Microscopy, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy), Transmission Electron Microscopy, 
Scanning Electron Microscopy. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Kulkarni, Nanotechnology: Principles and Practices, Capital Publishing Co. 2007. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. Tang, Zikang and Sheng, Ping, Taylor and Francis, Nano science and technology: novel structures and phenomena, 2003. 
2. B. Rogers, S. Pennathur, J. Adams, Taylor and Francis, Nanotechnology: Understanding small systems, 2008. 
CH 415 FLUIDIZATION	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to fluidization, Types of fluidization; Gross behavior of fluidized beds: Minimum fluidization velocity, 
pressure drops in fluidized beds, Bed voidage, TDH, Viscosity and fluidity of beds, Bubble behavior, Bed expansion, 
Distributor design, Simple mathematical treatment; Solid transport: Flow and fluidized solids, Solids transfer, 
Terminal velocity, Particle entrainment and elutriation, Simple calculations; Heat and mass transfer in fluidized beds 
: Heat transfer mechanism, Principles of gas-solid and bed surface transfer, Heat transfer to liquid fluidized systems, 
Generalised correlation for fluidized bed mass transfer and its limitations; Semifluidization: Principles, production 
of various bed parameters, Industrial applications; Design of fluidized bed reactors: Concept of RTD, Basic design 
principles for fluidized bed reactors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Kunii and O. Levenspiel, Fluidization Engineering. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. M. Leva, Fluidization. 
2. J S M Botterill, Fluid bed heat transfer. 
3. Current literature. 
Pre-requisite:	Knowledge	in	under	graduate	“Fluid	Dynamics”	
CH 417 MODERN	SEPARATION	PROCESS	IN	CHEMICAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
An overview: Separation techniques, separation from liquids, separation from gasses and vapors, separation from solids 
and separation methods in bioprocessing: aqueous two-phase separation, Reverse micelle extraction; Membrane 
separations: Definition of a membrane and membrane process such as microfiltration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, 
dialysis, electrodialysis, gas permeation, pervaoration Characterization of membrane such as colloidal morphology, 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
214
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
permeability and permeselectivity. Membrane modules such as plate and frame device, spiral wound, tubular and 
hollow-fiber; Membrane technology in gas separation, biotechnology and in food and biochemical industry; Ion 
Exchange: Ion exchange mechanism, ion exchange media, equilibrium, equipment and design procedure and industrial 
applications; Adsorption as a separation process: Thermodynamics of adsorption: basic relationship, Representation, 
correlation and prediction of single component adsorption equilibrium data and extension to multi-component 
adsorption equilibrium calculation: Isotherm expression of gas adsorption; Adsorption with chemical reaction and 
adsorption with biological growth; Chromatography separation: Fundamentals of HPLC, Chromatographic column, 
Development of gradient-elution separations. Basic principles of capillary electro chromatography, mobile phase 
composition, Stationery phases used in CEC; Solid separation processes: Physical properties of solids, classification 
of powders, particle size distributions, particle density, bulk density and porosity, forces of adhesion. Separation of 
particulates and powders. Wet separation process: Protein recovery, Soya processing and other applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. D. Seader, and E. J. Henley, Separation process principles, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1998. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. Ruthern, M. Douglas, Encyclopedia of separation technology, Wiley-Interscience, 1st edition, 1997. 
2. J. S. Waston, Separation methods for waste and environment, Marcel Dekker, 2000. 
3. N. D. Richard, and T. Patricia, Principle of Chemical separations with environmental applications, 2004. 
4. S. Ahija, Handbook of Bioseparations, Academic Press, 2000. 
5. Hunter, J. Robert, Foundation of Colloid Science, Vol II 2000. 
CH 418 RECENT	SEPARATION	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Adsorption:	Concepts and definitions; adsorbents and their preparation and properties; adsorption isotherms and 
their importance; adsorption types; equipments; adsorption in fixed bed; methods regenerations of adsorbents 
and basic mathematical modeling. Chromatography	separation: Basic principal; different types of chromatographic 
separation techniques and their application. Membrane	separation	technique:	membrane classification, chemistry, 
structure and characteristics and preparation; various membrane separations technology such as microfiltration, 
ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, dialysis, electrodialysis, gas permeation, pervaoration, liquid membrane and their 
applications in chemical, biotechnology, food, and biochemical industry. Reactive	Distillation:	Concept, modeling 
and design aspects and applications. Supercritical	 Fluid	 Extraction:	 Concept, modeling and design aspects and 
applications. Biofiltration:	Concept, modeling and design aspects and applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. K. Dutta, Principles of Mass Transfer and Separation Processes, Prentice Hall of India Private Limited, 2007. 
2. R. W. Baker, Membrane Technology and Applications, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2004. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. M. C. Porter, Handbook of Industrial Membrane Technology, Crest Publishing House, 2005. 
2. M. Mukhopadhyay, Natural extracts using supercritical carbon dioxide, CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, Florida, USA, 2000. 
3. R. G. Harrison, P. W. Todd, R. Scott, Bioseparations Science and Engineering, Oxford University Press. 
4. J. E. Bailey and D. V. Ollis, Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, Mc-Graw Hill, 1986
5. J. G. S. Marcano and T. T. Tsotsis, Catalytic membranes and membrane reactor, John Wiley, 2002. 
CH 419 COMPUTATIONAL	FLUID	DYNAMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to CFD; Basic Concepts and Equations of Fluid Dynamics; Basic Concepts, Continuum model of a 
fluid, Kinematics, Steady and unsteady flow, Description of fluid motion by Lagrangian method, Eulerian method. 
Acceleration of a fluid particle, Forces acting on a fluid particle, Laws governing fluid motion, derivation of governing 
equation, continuity equation, Navier Stokes equation and its derivation, Energy equation, Chemical reacting flows. 
Equations of motion in conservation and vector forms. Non-dimensional form of equations, equations in orthogonal 
and curvilinear coordinates; Simplified forms of equations: Euler’s equation, Velocity potential equation; Reynold’s 
equation for turbulent flow: Averaging procedure, Mass weighted averaging, Reynold’s form of continuity equation, 
Reynold’s form of momentum equation, Reynold’s form of energy equation, Boundary layer equations; Momentum 
integral equations, Vorticity transport equations, Conservative and body force fields; Turbulence Modeling Large 
Eddy Simulation; Governing equations, Models of turbulence, Large eddy simulation and detached eddy simulation; 
Mathematical behaviour of Governing equations in CFD; Mathematical preliminaries; Finite difference method, 
Finite volume method; Simulation of Incompressible Flow using Lattice-Boltzmann Method; Introduction; Lattice Gas 
method; Lattice-Boltzmann Method; CFD for Process Equipment Application; Modeling of some physical phenomena 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
215
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
encountered in CPI; Examples of application of CFD to CPI, Review of status of CFD for CPI applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. A. J. Fletcher and C. A. Fletcher, Computational Techniques for Fluid Dynamics – I, Springler, 2nd edition, 1996. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. R. Lohner, Applied computational fluid dynamic Technique, John Wiley & Sons, 2001
2. D. A. Handerson, Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. 
3. T. K. Bose, Numerical Fluid Dynamics. 
Pre-requisite:	Knowledge	in	under	graduate	“Fluid	dynamics”
Pre-requisite:	Knowledge	in	under	graduate	“Basic	chemistry”
CH 421 REACTION	KINETICS	AND	CATALYSIS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Homogeneous Reactions: Classifications of reactions, definition of reaction rate, variables affecting the rate, order 
of reaction and its determination, theoretical study of reaction rates-The Arrhenious relationship, Collision theory 
and activated complex theory, molecularity; interpretation of kinetic data for batch and flow systems, integral and 
differential methods of analysis; design of batch, semi-batch and flow (Tubular & Tank) reactors for single ideal 
reactions, reactions in series and parallel and mixed reactions under isothermal operations; design of adiabatic 
and non-isothermal reactors; introduction to enzyme kinetics. Heterogeneous reactions: examples; classification of 
catalysts, general procedure for manufacture of catalysts, catalytic promoters and poisons, reactions catalyzed by 
solid catalysts; engineering properties of catalysts and their determination, general mechanism of catalytic reactions, 
adsorption isotherms; transport processes in reactions catalyzed by solids; design of heterogeneous catalytic reactors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. O. Levenspiel, Chemical Reaction Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, 1999. 
2. H. S. Fogler, Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, Prentice Hall of India Private Limited, 1999
Suggested Reading: 
1. G. F. Froment and K. B. Bischoff, Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, John Wiley, 2001. 
2. J M Smith, Chemical Engineering Kinetics, Mcgraw & Hills, 1981. 
CH 422 SIMULATION,	MODELLING	AND	OPTIMISATION	OF	CHEMICAL	PROCESS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Simulation: Techniques of digital simulation – Information flow, from process to information flow diagram, From 
information flow diagram to numerical form, Recycles, Calculation of a recycle set, etc; Digital simulation of C. S. T. 
R. s in series, non-isothermal C. S. T. R, Binary distillation column, Batch reactor, Computer aided design; Modeling: 
Fundamentals of mathematical models and formulation – Continuity equation, Equation of motion, Transport 
equations, Energy equation, Equations of state, Equilibrium, Chemical kinetics and their applications; Lumped and 
distributed parameter models – Fluid systems, C. S. T. R. (single, series, isothermal, constant hold up, variable hold up, 
gas phase pressurized and non-isothermal), Single component vaporizer, Multi-component flash drum, Batch reactor, 
Reactor with mass transfer, Ideal binary distillation column, Batch distillation, Heat exchanger, etc; Optimization: 
Single variable optimization (analytical, dichotomous search, fibonacci, golden section, regula falsi), Multivariable 
optimization (analytical, geometric programming, linear programming), Convergence methods (Newton’s methods, 
direct substitution, Wegstein’s method). 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. L. Luyben, Process Modelling, Simulation and Control for Chemical Engineers, McGraw Hill, 1990. 
Suggested Readings: 
1. B. V. Babu, Process Plant Simulation, Oxford University Press, 2004. 
2. S. S. Rao, Engineering Optimization: Theory and practice, New Age Publishers, 1999. 
3. A. Hussain and K. Gangaiah, Optimisation Techniques for Chemical Engineers, Macmillan, 2001. 
4. B. W. Bequette, Process Control: Modeling, Design and Simulation. Prentice-Hall India, 2006. 
CH 425 ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Importance of environment for mankind, Damages due to environmental pollution; Air pollution: Introduction, 
Composition of air and nature of air pollution, Classification of pollutants and their nature, Sources of air pollutants 
and their effects; Meteorological factors influencing air pollution, Methods of estimation of various types of 
pollutants in air, Air pollution problem in few typical chemical industries, Approaches to air pollution control, Control 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
216
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
equipment for particulate emissions and gaseous pollutants, Pollution from mobile sources, Air quality criteria and 
standards; Water pollution: Waste water treatment – evaluation, classification of wastes, Control of water pollution, 
Characterisation of waste waters; Methods and equipment – preliminary treatment and disposal, Treatment of 
industrial wastes from a few typical chemical industries, Standards. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. L. Davis and D. A. Cornwell, Introduction to Environmental Engineering, Tata McGraw & Hills, 2007
Suggested Reading: 
1. L. K. Wang, Air pollution control Engineering, Humana Press Inc., U. S.; 2Rev Ed edition, 2004 
2. R. Weiner and R. Matthews, Environmental Engineering, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003. 
CH 426 COAL	PROCESSING	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Role of coal in the overall energy situation; Recent advances in coal preparation methods including fine coal treatment; 
Simulation and modeling of coal beneficiation circuits; Thermodynamics and kinetics of coal gasification reactions; 
Fluidized bed coal gasification processes; Combined cycle power generation; Coal liquefaction: Various methods, 
kinetics of solvent extraction, catalytic hydrogenation and other liquefaction processes; Concept of coal refinery and 
coalplex; Environmental impact analysis of coal utilization methods such as carbonization, gasification, etc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. L. Lowary, Chemistry of Coal Utilization, Vol. I & Vol. II. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. Mangold, Liquefaction and Gasefication of Coal. 
2. Wilson and Wales, Coal, Coke and Coal Chemicals. 
CH 427 COLLOID	AND	INTERFACIAL	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
General introduction of colloids, interfaces, surfactants, and micellization.; Intermolecular forces, Van der Waals 
forces (Keesom, Debye, and London interactions), Colloidal systems and colloidal stability (van der Waals attraction 
and potential energy curves), Brownian motion and Brownian flocculation. Surface and interfacial tension and surface 
free energy, Surface tension for curved interfaces, Surface excess and Gibbs equation. Theory of surface tension and 
contact angle, and wetting. Thermodynamics of interfaces, thermodynamics of micelle and mixed micellar formation. 
Electrical phenomena at interfaces (Electrokinetic phenomena, Electrical double layer). Emulsion and micro-
emulsion.; Application: General applications, Enhanced petroleum recovery, super hydrophobic and self cleaning 
surfaces, novel fabrication of nanostructured particles. Measurement techniques of surface tension, Contact angle, 
Zetapotential, Particle size. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. C. Hiemenz, and R. Rajagopalan, Principle of colloid and surface chemistry, 3rd edition, Mercel Dekher, N. Y. 1997. 
2. D. J. Shaw, Colloid & Surface Chemistry, Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, 1992. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. M. J. Rosen, Surfactants and Interfacial Phenomena, Wiley-Interscience Publication, New York, 2004. 
2. Adamson, A. W. Gast, A. P. Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1997. 
3. J. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Academic Press, New York, 1992. 
Pre-requisite:	Knowledge	in	under	graduate	“Basic	chemistry”	
CH 428 DISASTER	MANAGEMENT	IN	CHEMICAL	INDUSTRIES 3 credits [3-0-0]
General aspects of industrial disaster: Due to fire, explosion, toxicity and radiation; Chemical hazards: Classification 
of chemical hazards, Chemical as cause of occupational diseases – dust, fumes, gases and vapours; Hazard analysis 
and health management; Engineering control of chemical plant hazards – Plant layout, ventilation and lighting, 
Pressure vessels, Storage, Handling, Transportation, Electrical systems, Instrumentation; Emergency planning, 
Personal protective devices, Maintenance procedure; Emergency safety and laboratory safety; Legal aspects of safety, 
Management information system and its application in monitoring disaster, safety and health; Hazop Analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. H. Tawcatt & W S Wood, Safety and Accident Prevention in Chemical Operations. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
217
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Suggested Reading: 
1. R. V. Betrabet and T. P. S. Rajan in CHEMTECH-I, Safety in Chemical Industry, Chemical Engineering Development Centre, 
Madras, 1975. 
2. Wells, Safety in Process Plant Design. 
3. Less, P. Frank, Loss Prevention in Process Industries. 
4. J. Lolb & S. Roy Sterm, Product Safety and Liability. 
CH 432 OPTIMIZATION	TECHNIQUES	IN	PROCESS	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Optimal problem formulation, Single variable optimization algorithms including interval halving; golden section 
search; Newton-Raphson method; bisection method; root finding using optimization techniques, Multi variable 
optimization algorithms including simplex search method; Cauchy’s steepest descent method; Levenberg Marquardt’s 
method, constrained optimization algorithms including Khun-Tucker conditions, transformation methods; direct 
search methods; liberalized search techniques; feasible direction method, Specialized algorithms including Integer 
programming; geometric programming. Nontraditional optimization technique like simulated annealing. Application 
of the aforesaid techniques in Chemical Engineering designs, like optimum insulation thickness, shell and tube heat 
exchanger design.; Scope & Objective: Optimization has become a part of computer aided design activities where 
the goal is not only to achieve a feasible design but also a design objective. The course provides basic knowledge 
of deterministic algorithms as well as algorithms which are stochastic in nature with probabilistic transition rules, 
new methods in computational intelligence or ‘soft computing’ inspired by evolutionary processes in nature, such 
as genetic algorithms. The course consists of lectures and a project component, which includes both model building 
and programming. This course also provides an opportunity to get conversant with optimization toolbox of MATLAB 
by the Mathworks, Inc. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. T. F. Edgar, D. M. Himmelblau, Optimization of Chemical Processes, Mcgraw-Hill College Division, 1987. 
Suggested Readings: 
1. B. V. Babu, Process Plant Simulation, OUP, India, 2004. 
2. S. S. Rao, Engineering Optimization Theory & Practice, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1996. 
CH 434 PROJECT ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to the subject; Development	 and	 implementation	 of	 the	 project	 in	 the	 following	 steps:	 Initial 
conception; Preliminary design ideas and rough evaluation of market and economics; Procuring data for final design; 
Final economic evaluation and decision set up the project; Detailed design; Procurement; Construction work; Start 
up and trail runs; Commercial production; Safety consideration; Process	Design;	Selection of process cycle; Chemical 
process considerations; Qualitative block type process flow sheet; Material balance and energy balance; Selection 
of process equipment and its computer aided design using Fortran language to various engineering problems; Plant 
layout: Planning layout and methods of layout planning; Economic	evaluation	of	 the	project;	Capital Cost; Plant 
cost estimating; Total product cost: Manufacturing cost; Raw material cost; Miscellaneous cost (labour cost, repair 
cost and maintenance cost); Depreciation; Economic Analysis: Net earning profitability analysis; Introduction to 
optimization. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Peters – Timmerham (International Editions), Plant Design and Economics for Chemical Engineers, McGraw Hill Book Co. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. F. C. Viberandt and C. E. Dryden (International Students Editions), Chemical Engineering Plant Design, McGraw Hill Book Co. 
2. B. S. Golfried, Theory and Problems of Programming with Fortran: Schaum’s Outline Series, Tata McGraw Hill. 
CH 439 NON-TRADITIONAL	AND	TRADITIONAL	OPTIMIZATION	TECHNIQUES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Optimal problem formulation, Single variable optimization algorithms, Multi variable optimization algorithms 
including simplex search method; Cauchy’s steepest descent method; Levenberg Marquardt’s method, constrained 
optimization algorithms including Khun-Tucker conditions, transformation methods; direct search methods; 
liberalized search techniques; feasible direction method, Specialized algorithms including Integer programming; 
geometric programming. Nontraditional optimization techniques including simulated annealing, genetic algorithms 
(GA), introduction to multi objective optimization problems. Application of all the aforesaid techniques with the 
help of the frequently used benchmark functions for engineering design.; Scope & Objective: ; Optimization has 
become a part of computer aided design activities where the goal is not only to achieve a feasible design but also a 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
218
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
design objective. The course provides basic knowledge of deterministic algorithms as well as algorithms which are 
stochastic in nature with probabilistic transition rules, new methods in computational intelligence or ‘soft computing’ 
inspired by evolutionary processes in nature, such as genetic algorithms. The course consists of lectures and a project 
component, which includes both model building and programming. This course also provides an opportunity to get 
conversant with optimization toolbox of MATLAB by the Mathworks, Inc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. S. Rao, Engineering Optimization Theory & Practice, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1996. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. K. Deb, Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms, John Wiley Sons, 2001. 
2. B. V. Babu, Process Plant Simulation, OUP, India, 2004. 
3. T. F. Edgar, D. M. Himmelblau, Optimization of Chemical Processes, Mcgraw-Hill College Division, 1987. 
CH 470 PROCESS	SIMULATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Steady state simulation of Heat Exchanger using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; Steady state simulation of a CSTR using ASPEN 
PLUS/ HYSYS; Steady state simulation of Flash vessel using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; Steady state simulation of Distillation 
Column using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; Steady state simulation of an Absorption column using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; 
Dynamic simulation of Heat Exchanger using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; Dynamic simulation of a CSTR using ASPEN PLUS/ 
HYSYS; Dynamic simulation of Flash vessel using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; Dynamic simulation of Distillation Column using 
ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS; Dynamic simulation of an Absorption column using ASPEN PLUS/ HYSYS
CH 471 CHEMICAL	REACTION	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study and operation of a packed bed reactor; Study and operation of a batch reactor; Study and operation of a 
CSTR; Study and operation of a plug flow reactor; Study and operation of a cascade CSTR; Study and operation of an 
adiabatic batch reactor; Study and operation Trickle bed reactor; Study and operation Condensation polymerization 
reactor; Study and operation Emulsion polymerization reactor; RTD study in a CSTR; RTD study in a plug flow reactor; 
Study and operation of a coiled tubular reactor
CH 473 COMPUTER	AIDED	DESIGN	LABORATORY	-	II 2 credits [0-0-3]
Finding out matrix addition, multiplication, inversion, rank, Eigen values using MATLAB simulator.; Plotting set of 
data using MATLAB; Parameter estimation using least-square technique using MATLAB; Writing ‘m’ files in MATLAB 
platform to solve coupled linear algebraic equations using Gauss elimination method; Writing ‘m’ files in MATLAB 
platform to solve non-linear algebraic equations using Newton Raphson Technique; Writing ‘m’ files in MATLAB 
platform to control level in a tank using P/PI/PID controller; Finding out response of a first and second order system 
(transfer function) using ‘simulink’; Simulation of a stirred tank reactor (both open loop and closed loop) using 
‘simulink’; Simulation of steady Flow of air through a cylindrical tube using GAMBIT and FLUENT; Simulation of steady 
state fluid flow and heat transfer processes using GAMBIT and FLUENT when liquid water flows through a cylindrical 
tube; Simulation of steady Flow of air through a ‘T’ joint using GAMBIT and FLUENT. 
CH 475 PROCESS	DYNAMICS	&	CONTROL	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Transient response to single tank system with storage & Flow to (a) step change (b) impulse change in put; Transient 
response of non interacting system in series; Transient response of interacting system in series; Study the operation of 
ON-OFF electronic temperature controller & determination of its performance to control the temperature of a system 
having capacity to store thermal energy; Study the principle of operation & working of pneumatic servo system with 
various input functions; Transient response of a CSTR System to step change; Controlling a batch reactor using digital 
PID controller; Study the dynamics of parallel & counter flow shell & tube heat exchanger; Controlling of Parallel Flow 
& counter flow STHE using digital PI controller to have desired output; Dynamics characteristics of mercury & water 
manometers; Study of control value characteristics; Study the performance of cascade control system & to maintain 
desired level in a tank, with flow; Study the dynamics of bubble cap distillation column; Control of a bubble cap 
distillation column using digital PID controller; Study of effect of PID controller on pressure process trainer. 
Department of Chemical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
219
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	CERAMIC	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
CR 211 Unit Operations in Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 212 Ceramic Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 219 Introduction to Ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 223 Materials Thermodynamics 3-0-0 3
CR 226 Pollution & Waste Management in Ceramic Industry 3-0-0 3
CR 230 Science of Ceramic Materials 3-1-0 4
CR 231 Properties of Ceramic Raw Materials 3-1-0 4
CR 244 Introduction to Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3
CR 248 Fuels, Furnace and Stoichiometry 3-0-0 3
CR 249 Materials Science & Engineering 3-0-0 3
CR 271 Raw Materials Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 272 Drawing of Refractory Lining and Joints 0-0-3 2
CR 273 Ceramic Workshop 0-0-3 2
CR 274 Ceramic Fabrication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 310 Refractories or Refractory 3-0-0 3
CR 320 Science of Sintering 3-1-0 4
CR 322 Glass Technology 3-0-0 3
CR 325 Computational Materials Science 3-0-0 3
CR 327 Interface Science & Sol-Gel Processing 3-1-0 4
CR 330 Fuel Cell & Batteries 3-1-0 4
CR 331 Whiteware Technology 3-0-0 3
CR 333 Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow 3-1-0 4
CR 335 Instrumental Characterization 3-1-0 4
CR 336 Cement Technology 3-1-0 4
CR 339 Ceramics in Electronic Applications 3-0-0 3
CR 341 Physical Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 344 Microstructural Design in Ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 346 Nanoceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 348 Introduction to Engineering Ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 370 RefractoriesTechnology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 371 High Temperature Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 372 Glass Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 373 Whiteware Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 374 Ceramic Product Development Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 375 Ceramic Characterization Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 376 Cement Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 377 Ceramic Equipment Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CR 391 Special Topic in Ceramic Engineering – I 3/4
CR 392 Special Topic in Ceramic Engineering – II 3/4
CR 393 Special Laboratory in Ceramic Engg – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
220
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CR 394 Special Laboratory in Ceramic Engg – II 0-0-3 2
CR 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
CR 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
CR 411 Advanced Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 415 Bio-ceramics 3-0-0 3
CR 416 Application of Refractories 3-1-0 4
CR 417 Unshaped Refractories 3-1-0 4
CR 418 Nanomaterials 3-0-0 3
CR 419 Biomaterials for Artificial Implants 3-0-0 3
CR 420 Glass Ceramic Technology 3-1-0 4
CR 421 Glasses for Advanced Technical Applications 3-1-0 4
CR 422 Ceramic Equipment Design 3-0-0 3
CR 424 Composite Materials 3-0-0 3
CR 426 Tribology of Materials 3-0-0 3
CR 433 Sensor Technology 3-0-0 3
CR 435 Functional Materials & Devices 3-0-0 3
CR 441 Electrical and Magnetic Ceramics 3-1-0 4
CR 445 Application of Phase Diagrams 3-1-0 4
CR 446 Thin Film and Coatings 3-0-0 3
CR 471 Advanced Ceramics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech.	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech.	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
CR 211 UNIT	OPERATIONS	IN	PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Communition: different type of communition equipment and theory of size reduction. Efficiency and particle size, size 
reduction and size distribution. Bulk solid transport and mixing. Mixing mechanism and mixedness. Mixing equipment 
types and operation. Consistency, particle mechanics and deformation behaviour of powders, slurries and paste. 
Particle classification-screening technique, cyclone separators, centrifuge. Filtration and washing process. Plastic 
forming, extrusion mechanics, control of types and operations. Basic concept of drying, costs involved in drying of 
ceramic, drying mechanisms in particulate systems, characterization of drier operations, drier controls, drying defects 
and drying shrinkage, advanced drying technologies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. L. McCabe, J. C. Smith and P. Harriot, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th Ed. McGraw-Hill Professional 2005. 
2. J. S. Reed, Introduction to the Principles of Ceramic Processing, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons. 1995. 
3. D. A. Brosan and G. C. Robinson, Introduction to Drying of Ceramics: with laboratory exercises, NetLibrary, Incorporated, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. M. Gaudin, Principles of Mineral Dressing, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi 2003. 
2. M. N. Rahaman, Ceramic Processing, CRC Press, 2003
CR 212 CERAMIC PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Significance of different ceramic processing operations. Powder synthesis, Colloidal and sol-gel processing. Powder 
characterization: Particle size, size distribution, Shape, Surface Area, Porosity, Chemical and Phase composition. 
Preparation of bodies: Blending of different weight fractions and size ratios, use of binders, types of binders; clay, 
molecular binder, film forming binders. Plasticizers, Foaming and antifoaming agents, granulation and spray drying. 
Dry pressing, Semi-dry pressing, Slip casting, Extrusion, Nontraditional shape forming: Gel casting, Tape casting, 
Freeze Casting, Injection moulding, Electro-phoretic deposition, Hot -pressing, Iso-static pressing; porosity, pore 
structure, drying defects; High temperature processing. . 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
221
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. S. Reed, Introduction to the Principles of Ceramic Processing, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons. 1995. 
2. M. N. Rahaman, Ceramic Processing and Sintering, 2nd Ed, CRC Press, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. W. Richerson, Modern Ceramic Engineering: Properties, Processing, and Use in Design, 3rd ed, CRC Press, 2005
2. D. A. Brosan and G. C. Robinson, Introduction to Drying of Ceramics: with laboratory exercises, Net Library, Incorporated, 2003. 
3. H. Mehrer, Diffusion in Solids: Fundamentals, Methods, Materials, Diffusion-Controlled Processes, Springer, 2007. 
CR 219 INTRODUCTION	TO	CERAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, definition and scope of ceramics. Historical perspective, classification, Ceramics and Civilization; 
Traditional ceramics: An overview, history, compositions, manufacturing and application of refractories, whitewares 
and heavyclay wares, glass, cement, ceramic coatings The development of modern ceramic technology, processing 
of ceramic powders, shape forming operations: pressing, slip casting, isostatic pressing, injection moulding, sheet 
forming, MLC technology. Firing of ceramics: kiln design and conveyor technology, sintering and densification, hot 
pressing and hot isostatic pressing. Sol –gel processing and monolithic ceramics. Basic glass processing, container 
glass, fibre glass, speciality glass products, glass- ceramics, glass microspheres, laminated glass, photochrome and 
photo sensitive glass Modern / high tech ceramics, high tech functions and functional ceramics, structural ceramics, 
electrical and electronic ceramics, chemical and nuclear ceramics, bio-ceramics, ceramic membranes, artificial gems 
and ceramics, aerospace and other strategic applications of ceramics, advanced ceramic processing techniques. 
Energy and pollution controls. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed. John Wiley & Sons, Singapore, 1991. 
2. D. W. Richardson, B. J. Dunbar, The Magic of Ceramics, American Ceramic Society, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. B. Wachtman Jr., Ceramic Innovations in the 20th Century, American Ceramic Society, 1999. 
CR 223 MATERIALS	THERMODYNAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, concept of states, systems equilibrium. Equation of states, extensive and intensive properties 
homogeneous and heterogeneous systems. Internal energy, heat capacity, enthalpy, isothermal, and adiabatic 
processes; The Second law of thermodynamics, entropy, enthalpy concepts, degree of reversibility and irreversibility, 
criteria of equilibrium, auxiliary functions, combined statements, Maxwell’s relations, transformation formula, 
Gibbs-Helmoltz equation; Concept of Third law, temperature dependence of entropy, statistical interpretation of 
entropy, Debye and Einstein concept of heat capacity, relation between Cp and Cv; Fugacity, activity, equilibrium 
constant, homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibria. Ellingham-Richardson diagrams and applications; Solution 
thermodynamics, partial molal quantities, ideal and non-ideal solutions, Henry’s law, Gibbs - Duhem equation, 
regular solution, quasi-chemical approach to solution; Statistical thermodynamics. Change of standard state. Phase 
equilibrium and phase rule. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. R. Gaskell,  Introduction to the Thermodynamics of Materials, Taylor & Francis, 2003. 
2. J. M. Smith, H. C. V. Ness, and M. M. Abbott, Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, 7th Ed, McGraw-Hill 
Professional, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. Ghosh, Textbook of Materials and Metallurgical Thermodynamics, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd, 2004
CR 226 Pollution	&	Waste	Management	in	Ceramic	Industry 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pollution and waste generation in ceramic and related industries. Kiln and stack emissions, pollution from service units 
like air compressor, laboratories, gas producers, storage facilities, waste water treatment plant etc; Environmental 
and health impacts of pollutants and solid wastes. Indian environmental laws and WHO’s norms. Pollution reduction 
measures in ceramic industries: air, sound, solid waste, water. Nature and type of industrial waste useful for ceramic 
industries. Use of industrial wastes in ceramic industries Utilization of fly ash, rice husk, BF slag in the production of 
traditional, advanced ceramics. Utilization of red mud and recovery of metals from red mud. Application of zeolite 
in environment (catalytic effect, water purification). Clay as an absorbent of toxic pollutant; Recycling of industrial 
waste. Fluorine contamination in alumina Industry disposal and recovery of refractory materials. Ceramics for water 
and air purification. Glass & glass ceramics in nuclear waste management 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
222
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. V. Rao, A Text Book of Environmental Engineering, Prentice Hall of India Private Limited, 2002. 
2. C. C. Herman (Editor), S. Marra (Editor), D. R. Spearing (Editor), L. Vance (Editor) and J. D. Vienna (Editor), Environmental Issues 
and Waste Management Technologies XI, Ceramic Transactions, Volume 176. John Wiley & Sons, edition, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. K. Sundaram, D. R. Spearing, and J. D. Vienna, Environmental Issues and Waste Management Technology in the Ceramic and 
Nuclear Industries VIII, Ceramic Transactions, Volume 143, The American Ceramic Society, 2002. 
2. S. M. Khopkar, Environmental Pollution: Monitoring and Control, New Age International (P) Ltd, 2004. 
CR 230 SCIENCE	OF	CERAMIC	MATERIALS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Crystal lattice, crystal class and crystal system. Some Real Structures: Rock Salt, Zinc Blende, Antifluorite, Rutile, 
Perovskite, Spinels, Wurtzite etc. Crystal imperfections: types and notations, Solid solutions, defects and dislocations. 
Vitreous state, glasses and structural models; Condensed phase rule and single component system: Silica, Zirconia 
and Carbon etc. Two component systems and Lever rule. Free energy-composition diagrams, phase stability, solid 
solutions, Eutectic and Eutectoid, Peritectic reaction, congruently and incongruentlymelting compound. Some 
important binary ceramic systems SiO2-Al2O3, MgO-Al2O3, CaO-SiO2, CaO-ZrO2, MgO-SiO2, BaO-TiO2, CaO-Al2O3, CaO-
MgO; Ternary System: Representation of composition on triangle, proof of the basis, Temperature, Solid models, Iso-
thermal Sections, Base projection method. Ternary systems with binary and ternary Eutectic, Peritectic, congruently 
and incongruently melting compounds. Some important ternary ceramic systems: CaO-SiO2-Al2O3, MgO-SiO2-Al2O3, 
CaO-MgO-SiO2. Brief idea on the application of real system binary, ternary and quaternary phase diagrams in the 
processing and process control of different ceramic materials. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed. John Wiley & Sons, Singapore, 1991. 
2. L. V. Azaroff, Introduction to Solids, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd, 1977. 
3. F. A. Hummel, Introduction to Phase Equilibrium in Ceramic Systems, First Edition, CRC Press, 1984. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th Ed. John Wiley & Sons Pvt. Ltd, 2004. 
2. 2. G. Smith, R. S. Roth, T. Negas and L. P. Cook, Phase Diagrams for Ceramists, American Ceramic Society, 1983
CR 231 PROPERTIES	OF	CERAMIC	RAW	MATERIALS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Classification of raw materials, beneficiation of raw materials, importance, use and limitations of natural raw materials: 
Bauxite, Limestone, Chromite, Magnesite, Dolomite, Fluorite, Graphite, Gypsum, Haematite, Kaolinite, Fireclay, Ball 
clay, Montmorillonite, Magnetite, Nepheline Syenite, Microcline, Feldspars (soda, potash, lime), Pyrophyllite, Quartz, 
Quartzite, Sillimanite, Kyanite, Andalusite, Talc, Wollastonite, Zircon, Beryl, Mica, Vermicullite, Silica sand etc; Brief 
idea on processing of synthetic raw materials: Bayer process, Calcined Alumina, Tabular Alumina, FusedAlumina, Sea-
water Magnesia, ZirconandZirconia, Titania, Magnesio-AluminateSpinel, FumedSilicaetc. The application areas and 
limitations of synthetic raw materials; Effect of heat on different raw materials with reference to phase transformation, 
thermal expansion, melting, decomposition behaviour, compound formation, stabilization. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. E. Worrall Clays and Ceramic Raw Materials, 2nd edition, Springer, 1986. 
2. W. L. McCabe, J. C. Smith and P. Harriot, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th Ed. McGraw-Hill Professional 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. Segal, Chemical Synthesis of Advanced Ceramic Materials, CambridgeUniversity Press, 1991. 
CR 244 INTRODUCTION	TO	ENGINEERING	MATERIALS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Atomic Structure and Bonding. Crystal Structure, crystal class and crystal geometry: Polymorphism; crystal structure 
analysis, crystalline Imperfections: point defect and line defects. Diffusions in Solids and phase transformations, 
thermal and athermal transformations. Solid solutions. Solidification: Solidification of metals and single crystals; 
Brief idea of crystal growth techniques; Mechanical Properties of Metals: Stress and strain, hardness. Strengthening; 
Recovery and recrystallization; Strength, Fracture toughness, creep and fatigue. Engineering alloys: Fe-C phase 
diagram; Heat treatment of steel; Classification of steel; Polymeric Materials: Basic structure– simple and network 
molecules; Physical states and transitions; Plasticization; Crystallinity; Polymerization, Degradation and stabilization 
of polymers, Vulcanization of rubber. Application of polymers, conducting polymers; Composite Materials: Definition; 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
223
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Types of composites, properties and applications; strength and toughness in composites, layered composites, 
particulate and fibre reinforced composites; Electrical, Magnetic and Optical Properties of Materials: Classification, 
Electrical and electronic conduction, polarization, dielectric properties, application. BCS theory and Superconducting 
Materials. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. F. Smith, Foundations of Materials Science and Engineering, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2003. 
2. V. Raghavan, Materials Science and Engineering, 4th Ed, Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. F. Shackelford and M. Meier, Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers, Prentice Hall PTR, 2005. 
2. F. Rodrigues, C. Cohen, C. K. Ober and L. A. Archer, Principles of Polymer System, 5th Ed. Taylor & Francis, 2003. 
CR 248 FUELS,	FURNACES	AND	STOICHIOMETRY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Classification of natural fuels, Brief discussion on alternate and renewable energy sources, winning and washing 
of coal, classification of coal, proximate and ultimate analysis of coal. Storage of coal and spontaneous ignition. 
Carbonization and manufacture of coke, caking index and coke quality. Coking process, cokeoven and byproducts; 
Origin, refining and distillation of crude petroleum, properties of liquid fuel – flash point, fire point, cloud point and 
pour point. Generation of producer gas, water gas, liquidified petroleum gas (LPG), gasifiers and gas analysis; Different 
types of industrial furnaces; batch and continuous furnaces and kilns, design and operation of different industrial 
furnaces and kilns, saggers, Fast firing technology, microwave furnaces. Fuel economy and thermal efficiency in the 
operation of furnaces; Sankey diagram, Regenerators and recuperators. Stack emission, chimney design, combustion 
calculation and environmental pollution, Measurement of temperature in furnaces- pyrometric cones, rings and 
bars and temperature controller; Combustion calculations of fuels; Material balance in ceramic processes. Batch and 
recipe calculation for refractories, glass, whitewares and cement. Energy Balance and flame temperature calculations. 
Combined material and energy balances. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. M. Felder and R. W. Rousseau, Elementary Principles of Chemical Processes, Third Edition, Wiley., 2004. 
2. S. Sarkar, Fuels and Combustion, Orient Longman, Mumbai, 2nd Ed, 1990. 
3. G. B. Remmy Jr., Firing of Ceramics, World Scientific, 1994. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. Trinks and M. H. Macwhinney, A. Shannon, R. J. Reed and J. R. Garvey, Industrial Furnaces, 6th Ed., Wiley-Interscience, 2003. 
2. R. A. Eppler and D. R. Eppler, Glazes and Ceramic Coatings, American Ceramic Society, 2000. 
3. D. R. Dinger, Particle Calculations for Ceramists, Dinger Ceramic Consulting Services, Clemson, US, 2001
CR 249 Materials Science and Engineering 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to materials science and engineering, Bonding and structure of materials, Crystal Structure and 
Crystal Geometry: Space lattice; Unit cells; Crystal systems; Bravis lattices; Miller indices; Volume, planar and linear 
density unit cell calculations; Polymorphism; Crystal structure analysis, Crystalline Imperfections, defect chemistry, 
diffusions in Solids; Phase equilibrium and transformation, Solidification: Solidification of metals and single crystals; 
Solid solutions Physical properties of materials, Mechanical properties of materials, Electrical and semiconducting 
properties of materials, Dielectric and Magnetic properties of materials, Optical and thermal behaviour of materials, 
piezolectric and electro optic behaviour of materials, Superconducting materials, electrochemical properties etc; 
Engineering materials: alloys and inter metallics, ceramic materials, glasses, polymers and composites etc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. 1.  W. F. Smith, Foundations of Materials Science and Engineering, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2003. 
2. 2.  V. Raghavan, Materials Science and Engineering, 4th Ed, Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. H. V. Vlack, Elements ofMaterials Science and Engineering, 6th Edition, Prentice Hall, 1989
2. J. F. Shackelford and M. Meier, Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers, Prentice Hall PTR, 2005. 
CR 271 RAW	MATERIALS	ANALYSIS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of Ca+2 and Mg+2 in water by EDTA method; Chemical analysis of limestone/dolomite; Complete analysis 
of Portland cement; Chemical analysis clay/magnesite/bauxite following Na2CO3/NaOH fusion; Determination of silica 
in quartz by HF treatment; Determination of very low-alkali content by flame photometer; Quantitative chemical 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
224
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
analysis of Alumino-Silicate brick; Chemical analysis of ordinary soda-lime-silicate glass; Quantitative chemical 
analysis of tri-axial porcelain body; Chemical analysis of glaze frit. 
CR 272 DRAWING	OF	REFRACTORY	LINING	&	JOINTS 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study and drawing of different refractory bricks of standard shape; Study and drawing of non-standard shapes of 
refractory bricks; Drawing of brick wall and brick joints; Drawing of different parts of rotary kiln; Drawing of converter; 
Drawing of ladle; Drawing of Blast Furnace Trough Lining; Drawing of slide plates refractories; Drawing of sub entry 
nozzle; Drawing of monoblock stopper; Chimney calculation and drawing of chimney. 
CR 273 CERAMIC WORKSHOP 2 credits [0-0-3]
Sieve analysis and particle size distribution of milled product; Verification of Rittinger’s Crushing Law and determination 
of crushing efficiency of a Jaw Crusher; Validation of Bond’s Law and determination of crushing efficiency of a Roller 
Crusher; Determination of angle of nip and maximum feed size for a Roll Crusher; Determination of critical speed 
and crushing rate of a Ball Mill; Study of Filter Press and preparation of filter cake; Determination of filtration rate of 
ceramic slurry; Study and operation of de-airing Pug Mill and preparation of extruded body; Operation of Counter 
Current Mixer and determination of mix consistency; Study and operation of Hydraulic Press and determination of 
bulk density. 
CR 274 Ceramic	Fabrication	Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of particle size and particle size distribution by Andreasen Pipette and Centrifuge; Determination of 
specific surface area of ceramic powder; Determination of intra-particle porosity of ceramic powder; Effect of additives 
on the rheology of oxide ceramic slurries; Preparation of slurry for slip casting of oxide ceramics and study of casting 
process; Determination of zeta potential and iso-electric point of ceramic slurry; Study of compaction behaviour of 
powder during dry pressing; Setting of plaster and determination of temperature rise and expansion of plaster during 
setting; Study of water to plaster ratio on physical properties of mould; Shaping of plaster of paris block. 
CR 310 REFRACTORIES OR REFRACTORY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Classification of refractories, properties of refractories, packing of solid particles – monosized particles, bimodal 
mixtures of spheres, bimodal mixture of non spherical particles, ternary and multiple mixtures, continuous particle 
size distribution, particle interaction during dry compaction; Shaped Refractories: Alumino-silicate, high alumina, 
magnesia, silica, doloma, carbonaceous, Refractories; raw materials, processing, process quality control, Detailed 
analysis of phase diagrams with respect to the raw materials controlling the firing temperature and schedule; 
properties, microstructure applications; Composite refractories: alumina-carbon, magnesia-carbon, Spinel, alumina-
silicon carbide- carbon, zirconia-carbon; Unshaped refractories; castables, gunning mass, ramming mixes, shotcreting 
mass, compositions/classifications, additives, manufacturing process, quality control, properties and applications; 
Properties and tests: Specification of different kinds of bricks, fusion point in relation to equilibrium diagram, PCE Test, 
HMOR, torsional creep properties and tests, Re-heat shrinkage, Spalling resistance, slag resistance; Reaction between 
refractories and glasses, heat transmission, behaviour of refractories in different environments, corrosion and failure 
of refractories, detailed analysis and interpretation of the refractories behaviour withrespect of microstructure. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. H. Chesters, Refractories- Production and Properties, The Iron and Steel Institute, London, 1973. 
2. C. A. Schacht, Refractories Handbook, CRC Press, 2004. 
3. S. Banerjee, Monolithic Refractories: A Comprehensive Handbook, Wiley-American Ceramic Society, 1998. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. P. Budnikov, The Technology of Ceramics and Refractories, Translated by Scripta Technica, Edward Arnold, The MIT Press, 4th 
Ed, 2003. 
2. C. A. Schacht, Refractory Linings: Thermo-mechanical Design and Applications, CRC Press, 1995. 
CR 320 SCIENCE OF SINTERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Diffusion: Mechanism of diffusion in solids, Ficks Laws, Nernst-Einstein equation, Random walk model, diffusion 
as a thermally activated process, thin film and error function solutions, diffusion distance, diffusion in ceramics, 
temperatures and imperfection related effects; Sintering: Driving force for sintering, solid state and liquid phase 
sintering, sintering models- mechanisms and kinetics. Grain growth and secondary recrystallization; Phase 
Transformation: Nucleation and Growth, spinodal decomposition; mechanism, thermodynamics and kinetics. Glass 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
225
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
formation; Creep and Superplasticity: mechanisms andkinetics; Kinetics of Heterogeneous Reactions: Reactions 
with and between solids, calcination and dehydration reactions, particulateinteractions, coarsening, nonisothermal 
process kinetics. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics by 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, NY. 
2. M. N. Rahaman, Ceramic Processes and Sintering by Marcel Dekker. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. G. Shewmon, Diffusion in Solids by McGraw Hill, NY. 
2. H. Schmalzried, Solid State Reactions by Academic Press, NY, 1974
CR 322 GLASS	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Concept of the glassy state. The enthalpy temperature diagram. Fundamentals of Glass Formation: Structural and 
Kinetic Approaches. Nucleation and crystal growth. TTT diagram. Structural models of silicate and non silicate glasses, 
bridging and non-bridging oxygen, batch calculation, mixing and handling, viscosity, low and high temperature 
viscosity, temperature and compositional dependence of viscosity, glass transition temperature; thermal expansion 
and density; Glass composition and manufacturing process. Crystallization of glass – devitrification; glass-batch 
formulation. Mixing and handling of glass batch. Glass melting process, refining of glass. Decolourisation of glass. 
Reactions leading to glass formation. Fabricationprocess: Feeders, Colburn process, PPG process, Float process. Hollow 
ware and fibre glass; Quality control of glass, defects in glass: Stones, Seeds, Cords and Blisters, redoxequilibrium and 
chemical durability of glass, toughening and strengthening of glass; Optical properties of glass, optical glass, coloured 
glass including photochromic and electrochromic glass, solarization and photosensitive glasses, coating of glass. Non 
conventional glass making: Vapour quenching method, sol gel; General idea about glass-ceramic preparation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. Paul, Chemistry of Glasses, 2nd Ed., Springer, 1990. 
2. J. E. Shelby, Introduction to Glass Science and Technology, The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. W. McMillan, Glass Ceramics, 2nd Ed., Academic Press, NY, 1979. 
2. A. K. Varshneya, Fundamentals of Inorganic Glass, Academic press, 1994. 
3. H. Bachs and D. Krause, Low Thermal Expansion Glass Ceramics, Springer, 2005. 
CR 325 COMPUTATIONAL	MATERIALS	SCIENCE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Description of atomic interactions; Basics of the density functional theory, approximations in terms of pair potentials; 
embedded atom method and tight-binding. Material behaviour and computational model in nano-, micro-, meso- and 
macro-scales in the content of real materials-related problems (mechanical and thermodynamic properties, Phase 
transformation microstructure evolution during processing; Linear Elasticity Theory for Crystal Plasticity, Dislocation 
Statics and dynamics, Finite Element and Difference Methods at the Meso—Macroscale, Polycrystal Elasticity and 
Plasticity Models; introduction to computational modeling; molecular statistics; Molecular Dynamics: models of 
interatomic potentials, Equations of Motion for Atomic Systems: Application of Molecular Dynamics in Materials 
Science: Simulation of Brittle Fracture, Simulation of Interaction of Dislocations with Grain Boundaries; Monte 
Carlo Simulation and Integration and lattice dynamics, Interpretation of modeling in terms of structures using radial 
distribution function, Fundamentals of the Algorithm, Spin Monte Carlo methods, Thermo dynamic and statistical 
analyses, Simulation of Surface Segregation, Phase Transition, Thin Film Deposition
Application of computing and statistical fundamentals to solve Material Science and Engineering problems
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Raabe, Computational Materials Science: The Simulation of Materials Microstructure and Properties, Wiley-VCH, 1998. 
2. M. Meyer and V. Pontikis, Computer Simulation in Materials Science: Inter-atomic Potentials, Simulation, Techniques and 
Applications, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Ohno, K. Esfarjani and Y. Kawazoe, Computational Material Science: from ab initio to Monte Carlo methods, Springer, 1999. 
2. J. R. Hill, L. Subramanian and A. Maiti, Molecular Modeling Techniques in Material Science, CRC Press, 2005. 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
226
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CR 327 INTERFACE	SCIENCE	&	SOL-GEL	PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Thermodynamics of surface. Adsorption Isotherm. Physical aspects of interfaces, Grain boundary, Contact angle, 
Dihedral angle and Grain shape prediction, Concept of wetting. Structure of surface and interface; Colloids, Sols and 
gels, Types of colloids; attractive surface forces, stabilization of colloids, Electrostatic stabilization, charge development 
on the particle surface in aqueous medium, origin of electrical double layer, Iso-electric points and zeta potential,, 
Effect of electrolytes on double layer. Ion exchange capacity and exchange equilibrium, adsorption of polymers and 
steric stabilization, electrosteric stabilization, structure of consolidated colloids, rheology of consolidated colloids, 
Flocculation and de-flocculation phenomena, kinetics of flocculation; Wetting agents, Plasticizers, Foaming and 
antifoaming agents, Lubricants; Types of gel, sol-gel processing of aqueous silicates, metal alkoxides, hydrolysis and 
condensation, effect of pH on gelation, aging, drying and gel densification. Sol- gel preparation technique, single and 
multi-component gel, use of double alkoxides, applications of sol-gel processing
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Myers, Surfaces, Interfaces and Colloids: Principles and Applications, 2nd Edition, Wiley-VCH; 1999. 
2. J. Reed, Introduction to the Principles of Ceramic Processing, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 1995. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. N. Rahaman, Ceramic Processing, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, FL, 2007. 
2. R. J. Pugh and L. Bergstrom, Surface and Colloid Chemistry in Advanced Ceramics Processing, CRC, 1994
CR 330 FUEL	CELLS	AND	BATTERIES	 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction; History, thermodynamics and electrochemical kinetics, fuel cell components and their impact on 
performance; Fuel cell systems: Proton exchange membrane fuel cell; Direct methanol fuel cells; Molten carbonate 
fuel cells; Polymer electrolyte fuel cells; solid oxide fuel cells; Fundaments of electrical and ionic conductivity, fast 
ionic conductors, defect chemistry, Electrolyte, material system, synthesis, properties, fabrication, applications; 
Anode, material system, synthesis, properties, fabrication, applications. Cathode, material system, synthesis, 
properties, fabrication, applications interconnects material system, synthesis, properties, fabrication, applications 
Special materials, material system, synthesis, properties, fabrication, applications. Stack design and fabrication 
techniques. Electorde polarization fundamentals, polarization kinetics. Testing and characterization of fuel cells and its 
components. Fuel processing and reforming of fuel; Batteries: general terms and characteristics, battery parameters, 
Fundamental aspects of battery system. Battery component, electrolyte, catode, anode, material system, synthesis, 
properties, fabrication, applications. Stack design and fabrication techniques. Testing and characterization of batteries 
and its components. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. G. Bruce, Solid State Electrochemistry, Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
2. G. Hoogers, Fuel Cell Technology Handbook, CRC Press, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. A. Kiehne, Battery Technology Handbook, CRC Press, 2003. 
2. J. S. Newman and K. E. Thomas-Alyea, Electrochemical Systems, Wiley-IEEE, 2004. 
3. C. Julien and G. A. Nazri, SolidState Batteries: materials design and optimization, Springer, 1994. 
CR 331 WHITEWARE	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Raw materials, processing, properties, batch composition and the effect on the properties of whiteware bodies, effect 
of particle size distribution of kaolinite on plasticity and workability of clay. Rheology and properties of clay - water 
system, mechanism of plasticity, additives/binders, plasticizers, flocculants and deflocculants and slip properties; 
Classification of whiteware bodies, batch formulation Tri-axial bodies - porcelain, stoneware, earthenware, hotel 
ware, majolica, terra-cotta, bone china, parian-art ware, insulator, tiles, sanitary ware etc. Body preparation including 
the unit operations and fabrication processes. Application of granular mechanics to slip casting. Influence of particle 
size distribution on properties of fired whiteware bodies. Mould materials, mould and mould design; Fundamentals 
of drying and shrinkage. Firing of whiteware bodies, microstructure evolution during firing of whiteware bodies. Time, 
temperature and atmosphere effects on firing of whitewares, special firing techniques, Glaze structure, formulation, 
raw materials, batch calculation, preparation, slip rheology, application. colours, decoration firing. Testing of white 
ware bodies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Ryan and C. Radford, Whitewares: Production, Properties and Quality Control, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1987. 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
227
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. W. M. Carty, C. W. Sinton, Science of Whitewares II, American Ceramic Society, 1999. 
3. F. H. Norton, Fine Ceramics: Technology and Application, McGraw Hill, NY, 1970. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. A. Eppler and M. Obstler, Understanding Glazes, TheAmerican Ceramic Society, 2005. 
2. V. E. Henkes, George Y. Onoda, W. M. Carty, Science of Whitewares, The American Ceramic Society, 1996
CR 333 HEAT	TRANSFER	AND	FLUID	FLOW 4 credits [3-1-0]
Steady state and unsteady state conduction. Heat flow through composite walls, cylinders and spheres, Thermal 
resistances in series for ceramic materials. Convective heat transfer: Free and forced convection, application of 
dimensional analysis to convection problems. Radiation Heat Transfer black and grey bodies, Stefan-Boltzman’s 
law, Kirchoff’s law. Radiation through furnace openings. Combined effect of conduction, convention and radiation, 
overall heat transfer coefficient. Heat transfer through fluidized bed. Computation of heat loss from furnaces and 
kilns- sankey diagram. Heat transfer concept and selection of refractories. Fluid properties, density, viscosity, surface 
tension, compressibility. Classification of fluids: Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids. Equation of continuity for 
compressible and incompressible fluid flow. Flow measurements: Venturimeter, Orifices, Pitot tube and Rotameter. 
Significance of Reynolds, Nussle’s and Prandlt’s Numbers; Euler’s numbers, Archimedes number; Pressure drop in 
flow and pressure drop calculation in various cases, Flow through bends, Straight and bend pipes, Packed beds. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. L. McCabe, J. C. Smith and P. Harriot, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, McGraw Hill professional, 2005. 
2. D. Q. Kern, Process Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill International AucklandBogota, 1986. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. H. Perry, D. W. Green and J. O. Maloney, Chemical Engineers’ Handbook; McGraw-Hill, 1999. 
CR335 INSTRUMENTAL	CHARACTERIZATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA), Thermogrvimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). Factors 
affecting the phase transformations - particle size, packing, heating rate, buoyancy effect. Thermal Conductivity, 
Dilatometry – basic principles, instrumentations and case study in ceramic applications. Study of sintering kinetics 
by dilatometry; Particle Size Analysis, Surface area and porosity – basic principle, data analysis; Spectroscopic 
method: UV-Visible, IR, FTIR and Raman – Basic principle, instrumentation and analysis of data; X-Ray Methods: x-ray 
generation, diffraction, Bragg law, Diffraction under ideal and non-ideal conditions, Scattering and structure factor. 
Principles of x-ray Diffractometer (XRD), x-ray data file and its analysis, indexing of crystal type. Chemical analysis 
by x-ray fluorescence (XRF) – Wave length and energy dispersive XR; Optical microscopy - light optics, microscope 
components, possibilities and limitations. Scanning Electron Microscopy - Optics and performance of a SEM, Image 
interpretation, crystallographic information in a SEM, analytical microscopy. Transmission Electron microscopy - 
construction and operation of a TEM, electron diffraction, Image interpretation. Techniques of sample preparation 
for TEM and SEM methods. Electron Beam Microprobe Analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. F. Speyer, Thermal Analysis of Materials, CRC Press, 1994. 
2. B. D. Cullity, Elements of X-ray Diffraction, Addison Wesley Publishing Company; 2nd edition 1978. 
3. P. J. Goodhew, J. Humphreys and R. Beanland, Electron Microscopy and Analysis, Third Edition, Taylor & Francis, 2001.  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. P. Klug and L. E. Alexander, X-ray Diffraction procedures for Polycrystalline and Amorphous Materials, 2nd Edition, John 
Wiley, 1974. 
2. D. A. Skoog, F. J. Holler and T. A. Nieman, Principles of Instrumental Analysis, 5th Ed., HartcourtCollege Publishers, 1998. 
CR 336 CEMENT	TECHNOLOGY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to hydraulic materials. Classification of Cement, Chemistry of hydrated and anhydrous cement 
compound. Manufacturing of Portland cement; Dry, Semi-dry, wet and semi-wet process, Cement grinding, Testing 
of cement, Cement compounds and their phase relations, Cementing qualities of cement phases, The burning of 
Portland cement, Constitution of Portland cement, Phase equilibrium conditions of clinker crystallization, Calcia-
Alumina-Silica system, Clinker constitution and cooling process, refractories used in the rotary kiln, Role of free 
magnesia and free lime in the clinker, hydration of cementing phases and Portland cement, theories and mechanism 
of cement setting and hardening, Action of acid water and sulphate waters on Portland cement, Steam-curing of 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
228
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Portland cement. Special Cement and cement additives, Blast Furnace slag- and high alumina cement. Concrete: 
Types, Method of production and Properties of concrete, Alkali-aggregate reaction, Electrical and fire resistance of 
cement and concrete. Pollution control in cement industries. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. Hewlett, Lea’s Chemistry of Cement and Concrete, Fourth Edition, Butterworth Heinemann; Fourth edition, 2004. 
2. H. F. W. Taylor, Chemistry of Cement, Thomas Telford, 1997. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. E. M. Gartner and M. Uchikawa, Cement Technology, The American Ceramic Society, 1994. 
2. K. E. Peray, Cement Manufacturer’s Handbook, Chemical Publishing Company, 1979
CR 339 Ceramics	in	Electronic	Applications 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, elementary solid state science, electrical conduction, defect and defect chemistry, charge displacement 
process. Ceramic conductors: high temperature heating elements and electrodes, ohmic resistors, varistors, 
thermistors – PTC, NTC, fuel cells and batteries, sensors, materials system, powder synthesis, processing, properties, 
devices and application. Fundamentals of superconductivity, theories of superconductors, materials system, synthesis, 
processing, properties and application; Dielectric and insulators, fundamentals of capacitors, classification of dielectric 
matrials, materials system, low permittivity, medium permittivity and high permittivity, Powder synthesis, processing, 
properties, fabrication and application. Capacitor designs, processing; Fundamentals of piezoelectricity, materials 
system, synthesis, processing, properties, devices and application. Fundamentals of pyroelectricity, materials system, 
synthesis, processing, properties, devices and application. Electro-optic fundamentals, materials system, synthesis, 
processing, properties, devices and application; Fundamentals of magnetism, Magnetics ceramics basic concepts, 
model ferrites: spinel ferrites, hexaferrites, garnets, properties influencing magnetic behavior, soft ferrites, hard 
ferrites, microwave ferrites, Preparation of ferrites, rawmaterials, mixing calcinations and milling, sintering, post 
sintered processing, applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. C. Buchanan, Ceramic Materials for Electronics: processing, properties and applications, Marcel Dekker, NY, 1986. 
2. L. M. Levinson, Electronic Ceramics: properties, device and applications, CRC Press, 1987. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. J. Moulson and J. M. Herbert, Electroceramics: Materials, Properties and Applications, Springer, 1990. 
2. B. Jaffe, W. R. Cook, H. Jaffe and H. L. C. Jaffe, Piezoelectric Ceramics, R. A. N Publishers, 1990. 
CR 341 PHYSICAL	CERAMICS	 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mechanical Properties: Concept of strength and its relation with fundamental parameters, plastic deformation, 
viscous flow, creep, Fracture of materials; Thermal Properties: Thermal expansion, thermal shock, annealing and 
chemical strengthening, specific heat and heat capacity, thermal conduction process; Electrical Properties: Electrical, 
electronic and ionic conduction phenomena in crystals, Fast ionic conductors, glasses and non-stoichiometric 
compounds. PTCR, NTCR, Varistors, thermisters etc; Dielectric Properties: Dielectric loss of crystals and glasses, 
dielectric strength, piezoelectric and ferroelectric ceramics; Magnetic Properties: Concept of magnetic phenomena 
in solids. Structure and magnetic properties of spinel ferrites, rare-earth garnets, ortho-ferrites and hexagonal ferrites 
with special reference to their microstructure; Optical Properties: Refractive index and dispersion, reflectance, opacity 
and translucency, absorption and colour from modern concepts in crystalline and vitreous ceramic systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons Pte Ltd., Singapore, 1991. 
2. Y. M. Chiang, D. Birnie III and W. D. Kingery, Physical Ceramics: Principles for Ceramic Science and Engineering, Wiley, 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Barsoum, Fundamentals of Ceramics, CRC Press, 2002. 
2. L. V. Azaroff, Introduction to Solids, Tata McGraw Hill, 1977. 
CR 344 MICROSTRUCTURAL	DESIGN	IN	CERAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Characteristic of microstructure; Quantitative analysis; Properties and factors affected by microstructure; 
microstructural aspects of sintering and grain growth, microstructural variables; Mechanical, thermal, optical 
properties and the effect of microstructure; High temperature degradation; Wear behaviour; Techniques for 
characterizing ceramic microstructure. Resolution and its implications for routine microscopy, Optical microscopy, 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
229
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
scanning electron microscopy, stereoscopy and stereology. Preparation of ceramic samples for microscopy. Fine 
powders and granulates; microstructural characterization of green bodies- sample preparation for SEM and TEM 
study; Dense fired ceramics, porous ceramics, microstructural maps of sintered body, polished surface and fractured 
surface microstructure, common pore structure in ceramic bodies, pore morphology and properties, quantitative 
estimation of different phases and grain size; study and interpretation of wetting behaviour, grain boundary film, 
crystalline interface boundaries, crystalline interphase boundaries, dislocations in the sintered body by SEM and 
TEM; microstructure of different types sintered ceramic bodies: Triaxial whiteware bodies, refractories, clay products, 
glass, glazes and enamels, glass ceramics, advanced and special ceramics. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. E. Lee and W. M. Rainforth, Ceramic Microstructures: Property Control by Processing, First Edition, Springer, 1994. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed., John Wiley & Sons Pte Ltd., Singapore, 1991. 
CR 346 NANOCERAMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to nanotechnology: Formation of nanomaterials by size reduction: Amorphisation by milling, molten 
drop impingement and limitations of milling for ceramic materials. Gas phase processes for nanomaterial synthesis: 
Nanosized clusters of elementary particles and ceramic materials. Condensed phase processes for nanomaterial 
synthesis; Manufacture of nanostructured materials (densification, nanocomposites). Determination of structure 
and chemical, mechanical, magnetic, electrical and optical physical properties of nanomaterials. Methods for 
determination of particle size, porosity, specific surface, chemical and supramolecular structures at the nanometric 
level. Proximal microscopies (AFM and STM), nanolithography and nanofabrication; technological applications of 
nanomaterials- super-plasticity, plastic flow processing of ceramics; ultra-pure and biocompatible ceramics; gas 
sensors; transparent ceramic coatings, diamond-like coatings, the fullerenes and carbon nanotubes, nano magnets 
for sensors and high density data storage, spin-tronic devices, nanotechnology for biological system & bio-sensor 
applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. Wilson, K. Kannangara, G. Smith and M. Simmons, Nanotechnology: Basic Science and Emerging Technologies, 
CRC Press, 2002. 
2. R. Freer, Nanoceramics: A British Ceramic Proceedings. British Ceramic Society, 1993. 
3. A. S. Edelstein, R. C. Cammarata, Nanomaterials: synthesis, properties and applications, CRC Press, 1998 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. A. Ratner and D. Ratner, Nanotechnology: A Gentle Introduction to the Next Big Idea, Prentice Hall PTR, 2003. 
2. G. Cao, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, ImperialCollege Press, 2004. 
3. 3.  H. G Rubahn, Basics of Nanotechnology, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 2008
CR 348 Introduction	to	Engineering	Ceramics 3 credits [3-0-0]
Definition of engineering ceramic materials. Engineering ceramics generally considered in the ceramics family- 
natural ceramics, polycrystalline ceramics fabricated by sintering, glass, glass-ceramics, single crystals of different 
ceramics and artificial gems. Engineering with ceramics: high temperature applications, ceramics in metal processing, 
glass production, industrial processes, ceramics in heat engines, wear and corrosion resistant applications-ceramics 
in seals, valves, pumps, bearings, thread guides, ceramics in paper making, ceramics as cutting tool inserts, super 
hard abrasives; Electrical applications of ceramics- dielectric ceramics, semiconductors, conducting ceramics, ceramic 
superconductors. Magnetic ceramics, opotical and opto-electronic applications of ceramics. Ceramic composites- 
particulate, whiskers, fibre reinforced ceramics. Medical applications of ceramics, ceramics in efficient use of energy 
and pollution control. Design with ceramics, design considerations- reliability requirement, fabrication limitation 
and cost consideration. Design approaches – empirical, deterministic and probabilistic design, Weibull statistics and 
failure analysis. Advantages and limitations of probabilistic design, linear elastic fracture mechanics approach and 
combined approach 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. B. Wachtman Jr., Treatise on Materials Science & Technology, Structural Ceramics Vol- 29, Academic Press Inc., New York, 
1989. 
2. D. W. Richerson, Modern Ceramic Engineering: Properties, Processing, and Use in Design, 3rd ed, CRC Press, 2005
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
230
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Hampshire, Non-Oxide Technical and Engineering Ceramics, Elsevier Applied Science, London, 1986. 
2. W. E. Lee and W. M. Rainforth, Ceramic Microstructures: Property Control by Processing, First Edition, Springer, 1994. 
CR 370 REFRACTORIES	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of packing density of one component system of various particle sizes; Determination of packing density 
of two component system having various size ratios; Recipe calculation and recipe making for refractory mix; Study 
of compaction response behaviour of refractory mix; Shaping of refractory brick by dry pressing/hand moulding 
method; Determination of porosity and density of the prepared refractory brick; Determination of crashing strength 
of refractory bricks; Study of thermal shock resistance and PLCR of refractory brick; Determination of MOR and HMOR 
of refractory brick; Vibrocasting of supplied castable and study of cured property; Effect of casting parameter on the 
properties of cast refractories; Study of strength development of castable with temperature. 
CR 371 HIGH	TEMPERATURE	PROCESSING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Calibration of thermocouple and determination of temperature profile of the furnaces; Effect of process parameters 
on the response behaviour of PID controller; Calibration of PID temperature Controller; Study of isothermal 
sintering behaviour of ceramic materials; Study of non-isothermal sintering behaviour of ceramic materials; Study of 
decomposition kinetics of a material from its isothermal weight loss behavior; Study of phase transformation kinetics 
from differential thermal analysis; Study of the heating rate on constant rate heating densification behavior; Study of 
binder burnt out behaviour by TGA; Study of recystallization behaviour of materials. 
CR 372 GLASS	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Batch calculation and preparation of soda-lime-silicate glasses; Fabrication of plate glass and annealing; 
Determination of glass transition temperature of the processed glass; Effect of refining agents during preparation of 
glasses; Fabrication of hollow glass ware by blowing techniques; Study of chemical durability of glasses using Flame 
Photometer; Batch calculation and fabrication of different coloured glasses; Determination of refractive index and 
colour concentration of glass; Determination of density of glass by non-destructive methods; Detection of strain in 
glass and annealing schedule; Determination of CTE of commercial glasses; Study of Littleton softening point of glass. 
CR 373 WHITEWARE	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design and drawing of model and mould; Shaping of a pre-designed plaster model; Fabrication of pre-designed 
slip casting mould; Fabrication of model using Jigger and Jolly; Determination of plasticity and Plasticity Index; 
Determination of drying sensitivity of a green body; Study of drying curve and critical moisture content of a green 
body; Determination of vitrification range of a whiteware body; Determination of deffloculant demand curve of slip; 
Study of slip casting behavior; Study of glaze-body fit by dilatometer; Determination of flow limit of glaze; Finishing, 
drying and glazing of cast wares; Crazing resistance of glazed article. 
CR 374 CERAMIC	PRODUCT	DEVELOPMENT	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
This is a project based laboratory where the students are required to develop a specific ceramic product having a 
given range of different properties. On the basis of the supplied end properties and the possible application area, 
the student will choose the raw material and the powder processing route, the green shape fabrication method. The 
developed green ceramic product needs to be sintered for evaluation of product property. The statistical analysis of 
the evaluated properties should be carried out to judge the product reliability. 
CR 375 Ceramic	Characterization	Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of thermal decomposition behaviour of dolomite / limestone/ magnesite; Study of phase transition in quartz 
by DTA; Weight loss behaviour of dolomite, magnesite and limestone by TGA; Study of thermal expansion behaviour 
and determination of thermal expansion coefficient of ceramic product; Determination of thermal hysteresis of 
zirconia by dilatometric method; Study and operation of x-ray diffractometer; Indexing of cubic crystal system and 
determination of its lattice parameter; Determination of lattice parameter of tetragonal crystals; Determination of 
crystallite size from x-ray line broadening; Study of data acquisition and processing for obtaining an x-ray profile; 
Phase identification using software; Determination of a calibration curve for quantitative estimation of two-phases 
in a mixture. 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
231
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CR 376 CEMENT	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Preparation of Portland cement in the laboratory; Determination of consistency of cement; Study of initial and final 
setting of cement by Vicat apparatus; Determination of soundness of cement Le Chatelier method; Making and curing 
of cement mortar; Compressive strength of cement mortar fine with ageing time; Determination of surface area of 
cement by Blain Air Permeability apparatus; Determination of fineness modulus and grain size distribution of fine 
aggregate; Effect of casting process parameters on the properties of cement mortar; Quantitative chemical analysis 
of cement; Effect of admixture on cement mortar; Study of the durability of cement mortar
CR 377 Ceramic	Equipment	Design	Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design of tunnel kiln brick lining; Design of rotary kiln brick lining; Design of electrically heated laboratory furnace; 
Design of spray drier/spray pyrolyzer heating chamber; Design of L-D converter lining; Design of Ladle lining
CR 411 Advanced	Ceramics 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction and classification of Structural Ceramics, Brief review of Griffith theory of fracture, toughness, statistical 
nature of strength Alumina and alumina ceramics Crystal structure, phases, types of alumina, properties and its 
relation to microstructure, importance and application. Zirconia Ceramics Crystal structure and polymorphic 
modifications, Transformation Toughening; different system in zirconia, application. Composites: strengthening 
and toughening mechanisms, composite fabrication. Composites of some oxides and nonoxides. Classification of 
non-oxideceramics, siliconcarbide, siliconnitride Sialon, Tungsten Carbide, Boron Carbide, Boron Nitride, Carbon 
and Graphite, phase diagrams, processing, sintering and properties. Abrasives; natural and synthetic; properties, 
applications andperformances; Semiconductor, electronic, ionic conductors and fast ion conductors; defects 
influoride type andperovskite oxides; conduction process and transference number; electronic conduction in oxides; 
semiconductor - metal transition; Ionic conduction in oxides; fast –ion conductors; resistors and varistors, ceramic 
capacitors, piezoelectric and electro-optic ceramics, Super conductivity: basic principles; materials; synthesis and 
applications; Magnetic Ceramics: Introduction; types of magnetism: magnetic anisotropy; magnetostriction; domains 
and magnetization processes; magnetic Materials: soft and hard; synthesis; characterization and applications, ferro-
electricity in capacitor technology, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. B. Wachtman Jr., Structural Ceramics, Treatise on Materials Science & Technology Vo l- 29, Academic Press, New York, 1989. 
2. W. E. Lee and W. M. Rainforth, Ceramic Microstructures: Property Control by Processing, Springer, 1994. 
3. R. C. Buchanan, Ceramic Materials for Electronics: Processing, properties and applications, Marcel Dekker, 1986. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. E. Dorre and H. Hubner, Alumina: Processing, Properties and Applications, Springer- Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1984. 
2. A. J. Moulson and J. M. Herbert, Electroceramics: Materials, Properties and Applications, Springer, 1990. 
CR 415 BIOCERAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to biomaterials, bio-ceramics as implant in human body, Physics of bone and structure of tooth, Cortical 
bone versus Trabecular bone structure. Different type of biomaterials: Metal and alloys, Ceramics, Polymers and 
composites; Bio-glass and A/W Glass ceramics, Hydroxyapatite, Bioactivity and bone bonding, porous hydroxyapatite 
and study of bio-compatibility; Composite implant materials: mechanics of improvement of properties by 
incorporating different elements. Composite theory of fiber reinforcement. Polymers filled with osteogenic fillers. 
Host tissue reactions; Properties of biomaterials: Bulk properties – mechanical, biological and chemical properties; 
Surface properties – Surface roughness and surface characterization. Testing of biomaterials/Implants: In vitro testing 
(Mechanical testing): tensile, compression, wears, fatigue, corrosion studies and fracture toughness. In-vivo testing 
(animals): biological performance of implants. Ex-vivo testing: in vitro testing simulating the in vivo conditions. 
Standards and specifications of implant materials, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. L. Hench and J. R. Jones, Biomaterials, Artificial Organs and Tissue Engineering, Taylor & Francis 2007
2. J. F. Shackelford, Advanced Ceramics (vol. 1) Bioceramics, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, New York, 1999. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. Wereszczak, M. Mizuno and E. L. Curzio, Advances in Bioceramics and Biocomposites II, John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
232
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CR 416 APPLICATION	OF	REFRACTORIES 4 credits [3-1-0]
Review of metallurgical processes; Identification of different refractory linings for primary and secondary steel making 
operations, Hot repairing – Materials, Repairing techniques; Future trends in utilization of refractories towards 
efficient lining for steel making; Coke oven refractories, Blast furnace refractories, trough refractories, taphole clay, 
refractories for cooling and heat saving in blast furnaces, Refractories for steel making, Ladle refractories, Continuous 
casting refractories: Materials, Production, Properties, Applications and Future trends; Use of non-oxide ceramic 
materials in ferrous and non-ferrous industries. Refractories in cement industries. Refractories in glass industries. 
Direct bonded mag-chrome aggregates and refractories for Aluminium, Copper, Zinc and Petrochemical Industries. 
Standardization, testing – including non – destructive testing. New generation slide gate refractories with improved 
performance, Plant trial performance ofnon shaped and advanced refractories developed using surface chemistry, 
thermo-mechanical considerations for refractory linings, refractories for the refineries and circulating fluid beds, 
plasma processing of refractory aggregates, coating techniques for improving the oxidation resistance of graphite. 
Recent developments in the application of refractories, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. H. Chesters, Refractories- Production and Properties, The Iron and SteelInstitute, London, 1973. 
2. R. Amavis, Refractories for the Steel Industry, Elsevier Applied Science, Springer, 1990. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. C. Caniglia and G. L. Barna, Handbook of Industrial Refractories Technology: Principles, Types, Properties and Applications, 
William Andrews Inc, 1992. 
2. S. Banerjee, The Changing Refractories Industry: New Technologies, Materials and Markets, Business Communication Co, 
1999. 
CR 417 UNSHAPED	REFRACTORIES 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction	 to	 monolithic	 refractories,	 advantages	 and	 disadvantages;	 classifications	 based	 on	 application	
techniques,	chemical	constituents	and	purity;	raw	materials	and	their	selection,	particles	size	distribution,	discrete	
and	continuous	particle	size	distribution,	Furnas,	Andreassen-Andersen	and	Dinger-Funk	model;	different	bonding	
systems,	CaO-Al2O3	system,	hydration	of	calcium	aluminates,	bonding	mechanism	of	different	binders,	various	
additive	systems;	refractory	castable	and	details	of	CCC,	LCC,	ULCC,	NCC,	SFC;	other	monolithics,	like	mortar,	gunning	
mass,	 spraying	mass,	 ramming	mass,	 etc;	machinery	 and	equipments	 for	making	unshaped	 refractories,	 batch	
preparation,	mixing,	processing	and	manufacturing	techniques;	installation	techniques	and	application;	properties	
and	specialties	of	different	castable	systems,	like	alumina,	alumina	-	magnesia,	alumina	spinel,	magnesia,	magnesia	
carbon, etc
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. A. Schacht, Refractories Handbook, CRC Press, 2004. 
2. S. Banerjee, Monolithic Refractories: A Comprehensive Handbook, Wiley-American Ceramic Society, 1998. 
3. Subrata Banerjee, Thomas Abraham, The changing refractory industry: new technologies, materials, and markets, Business 
Communications Co., 1999. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Stephen C. Carniglia, Hand book of industrial Refractories technology, Principles, Types, Properties and Applications Noyes 
Publications USA 1992. 
2. Hiemenz PC. Principles of Colloid and Surface Chemistry. 2d ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1986. 
CR 418 Nanomaterials 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Nanostructured materials, Low-dimensional structures: Nano clusters & Nano crystals, 
superparamagnetic materials, nanomagnetic composite materials, Magnetic nanostructured materials, Nanoscale 
magnetism of fine particles of transition metals, alloys and oxides, Survey of materials and scaling with respect to 
different types of nanomaterials- metals, ceramics, semiconductors, polymers, structural materials and functional 
materials; Rate- controlling mechanisms and diffusion. Nucleation-classical nucleation theory, clusters and 
nucleation rates; characterization of nanostructured materials, different synthesis techniques; Ultrafine powders and 
communition. Nanocomposites, Thin films and Coatings. Sol-gel processing of different types of materials and their 
consolidation. Monoliths, films, membranes; Gas phase synthesis, photolithography; Nanotechnology and MEMS, 
nano magnets for sensors and high density data storage, carbon nanotube, spin-tronic devices, nanotechnology for 
biological system & bio-sensor applications, recent developments in this area. 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
233
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. N. R. Rao, A. Müller and A. K. Cheetham, The Chemistry of Nanomaterials: Volume 1, Synthesis, Properties and Applications; 
Wiley-VCH, 2006. 
2. C. N. R. Rao, A. Müller and A. K. Cheetham, The Chemistry of Nanomaterials: Volume 2, Synthesis, Properties and Applications, 
Wiley-VCH, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. Cao, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, ImperialCollege Press, 2004. 
2. R. Booker and E. Boysen, Nanotechnology: The fun and easy way to explore the science of matter’s smallest particles, Wiley 
Publishing Inc. 2005
CR 419 Biomaterials	for	Artificial	Implants 3 credits [3-0-0]
Bio-compatability-definition and issues, introduction to biological environments, function and degradation of materials 
in vivo- swelling and leaching, corrosion and dissolution, reactions of biological molecules with bio-material surfaces, 
mechanics of materials- deformation and failure, friction and wear. Biological effects of implants- inflammatory 
process, adaptation, allergic foreign- body response; Surface chemistry of materials- surface energy, contact angle, 
critical surface tension, electrokinetic theory; Biomaterials, types- metals, polymers- hydrogels, polymer degradation, 
resorbable polymers, sutures, drug delivery, dialysis membranes. Ceramics, - dense ceramics, porous ceramics, bio-
active ceramics, resorable ceramics, composites - structure and properties; processing of bio-materials. Coated 
Hydroxyapatite – need for coating, type of coating – Plasma sprayed coating, bio-mimetic coating. Characterization 
of biomaterials; in-vitro and in-vivo testing, Polymeric biomaterials – naturally occurring polymeric biomaterials, 
synthetic non bio-degradable and bio degradable polymers, polymer matrix composite biomaterials; Application of 
bio-materials- dental implants, orthopaedic implants, soft tissue application, Tissue engineering- biomaterials for 
tissue engineering, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. V Bhat, Biomaterials, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. 
2. J. B. Park and J. D. Bronzino, Biomaterials: Principles and Applications, CRC Press, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. L. Wise, D. J. Trantolo, D. E. Altobelli, M. J. Yaszemski and J. D. Gresser, Human Biomaterials Applications, Humana Press, 
1996. 
CR 420 GLASS	CERAMIC	TECHNOLOGY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Fabrication and properties of Glass ceramics. Crystallization of glass: Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, 
Growth. Binary (Mullite) and ternary (Mullite, Hexacelsian, Celsian-Rutile) glass ceramics. Phase separation. Control 
of mechanical, thermomechanical, electrical, optical properties through microstructure development in glass 
ceramics. Nanocrystalline microstructure. Surface strengthening– thermal strengthening and chemical strengthening 
of glass ceramics. Technical application of glass ceramics: Structure, composition and properties of glass ceramic used 
in Radome, Photosensetaitve materials, Machinable glass ceramics, Magnetic Memory Disk. Household application 
of glass ceramics : Decorative glass ceramics, High – Quartz and Keatite- type alumino- silicates, composition of 
ceramic colours glass ceramic cook top panels. Precision Optical applications: low thermal expansion glass ceramics, 
large casting technology, dimensional stability, transparent glass ceramic, thin walled cylinders, reflective optics, 
laser gyroscopes, light weight mirrors, Radiation stability technology, Refractory glass ceramics, Glass ceramics in 
biomedical application. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. H. Lewis, Glass & Glass Ceramics, Chapman & Hall, London, 1989. 
2. W. Holand, Glass Ceramic Technology, The American Ceramic Society, 2002
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Paul, Chemistry of Glasses, Chapman and Hall, 2nd Ed., 1990. 
2. P. W. McMillan, Glass Ceramics, Academic Press, 2nd Ed., NY, 1979. 
3. H. Bachs and D. Krause, Low Thermal Expansion Glass Ceramics, Springer, 2005 
CR 421 GLASSES	FOR	ADVANCED	TECHNICAL	APPLICATIONS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Properties of technical glasses, Effect of glass composition on mechanical, optical and electrical properties of glass. 
Properties and processing of Chemical resistant glass, heat resistance glass, CRT glass, Neutral glass, Glass electrodes, 
Low dielectric loss glass, Eutectic glass. Glass metal sealing. Processing and properties of Glass Fibres for Insulation 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
234
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and Reinforcement. Hard glass. Theoretical strength of glasses. Different parameter controlling strength of glass. 
Glasses for Plasma Display Panels. Chalcogenide and Halide and oxy-halide glasses. Properties of Photonic Glass. 
Gradient index glass : Application, properties and design. Properties of laser glasses. Processing of Optical fiber. Fiber 
Gratings. Glass Fibers for High Power Lasers: Fundamentals and applications: Nonlinear optical glass and Magneto-
optical glass
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. H. Lewis, Glass & Glass Ceramics, Chapman & Hall, London, 1989. 
2. W. Holand, Glass Ceramic Technology, The American Ceramic Society, 2002
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Yamane, Glasses for Photonics. Chembridge University Press 2000. 
2. P. W. McMillan, Glass Ceramics, Academic Press, 2nd Ed., NY, 1979. 
3. H. Bachs and D. Krause, Low Thermal Expansion GlassCeramics, Springer, 2005 
CR 422 CERAMIC	EQUIPMENT	DESIGN	 3 credits [3-0-0]
Design of Ball Mill, Design of Laboratory Furnace, Design of cement rotary kiln, Design of tunnel kiln for refractory 
industry, Design of tunnel driers, Design of humidity control drier, Design of LD converter lining, Design of Electric Arc 
Furnace lining, Design of Ladle lining, Design of Spray Drier. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. M. Walas, Chemical Process Equipment: Selection and Design, Butterworths -Heinemann, Butterworths, 1988. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. J. Sandler, and E. T. Luckiewicz, Practical Process Engineering: A Working Approach to Plant Design, McGraw Hill Book 
Company, 1987. 
2. V. C. Davis, Calculation in Furnace Technology, Pergamon Press ltd, 1970. 
CR 424 COMPOSITE	MATERIALS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Composites- Definition, Classification and Importance, design of composite materials, the concept of load transfer, 
Glass, ceramic and carbonfibres, silicon carbide, alumina and alumino-silicate fibres. Common ceramic matrix material 
and their properties, interfaces in composites, interaction at the interface. Types of reinforcement: continuous 
fibre, short fibre, whisker; Ceramic Matrix composites: fibre packing arrangement, fabrication, properties, interface 
reaction, toughness; specific examples - Alumina -silicon carbide, Mullite- Zirconia, polymer-PZT composites, metal 
composites, layered composites- composite processing, densification and application; properties of composites: 
Density, Mechanical properties, mechanism of load transferfrom matrix to fibre, elastic deformation of laminates, 
variation of lamina properties with orientation, tensile and compressive strength and failure mechanism of long and 
short fibre composites, toughness of composites and sub-critical crack growth, thermal behaviour of composites 
debonding, fibre pull out, delamination fracture. Application of composites. Recent advances in composite technology, 
recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. F. Carter and D. F. Paul, Materials Science and Engineering, ASM International, 1991. 
2. J. F. Shackelford and M. Meier, Introduction to Materials Science for Engineers, Prentice Hall PTR, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. F. L. Matthews and R. D. Rawlings, Composite Materials: Engineering and Science, Woodhead Publishing, 1999. 
2. K. K. Chawla, Composite Materials: Science and Engineering, Springer, 2001. 
CR 426 TRIBOLOGY	OF	MATERIALS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Different types of materials and applications, surface characterization (Physico – chemical characteristics 
of surface layers) Surface visualization, Geometry of non – conforming surfaces (analysis and measurement of surface 
roughness), Surface and subsurface stress distributions and Hertzian contact; Contact between solid surfaces; 
Adhesion Friction; Testing, Frictional behavior (Solid – solid contact, liquid mediated contact), Friction mechanism of 
metals, ceramics and polymers, solid lubricants. Thermal properties of sliding surfaces; Classification of wear and wear 
testing, role of humidity; the various modes of wear: adhesive, delamination, fretting, abrasive, erosive, corrosive, 
oxidizing (mild and severe), melt and the wear-mechanism maps, types of particle present in wear debris; Surface 
Engineering Methods to reduce wear, Electrolytic, Spraying, Hard-facing, Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD), Plasma 
Vapour Deposition (PVD), Mechanical methods, Surface melting and Thermo chemical treatments; Lubrication: Solid 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
235
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
lubricants, Liquid lubricants, Fluid film lubrication, Introduction to Elasto-Dynamic (ED) and Elasto- Hydro Dynamic 
(EHD) Lubrication, Mixed and Boundary lubrication, micro and nano tribology, solution of tribological problems, 
recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Bhushan, Principles and Applications of Tribology, Willey –IEEE, 1999. 
2. M. Hutchings, Tribology: Friction and Wear of Engineering Materials, Edward Arnold, 1992. ( Original from the University of 
Michigan Digitized 6 Dec 2007)
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. C. Ludema, Friction, Wear, Lubrication: A Textbook in Tribology, CRC Press, 1996. 
2. R. D. Arnell, P. Davies, J. Halling, and T. Whomes, Tribology Principles and Design Applications, MacMillan, 1991( Original from 
the University of Michigan Digitized 6 Dec 2007)
CR 433 SENSOR	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Overview, definition and classifications of sensors, principles of ceramic sensors, physical-chemical and technological 
principles of ceramic sensors: basic concepts, technological principles, operating principles of porous ceramic 
sensors. Ceramic humidity sensor: classification, basic parameters and characteristics, testing and stabilization of 
humidity sensor, control of the sensitivity of ceramic humidity sensors. Ceramic gas sensor: classification, parameters 
and characteristics of resistive gas sensor, selectivity and sensitivity of gas sensor, operating principles, reducing gas 
sensor, alcohol sensor, odor and product quality sensor, oxygen sensor, ceramic sensor for other gases, manufacturing 
of gas sensor. Ceramic temperature sensor: NTC thermistors, PTC thermistors, CTR thermistors, capacitive ceramic 
temperature sensors. Ceramic pressure sensors. Multifunctional ceramic sensors; Humidity-gas and Temperature-
humidity ceramic sensors, Temperature-Humidity-Gas ceramic sensors. Application of ceramic sensors Flow Sensor, 
Acoustic Sensor, Magnetic field sensor; Chemical Sensor; Biosensors: Origin of biosensor, transduction mechanism 
of biosensor, application range of biosensor and future prospects; Sensor Instrumentation; MEMS based sensor, 
Nanotechnology in Sensor applications, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. G. Nenov and S. P. Yordanov, Ceramic Sensors: Technology and Applications, CRC Press, 1996. 
2. S. Soloman, Sensors Handbook, McGraw-Hill Professional, 1998. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Ihokura and J. Watson, Stannic Oxide Gas Sensors, CRC Press, 1994. 
2. J. Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors Physics, Designs, and Applications, Springer, 2004 
CR 435 FUNCTIONAL	MATERIALS	AND	DEVICES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Electrical and optical properties of materials. Dielectric, ferroelectric, super conductors and optical fibers. Magnetic 
properties: Microscopic origin of magnetism, domains, magnet fabrications and applications; Definition of smart 
materials: Introduction of ferroelectric materials, Ferri-electric, PTC Ceramics, Piezoelectric, Pyroelectric and Electro-
Optic materials; Thin film processing and characterization. Application of ferro-electric materials; Introduction 
of shape memory alloys: Thermo-elastic martensitic transformations; shape memory alloys: Ni-Ti, Cu-Zn-Al, 
Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloy; Shape Memory Ceramics. Optical fibre technology, MEMS materials: Preparation 
and application. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Uchino, Ferroelectric Devices, Marcel Dekker, 2000. 
2. Z. L. Wang and Z. C. Kang, Functional and Smart Materials, Springer 1998. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Otsuka and C. M. Wayman, Shape Memory Materials, CambridgeUniversity Press, 1998. 
2. N. Setter, Electroceramic-based MEMS: Fabrication Technology and Applications, Springer, 2005. 
3. J. W. Gardner, V. Varadan and O. O. Awadelkarim, Microsensors, MEMS, and Smart Devices, John Wiley and Sons, 2001
CR 441 ELECTRICAL	AND	MAGNETIC	CERAMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Elementary solid state science, electrical conduction, charge displacement process. Ceramic conductors: electrodes, 
ohmic resistors, varistors, thermistors, fuel cells and batteries, superconductors, materials system, powder synthesis, 
processing, properties, devices and application. Sensors: basic principles, classification, material system, powder 
synthesis, processing, devices and applications. Fast ion conductors, mixed ionic electronic conductors: material 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
236
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
system, powder synthesis, processing, property and property modification by dopants. Dielectric and insulators, 
fundamentals of capacitors, classification of dielectric materials, materials system, powder synthesis, processing, 
properties, fabrication and application. Piezoelectric, pyroelectric and electro-optic fundamentals, materials system, 
synthesis, processing, properties, devices and application; Fundamentals of magnetism, magnetic ceramics basic 
concept, crystal structure of magnetic ceramics: spinel, hexa ferrite, garnet, structure modification by dopants, 
microstructure. Preparation of magnetic ceramics, different powder synthesis techniques, green body forming, 
sintering, permanent magnet technology, thin films. Magnetic properties of ceramics, origin of magnetic moment, 
magnetic order, domains and domain walls, soft ferrites, hard ferrites, magnetization dynamics, electrical and 
magneto-optical properties. Application and devices of ceramic magnet. Ferro-fluids, recent developments in this 
area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. C. Buchanan, Ceramic Materials for Electronics, CRC Press, 2004. 
2. D. C. Jiles, Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, CRC Press, 2nd Edition, 1998
3. J. Smit and H. P. J. Wijn, Ferrites, Wiley, 1959. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. M. Levinson, Electronic Ceramics: properties, device and applications, CRC Press, 1987. 
2. R. Valenzuela, Magnetic Ceramics, CambridgeUniversity press, 1994. 
3. A. Goldman, Modern Ferrite Technology, Springer Science & Business, 2006. 
CR 445 APPLICATIONOF	PHASE	DIAGRAMS	 4 credits [3-1-0]
Some important three component systems- CaO–Al2O3 –SiO2, MgO-Al2O3-SiO2, SiO2-FeO-Fe2O3, MgO-FeO-Fe2O3, MgO-
Al2O3-Cr2O3. Quaternary System-MgO-CaO-SiO2-Fe2O3, MgO-SiO2-CaO-B2O3. The relevance of above phase diagrams in 
the ceramic system. Use of phase diagram in the sintering of ceramics; multiphase system containing a liquid phase, 
tungsten-carbide-cobalt system, porcelain, silicon nitride. Crystal growing techniques and use of phase diagrams in 
crystal growth; growth from stoichiometric melts, impurity distribution coefficient, constitutional supercooling and 
non-stoichiometric melts, single crystal growing of Yttrium-iron-garnet, cubic barium-titanate, gallium-phosphide, 
quartz crystal from hydrothermal solution; Phase diagrams in the development and use of refractories; Alumino-
silicates, Silica and basic refractories, Fusion cast refractories. Liquid immiscibility in oxide systems. Study of 
dissolution of refractories in molten slag; Application of the phase diagrams in cement chemistry; calcium-alluminate 
cement and Portland cement
Phase diagrams in glass making, iron-carbon system, in the stabilization of zirconia phases. Phase diagrams in high 
pressure systems, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Y. M. Chiang, D. Birnie III and W. D. Kingery, Physical Ceramics: Principles for Ceramic Science and Engineering, Wiley, 1996. 
2. D. R. F. West, Ternary Phase Diagrams in Materials Science, Maney Publishing; 3rd edition, 2002. 
3. A. M. Alper (Editor), G. Kostorz (Series Editor), H. Herman (Series Editor), Phase Diagrams in Advanced Ceramics, Treatise on 
Materials Science and Technology Academic Press. 1995. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. M. Alper, Phase Diagrams: Materials Science and Technology, Vol. I, II and III, Academic Press, 1970. 
2. E. M. Levin, R. S. Roth, G. Smith, C. R. Robbins, H. F. McMurdie, L. P. Cook and M. K. Reser, Phase Diagram for Ceramists: salts, 
The American Ceramic Society, 1975
CR 446 THIN	FILM	AND	COATING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Film deposition techniques and processes: Introduction, Gas kinetics: vapours and gases, distribution function, 
transport properties. Vacuum technology: pump selection and exhaust handling, contamination sources and 
pressure measurement. Evaporation: thermodynamics of evaporation, sources, deposition monitoring. Deposition: 
adsorption, surface diffusion, nucleation, structure development, interfaces, adhesion, temperature control. 
Molecular beam epitaxy: process overview, deposition system, application, Sputter deposition, introduction, sputter 
sources, applications. Chemical Vapour deposition, Laser ablation, Plating: electroplating, electro-less plating, and 
application. Sol-gel coating, Pattern generation techniques: microlithography, optical tools for microlithography, 
etching, advanced process. Properties of Thin Film Materials: Substrates for thin film applications, thin film conductor 
materials, Resistors for thin film applications, thin film dielectrics, Thin film magnetics, advanced thin film materials. 
Characterization of Thin Film: Electro-Optical measurements, Chemical composition and Structural characterizations, 
nano-scale and atomic scale measurements. Thermal barrier coatings. Diamond films: nucleation and growth, 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
237
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
properties of diamond, applications. Thin film optical materials: behavior of light at the interface, multilayer optical 
coating, preparation and formulation of optical thin films, applications, recent developments in this area. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Seshan, Hand Book of Thin Film Deposition Technique, William Andrew INC, 2002
2. D. L. Smith, Thin film deposition, McGraw-Hill Professional, 1995. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. Elshabini-Riad and F. D. Barlow, Thin Film Technology Hand Book, McGraw-Hill Professional, 1997. 
CR 471 ADVANCED	CERAMICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of bending strength in circular pellets; Determination of bending strength by three- and four-point 
bending methods; Determination of elastic modulus of bar type specimen; Determination of tensile strength of 
composites; Determination of fracture toughness by SENB and ISB method; Determination of hardness by Vickers 
Indentation; Determination of Curie temperature for ferro-electric materials; Temperature dependent conductivity of 
insulators/ semiconductors; Determination of frequency dependent dielectric constant and loss-factor of capacitors; 
Study of grain and grain boundary resistivity by Cole-Cole plot; Determination of B-H curve, permeability and magnetic 
loss of ferrite; Arrhenius plot for determination of activation energy of conduction. 
Department of Ceramic Engineering
Detail Syllabi
238
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Detail Syllabi
239
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	COMPUTER	SCIENCE	AND	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
CS 102 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-1-0 4
CS 171 Computing Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
CS 172 Computing Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
CS 211 Discrete Mathematics 3-1-0 4
CS 212 Object Oriented Programming and Web Application using C# 3-0-0 3
CS 213 Principles of Programming Languages 3-1-0 4
CS 222 Database Management Systems 3-0-0 3
CS 241 Analog Electronics 3-0-0 3
CS 242 Computer Organization and Architecture 3-1-0 4
CS 243 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
CS 270 Analog Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 271 Data Structure Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 272 Database Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 273 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 274 VHDL Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 312 Systems Analysis and Design 3-0-0 3
CS 314 Simulation and Modeling 3-0-0 3
CS 315 Optimization Techniques 3-1-0 4
CS 321 Data Communication 3-0-0 3
CS 325 Cryptographic Foundations 3-0-0 3
CS 326 Data Communication and Computer Networks 3-0-0 3
CS 327 Relational Database Management Systems 3-0-0 3
CS 331 Theory of Computation 3-1-0 4
CS 332 Algorithm Analysis and Design 3-1-0 4
CS 333 Operating Systems 3-0-0 3
CS 334 Operating Systems Design 3-0-0 3
CS 335 Computer Graphics and Multimedia 3-0-0 3
CS 336 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
CS 338 Systems Software 3-1-0 4
CS 341 Microprocessors and Microcontrollers 3-1-0 4
CS 343 Digital Logic Design 3-0-0 3
CS 371 Data Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 372 Systems Analysis and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 373 Microprocessor Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 374 Operating Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 375 Computer Graphics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 376 Digital Signal Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 377 Computational Statistics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 378 Systems Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 379 Network Design and Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
240
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 382 System Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 384 Algorithm Analysis and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 412 Software Engineering 3-1-0 4
CS 413 Advanced Programming Skills 3-0-0 3
CS 414 Software Project, Process and Quality Management 3-1-0 4
CS 416 Bioinformatics 3-1-0 4
CS 417 Graph Theory and Network Algorithms 3-0-0 3
CS 418 Real Time Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 421 Computer Networks 3-0-0 3
CS 423 Ad-hoc and Wireless Networks 3-1-0 4
CS 425 Data MiningandData Warehousing 3-1-0 4
CS 427 Network Security 3-1-0 4
CS 430 Information Theory and Coding 3-1-0 4
CS 431 Compiler Design 3-0-0 3
CS 432 Distributed Operating Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 433 Algorithm Design 3-0-0 3
CS 434 Image Processing 3-0-0 3
CS 435 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3
CS 436 Soft Computing Techniques 3-0-0 3
CS 437 Soft Computing 3-0-0 3
CS 438 Pattern Recognition 3-1-0 4
CS 439 Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
CS 440 Cryptographic Foundation 3-0-0 3
CS 441 Advanced Computer Architecture 3-1-0 4
CS 442 Computer System Architecture 3-0-0 3
CS 443 Embedded Systems 3-1-0 4
CS 444 Cluster and Grid Computing 3-1-0 4
CS 445 Parallel Algorithms 3-1-0 4
CS 446 Graph Theory 3-0-0 3
CS 448 Artificial Intelligence & Neural Network 3-0-0 3
CS 449 VLSI System Design 3-1-0 4
CS 450 Multimedia & Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
CS 451 Image Processing 3-0-0 3
CS 471 Network Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 472 Software Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 473 Real Time Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 474 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 477 Soft Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 478 Parallel Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 479 Advanced Linux Programming Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 481 Compiler Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
241
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 482 Distributed Computing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 485 Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 0-0-3 2
CS 489 Computer Vision Laboratory 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
CS 102 data	structures	and	ALGORITHMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction: Data types, Abstract data types, data Structures, storage structure, Concept of ‘O’ notation, Time 
complexity & Space complexity issues. Arrays, Stacks &  recursions, Queues, Linked list, Hashing, Trees Graphs & 
their ApplicationsLinked representation of Graph, Adjacency Matrix, Adjacency list, Shortest path algorithm, Graph 
Traversal: BFS, DFS, BDD and its application, Sorting Techniques : Bubble sort, Quick sort, selection sort, Heap sort, 
insertion sort, merge sort, radix sort & efficiency considerations. Searching Techniques: Sequential search, index 
sequential search, Binary search, Interpolation Search, Tree Searching, and Fibonacci Search. Files: properties of 
physical storage media, file organization techniques. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Tremblay & Sorenson, Introduction to Data Structures with applications, Tata-McGraw-Hill, 2nd Ed., 2006. 
2. M. A. Weiss, Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, Addison-Wesley, 3nd Ed., 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Sahani, Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, Silicon Press, 2004. 
2. A. V. Aho, J. E. Hopcroft & J. D. Ullman, Data Structures and Algorithms, Addition-Wesley, 1998. 
3. G. A. V. Pai, Data Structures and Algorithms: Concepts, Techniques and Applications, Tata McGraw Hill, 1st Ed, 2008. 
4. D. Samanta, Data Structures, PHI, 2004. 
CS 171 COMPUTING	LABORATORY	–	i 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Read a line of text and count the number of characters, vowels, consonants and blank spaces in it.; Implementation of 
matrix manipulations; Programs on recursive function.; Interchanging values of two variables without a third variable 
using arithmetic operators and also using bit-wise operators.; Programs on the use of functions.; Programs on Sorting 
and Searching.; Programs on files for creating, populating and manipulating a simple database. 
Implementation of linked list.; Implementation of other data structures.; Menu driven programs. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Gottfried, Programming with C, 2nd Edition, Shaums Outline, TMH. 
2. E. Balguruswami, Programming with C, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2006. 
CS 172 COMPUTING	LABORATORY	–	iI 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Implementation of: Classes and objects.; Constructors and Destructors.; Friend and virtual functions.; Operator 
overloading, function overloading.; Conversion of one data type to another.; Inheritance (single, hierarchical, multiple 
and multilevel).; Templates.; Exception handling. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Balguruswami, Programming with C++, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rded, 2006
2. B. Strouptrup, C++ Programming Language, Pearson Education, 3rd Ed, 2009. 
CS 211 discrete MATHEMATICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Sets and Propositions: Mathematical induction, The Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion, Proposition, Theory 
of inference, Predicate Calculus, Methods of proof, Permutations and Combinations, Relations and Functions: 
properties of binary relations, Closure of relations, Warshall’s algorithm, Equivalence relations Partial ordering 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
242
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
relations and lattices, Chains and antichains, Functions, Composition of Functions, Invertible Functions, Recursive 
Functions, Pigeonhole principle, Graphs: representation of Graphs, operations on graphs, paths and circuits, graph 
traversals, shortest path in weighted graphs, Eulerian paths and circuits, Hamiltonian paths and circuits, Traveling 
sales persons problem, Planar graphs, Graph Coloring, Application of Graphs, Tress and Cut-Sets: Rooted trees, Binary 
search trees, Spanning trees, Minimum spanning trees, Kruskal’s Algorithm, Prims Algorithm, Transport Network, 
Modelling Computation: Languages, Phase structure and grammars, Types of grammars and Languages, Finite state 
machines, Discrete Numeric functions and Generating Functions, Recurrence relations and recursive algorithms, 
Linear recurrence relations, Solving Recurrence Relations by Generating Functions, Divide and conquer algorithms, 
Groups and rings: groups and subgroups, Cosets and Lagrange’s theorem, Codes and Group codes, Boolean Algebras: 
Lattices and algebraic systems, Principle of duality, Distributive and complemented lattices, Boolean functions and 
Boolean expressions, Simplification of logic expressions using Karnaugh Map, Simplification of logic expressions using 
Quine-McClusky method, Propositional Calculus, Design and Implementation of Digital Networks, Switching Circuits. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. L. Liu, D. P. Mohapatra, Elements of Discrete Mathematics: A computer Oriented Approach, Tata-McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2008. 
2. B. Kolman and R. C. Busby, Discrete Mathematical Structures for Computer Science, Prentice Hall of India, 5th Ed, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Kenneth H. Rosen, Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, Tata McGraw Hill, 5thed, 2003. 
2. J. P. Tremblay and R. Manohar, Discrete Mathematical Structures with Applications, to Computer Science, TataMc-Graw Hill, 
2001. 
3. Joe L. Mott, A. Kandel, and T. P. Baker, Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists & Mathematics, Prentice Hall of India, 
2nded, 2006. 
4. N. Deo, Graph Theory with applications to Engineering & Computer Science, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
5. S. Lipschutz, Discrete Mathematics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2005. 
CS 212 OBJECT-ORIENTED	PROGRAMMING	AND	WEB	APPLICATION	USING	C# 3 credits [3-0-0]
Object Oriented Programming (OOP): Introduction to object-oriented programming, concepts of classes, objects, 
encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism, Data Abstraction etc; Introduction to C#, understanding C# in . NET 
environment; programming using C#.; Web Based Applications; Web-based projects, development process, role of 
web server, document object model, COM, . NET framework, HTML, DHTML, XML, CSS for designing web pages, life 
cycle of ASP pages, concepts of ASP. NET, components & characteristics, building ASP. NET web pages using C#, web 
configuration, data access using ADO. Net, XML etc; Database connectivity with SQL Server, Understanding DDL, 
DML, DCL, TCL commands, real time cases in database management, Security issues, maintenance and updating 
web projects etc.; Real Life Problem solving using OOP concepts; Requirements Analysis and Specification, Software 
Design; Real life software module development using C# and ASP. NET, Software Testing & Implementation; Multiple 
case studies to be undertaken. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Kogent Solution Inc, Black Book (Asp. Net & C#) 3. 5, platinum edition, Dreamtech press, 2010. 
2. E Balgurusamy, Programming in C#, 2nd edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008. 
3. Matthew MacDonald, Beginning ASP. NET 3. 5 in C#, 2nd edition, Apress, 2010. 
4. James A. Senn, System Analysis Design, PHI. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Online and Offline Access to MSDN Library
CS 213 PRINCIPLES	OF	PROGRAMMING	LANGUAGES 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	171	&	CS	172
The Role of Programming Languages: Toward Higher-level Languages, Problems of Scale, Programming Paradigms, 
Language Implementation Bridging the Gap Language Description: - Syntactic Structure: Expression Notations, 
Abstract Syntax Trees, Lexical Syntax, Context -Free Grammars, Grammars for Expressions, Variants of Grammars; 
Statements: Structured Programming, Types: Data Representation, Procedure Activations; Object Oriented 
Programming: Groupings of Data and Operations: - Constructs fro Program Structuring, Information Hiding, Program 
Design with Modules, Modules and Defined Types, Class Declarations in C++, Dynamic Allocation I C++, Templates: 
Parameterized Types, Implementation of Objects in C++. 7. Object-Oriented Programming: - What is an Object?, 
Object-Oriented Thinking, Inheritance, Object-Oriented Programming in C++, An extended C++ example, Derived 
Classes and information Hiding, Objects in Smalltalk, Smalltalk Objects have self; Functional programming: Elements 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
243
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
of Functional Programming, functional Programming in a Typed Languages, functions as First-Class Values, ML, 
Functional Programming with Lists
Other Paradigms: Logic Programming, an Introduction to Concurrent Programming. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Sethi, Programming Languages – Concepts & Constructs, 2nd Ed, Pearson Education. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. W. Sebesta, Concepts of Programming Languages, 8th edition, Addison-Wesley, 2007. 
2. M. L. Scott, Programming Language Pragmatics, 2nd edition, Morgan Kaufmann, 2005. 
3. T. W. Pratt & M. V. Zelkowitz, Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, 4th edition, Prentice-Hall, 2001. 
4. S. Krishnamurthi, Programming Languages: Application and Intepretation, Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-
Share Alike 3. 0, Version: http: //www. cs. brown. edu/~sk/Publications/Books/ProgLangs/2007-04-26
CS 222 database management systemS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	102
Introduction to Database systems: Data Independence, Data Models, levels of abstraction, structure of DBMS, 
Relational Model, Integrity constraints, Relational Languages, Query Languages: SQL, QUEL, QBE, Aggregate 
operators, Embedded and Dynamic SQL. File Organization: Storage, Buffer management, Record and page formats, 
File organization techniques, Indexing. Query optimization: Query processing on various operations, Translating 
SQL queries, estimating the cost. Database design: E-R Model, Functional dependencies, normalization, multi-
valued dependencies. Concurrency control and recovery: transaction, schedules, Lock based concurrency, Lock 
management, Concurrency control without locking, Crash recovery- log, check pointing, media recoveries. Database 
Security, Distributed databases design, Object Oriented database design & its implementation, Introduction to recent 
advances in database technology. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. D. Ullman, Principles of Data Base Systems, Galgotia, 2nded, 2003. 
2. A. Silberschatz, H. F. Korth & A. Sudarshan, Database system Concepts, McGraw Hill, 5thed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Desai, An Introduction to database system, Galgotia, 1997. 
2. C. J. Date: An Introduction to Data Base Systems, Addison Wesley, 1995. 
3. R. Elmasri, S. Navathe, S. B. Navathe, R. Sunderraman, Fundamentals of Database Systems, Addison Wesley, 2nded, 1994
4. R. R. Krishnan, Database Management Systems, McGraw Hill, reprint 2007 
CS 241 ANALOG	ELECTRONICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Bipolar Junction Transistors and Field Effect Transistors, Biasing for BJT/FET and thermal stabilisation, transistors 
at low frequencies, small signal equivalent circuits, linear analysis. Feedback Amplifier Classifications, input and 
output resistance of feedback amplifiers, Effect of feedback on gain and impedance, frequency response of feedback 
amplifiers; emitter and source follower; low frequency response, h-parameters; transistors at high frequencies, high 
frequency equivalent circuit and response, gain-BW product. Crystal, Wien bridge and tuned oscillators, Multi stage 
amplifiers, Distortion in amplifiers. OP-amp bias currents and offset voltages, frequency response, measurement of 
OP-amp parameters, coupled amplifier, Class A and Class B power amplifiers; push –pull amplifiers; distortion in Class 
AB push-pull amplifiers; audio power amplifier, Class C amplifiers. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Malvino & D. J. Bates, Electronics Principles, Tata McGraw Hill, 7th Ed, 2007. 
2. J. Millman, C. C. Halkias, Integrated Electronics: Analog and Digital Circuits and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 35th reprint, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Boylested & Nashelsky, Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory, Prentice Hall of India, 7th Ed, 2007. 
2. D. A. Bell, Electronic Devices and Circuits, Prentice Hall of India, 4th Ed, 2004. 
3. J. Millman, Microelectronics, McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 1988. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
244
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 242 Computer	Organization	and	Architecture 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Overview of Computer Architecture and Organization: Contrast between computer architecture and organization; 
Fundamentals of computer architecture: Organization of von Neumann machine; Instruction format; execution 
cycle; Instruction types and addressing modes; Computer Arithmetic: representation of integers and real numbers; 
algorithm for carrying out common integer and floating-point operation; Memory system organization and 
architecture: Memory system hierarchy; main memory organization; cache memory; virtual memory; Interfacing and 
Communication: I/O fundamentals; I/O techniques; Interrupt; memory system design and Interfacing; Buses; Device 
subsystem: External storage system; RAID architecture; Control Unit Design: Instruction sequencing, Instruction 
interpretation, control memory, Hardwired Control, Micro programmed Control, Micro programmed Computers. I/O 
organization: Bus control, Serial I/O (study of Asynchronous and synchronous modes, USART & VART), Parallel Data 
transfer: (Program controlled: Asynchronous, synchronous & Interrupt driven modes, DMA mode, interrupt controller 
and DMA controller). Organization of CPU: Single vs multiple data path; ISA; Control unit; Instruction pipelining; 
Trends in computer architecture: CISC, RISC, VLIW, Introduction to ILP; Pipeline Hazards: Structural, data and control; 
Reducing the effects of hazards. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. C. Hamacher, Z. G. Veranesic, and S. G. Zaky, Computer Organisation, Tata McGraw Hill, 5th Ed, 2002. 
2. J. P. Hayes, Computer Architecture and Organisation, McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 1998. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. M. Mano, Computer System Architecture, Pearson, 3rd Ed, 2004. 
2. W. Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture – Designing for Performance, Prentice Hall of India, 7th Ed, 2007. 
3. D. A. Pattersen and J. L. Hennesy, Computer Organisation and Design: The HardwareSoftware Interface, Elsevier, 2nd Ed, 2006
CS 243 DIGITAL	ELECTRONICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
QuineMcCluakey method of Minimization, Minimization of multiple I/O Switching functions, Design of combinational 
logic: few examples. Full Adder / Subtracter, BCD Adder, LAC Adder, Decoder, MUX / DEMUX three structure, 
Combinational logic design using ROM array, Applications of MSI designs. Difference between Combinational 
and Sequential circuits, Flip Flops, Counters, Shift Registers and PLA. Basic models of sequential M/C, Analysis of 
Asynchronous and synchronous circuits, Synthesis of completely and incompletely specified synchronous sequential 
M/Cs. Fault detection and location, classical methods, path senistizing method, Equivalent Normal-Form method, 
Two-level-circuit, fault detection, Multi-level-circuit, fault detection, Boolean difference method. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. Mano and M. D. Cilette, Digital Design, Pearson education, 4th Ed. 2008. 
2. R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. F. Wakerly, Digital Design Principles and practices, PHI, 4th Ed, 2005. 
2. M. Mano, Digital Logic and Computer Design, 1st Ed, Pearson, 2002. 
CS 270 ANALOG	ELECTRONICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design of 2 stage RC coupled amplifier.; Design of integrator and differentiator using OP-AMPS.; Design and verification 
of different amplifier configurations with OPAMPS.; Determination of different electrical parameters of OPAMP.; 
Design of OPAMP application circuits using P-SPICE simulator. 
CS 271 DATA	STRUCTURE	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	CS	102
Following is a list of experiments to be coded in C or C++. Details of each experiment are to be provided by the subject 
teacher.; Understanding the use of arrays.; Programming insertion, deletion, merging in arrays. Realization of various 
linked lists.; Simulating a stack.; Using stack for various conversions of expression like prefix etc.; Realizing a queue.; 
Performing various operations on queue.; Simulate a tree and perform various tree traversals.; Programming various 
sorting algorithms.; Understanding the use of hashing. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
245
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 272 DATABASE	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	CS	102
Database Lab: 
Study of SQL syntax; Study of Oracle syntax; Study of DB2 syntax; Writing Views, Assertions, Triggers; PL/SQL Programs 
to be simulated given by instructor; Generating forms and reports; Following database to be designed and queries 
to be processed using SQL.; Oracle and DB2: Order processing; insurance; student enrollment; library; banking 
enterprise; Primary keys, data types and relevant queries for the above database will be supplied by the instructor; 
Front end may be created by using VB, Java. 
CS 273 DIGITAL	ELECTRONICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
To study and verify various logic gates.; Verification of DE-MORGAN’ theorem.; Implementation of Boolean function 
using NAND and NOR logic.; Implementation of half and full adder circuit is using NAND logic gate.; To design and 
study RS and JK Flip-flop. 
To study and design JK flip-flop.; To design module-7 counter.; Designing a buffer register 4 bit using D-flip flop.; 
Design a 2 to 4 line decoder using AND and NOT gates.; Design a decimal to binary priority encoder
CS 274 VHDL	PROGRAMMING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites: CS 243
Write VHDL code to implement the following: Full adder using multiplexer; Binary Multiplexer ( 8 bit/16 bit); Floating-
Point addition; Carry save Multiplier (8 bit); Two’s complement Multiplier; Parity Encoder; GCD Processor; Universal 
Shift register with asynchronous reset; FSM to detect the flag sequence of HDLC frame 
CS 312 SYSTEMS	ANALYSIS	AND	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Concepts of data and information, System Concepts, Components of a system, Characteristics of a system, Types 
of systems: closed systems, open systems, man made systems. Information Systems, Types of information Systems: 
Transaction processing systems, Management information systems, Decision support systems, Expert systems. 
Computer based information systems (CBIS), Feasibility study. Systems development life cycle model, Iterative 
waterfall model, Prototype model, Incremental model, Spiral model. Systems Analysis and Design, Classical and 
Structured approaches, Structured Analysis tools: DFD, Data dictionary, Decision tree etc., Systems Design, input/
output design, Software Design and Documentation tools: HIPO and Warnier / Orr Diagrams. System testing and 
quality assurance. SystemImplementation. HW/SW selection, Conversion, Software Maintenance. Activitynetwork. 
CPM, PERT, Gnatt Chart, Recent trend in systems analysis and design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. George, Valacich, Modern Systems Analysis and Design, Pearson, 2nd Ed, 2005. 
2. J. A. Senn, Analysis and Design of Information Systems, McGraw Hill, 1989. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. C. Lucas, The Analysis, Design and Implementation of Information Systems, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
2. E. M. Awad, System Analysis & Design, Galgotia Publication, 2002. 
3. R. Mall, Fundamentals of Software Engineering, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
CS 314 SIMULATION	AND	MODELING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Definition of System: Types of Systems-continuous and discrete; Modeling process and Definition of a model; 
Computer workload and preparation of its model; verification and validation modeling procedures; Comparing 
model data with real system data; Differential and partial differential equation models; Combining discrete events 
and continuous models; (Examples of a computer should be used for illustration and discussion purposes). Simulation 
Process: Use of simulation; Discrete and continuous simulation languages (such as GPSS, SLAM, SIMSCRIPT, II and 
SIMULA); Study and use of one language (depending on the availability) in detail. Use of Database and A. I. techniques 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
246
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
in the area modeling and simulation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. Banks, Modeling and Performance Measurement of Computer Systems, Prentice Hall of India, reprint 2007. 
2. A. M. Law, W. D. Kelton, Simulation Modelling and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. T. A. Payer, Introduction to Simulation, McGraw-Hill. 
2. J. Reitmen, Computer Simulation Application, Wiley, reprint 2000. 
3. W. A. Speriet, Computer – aided Modeling and Simulation, Academic Press, reprint 2002. 
CS 315 Optimization	techniques 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	MA	101,	MA	102,	MA	201,	MA	202
Origin, Characteristics and Techniques, operations research Modeling, Linear Programming Constraints with less than 
equal to, equal to and greater than equal to types. The Simplex method, Dual simplex method, Revised simplex 
method, Duality theory and sensitivity analysis. Transportation and Assignment problems, Traveling Salesman 
problem using branch and bound method, Network analysis including PERT-CPM, Integer programming, Non-linear 
programming problem solving using Fibonnacci search method, Golden ratio method, Gradient search method, 
Gradient projection method and Hessian matrix method, Queuing theory and applications for different M/M/I and 
M/M/C models. Inventory models considering holding cost, ordering cost and penalty costs. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. A. Taha, Operations Research an Introduction, Prentice Hall of India, 8th Ed, 2007. 
2. F. S. Hillier, G. J. Lieberman, Introduction to Operation Research, 8th Edition, Mc-Graw-Hill, 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. S. Rao, Optimisation Theory and applications, Wiley Eastern Ltd. India, 1978, reprint 2005. 
2. B. E. Gillet, Introduction to Operation Research: a computer oriented algorithmic approach Tata McGraw Hill, 1979, reprint 
2005. 
CS 321 data	COMMUNICATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Data transmission fundamentals: historical overview; time/frequency representation of data signals; elements of 
a communications link; definition of key terms; factors affecting system design, Binary and multi-level signaling: 
information transfer rate; calculation of channel capacity; bandwidth efficiency, Baseband data transmission: the 
problem of inter symbol interference; achieving a Nyquist channel response; recovery of symbols from noise; bit error 
rate performance for baseband data systems, Bandpass digital modulation: binary modulation schemes (eg ASK, FSK, 
PSK); multi-level digital modulation (e.g. M-ary ASK, M-ary FSK, M-ary PSK, QAM), Coding theory and practice: source 
coding; channel coding; block coding; convolutional coding; combined coding and modulation, Multi-user digital 
modulation techniques such as frequency division multiple access (FDMA); time division multiple access (TDMA); 
code division multiple access (CDMA); combined multiple access systems; Error detection and correction, Digital 
transmission fundamental
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Forouzan, Data Communications and Networking, Tata McGraw Hill, 4th Ed, 2007. 
2. W. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, Prentice Hall of India, 8th Ed. 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Leon-Garcia & I Widjaja, Communication Networks, Fundamental Concepts & Key Architecture, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 2003. 
CS 325 CRYPTOGRAPHIC	FOUNDATIONS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	211,	CS	332.	
Introduction to cryptography: Attacks, Services, and Mechanisms, Security Attacks, Security Services, A Model 
for Internet work Security. Conventional Encryption: Classical and Modern Techniques, Conventional Encryption: 
AlgorithmsTriple DES, International Data Encryption Algorithm, Blowfish, RC5, CAST, RC2, Characteristics of Advanced 
Symmetric Block Ciphers. Confidentiality Using Conventional Encryption: Placement of Encryption Function, Traffic 
Confidentiality, Key Distribution, Random Number Generation.; Public-Key CryptographyPrinciples of Public-Key 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
247
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Cryptosystems, The RSA Algorithm, Key Management, Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange, Elliptic Curve Cryptography, 
Message Authentication and Hash Functions: Authentication Requirements, Authentication Functions, Message 
Authentication Codes, Hash Functions, Security of Hash Functions and MACs. Hash and Mac Algorithms ( MD5 
Message Digest Algorithm, Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-l), RIPEMD, HMAC), Digital Signatures and Authentication 
Protocols and Web Security. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Stalling, Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practices, 4th Ed, 2005
2. B. A. Forouzan, Cryptography and Network Security, McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. Hershey, Cryptography Demystified, McGraw Hill, 2003
2. R E Smith, Internet Cryptography, Addison Wesley
3. J. Knudsen, Java Cryptography, O’Reilly, 1998. 
CS 326 DATA	COMMUNICATION	AND	COMPUTER	NETWORK 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Data transmission fundamentals: time/frequency representation of data signals; elements of a communications 
link; definition of key terms; Binary and multi-level signaling: information transfer rate; calculation of channel 
capacity; bandwidth efficiency, Baseband data transmission: the problem of inter symbol interference; achieving a 
Nyquist channel response; recovery of symbols from noise; bit error rate performance for baseband data systems, 
Advantages of Computer networks, LAN vs. WAN, ISO/ISI seven-layer architecture, networks topologies. Physical 
Layer: transmission media, analog transmission, digital transmission. Data Link Layer: Framing, Error detection and 
correction, MAC Layer : Ethernet Network Layer : Routing Algorithms – Shortest path, distance vector, link state 
routing, flooding, hierarchical routing, Internetworking – Tunneling, Encapsulation, Fragmentation, Virtual circuits, 
datagrams, Internet Protocol (IP) – Header Structure, addresses, options, etc. Routing protocols (examples: RIP, 
HELLO, OSPF, BGP). Classless Inter-Domain Routing, ICMP, ARP, RARP, BOOTP, DHCP. Transport Layer : Flow and 
error control, multiplexing, establishing and releasing a connection. Transmission Control Protocol, User Datagram 
Protocol, Domain Name Service. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. A. Forouzan, Data Communication and Networking, Tata McGraw Hill, 4th Ed, 2007. 
2. A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Prentice Hall of India, 4th Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. F. Halsall, Data Communication, Computer Networks and Open Systems, 4th Ed, AddisonWelsey, 2003. 
2. B. A. Forouzan, TCP/IP Protocol Suit, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2006. 
CS 327 RELATIONAL	DATABASE	MANAGEMENT	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Introduction to Database Systems: Goals of Data Base Management Systems, Data Independence, Data Models, Brief 
Review of file system, File systems vs. DBMS, Relational Languages, Structure of DBMS, Storage structures of files. 
Database design: ER model, Relational model and relational algebra, Relational database design, Queries in a DBMS, 
Basic queries in SQL, Database design issues, Functional dependencies, Normal forms. Introduction to Database 
security; Introduction to Object Oriented database design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. D. Ullman, Principles of Data Base Systems, Galgotia Publisher, New Delhi, 2003. 
2. Silberschatz, H. F. Korth & A. Sudarshan, Database system Concepts, McGraw Hill, 5th Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Desai, An Introduction to database system, Galgotia, 1997. 
2. C. J. Date: An introduction to Data Base Systems, Addison Wesley, 1995. 
3. R. Elmasri, S. Navathe, S. B. Navathe & R. Sunderraman, Fundamentals of Database Systems, Addison Wesley, 2nd Ed, 1994
4. Raghu Ram Krishnan, Database Management Systems, McGraw Hill, reprint 2007. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
248
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 331 Theory	of	Computation 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 211
Finite Automata and Regular Expressions: Deterministic and non-deterministic finite automata, regular expressions, 
Two way finite automata, finite automata with output: Mealy and Moore machines; Properties of Regular Sets: 
Pumping lemma, closure properties, decision algorithm, MyHill- Nerode theorem and minimization of finite automata; 
Context-Free Grammars(CFG): CFGs, derivation trees, simplification, Chomsky normal forms, Greibach normal 
forms; Pushdown Automata(PDA): Definitions, relationship between PDA and context free languages; Properties 
of Context-Free Languages: Pumping lemma, closure properties, decision algorithm; Turing Machines: The turing 
machine model, computable languages and functions, techniques for turing machine construction, modification 
of turing machines, church’s hypothesis, Turing machines as enumerators; Undecidability: properties of recursive 
and recursively enumerable languages, universal Turing machines, rice’s theorem, post correspondence problem, 
greibach’s theorem, introduction to recursive function theory, oracle computation; Chomsky Hierarchy: regular 
grammars, unrestricted grammars, context sensitive languages, relations between classes of languages. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Mishra & Chandrasekharan, Theory of computer science: Automata language andcomputation, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Ed, 
2007. 
2. P. Linz, Introduction to Formal Language and Computation, Narosa, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Nasir & Sirmani, A Text Book on Automata Theory, Cambridge University Press, 2008. 
2. H. R. Lewis & C. H. Papadimitriou, Elements of the Theory of Computation, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
CS 332 ALGORITHM	ANALYSIS	and	DESIGN 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS102,	MA	101,	MA	102
Abstract data structure as an organization of data with specified properties and operations Time and space 
analysis of algorithms Asymptotic Notation: Big Oh, Omega, Theta Notations, Average, best and worst case analysis 
Simple recurrence relations and use in algorithm analysis Analysis of Algorithms: Loops, Recursive Calls (Selection 
Sort, Insertion Sort, Euclid’s Algorithm, Hanoi Towers), Solving Recurrences.; Algorithmic strategies: Categorizing 
algorithms by methodology, Brute-force/exhaustive search algorithms, Greedy Algorithms, Divide and Conquer 
Strategy, Dynamic Programming, Backtracking algorithm and Branch-Bound Algorithm.; String Search problem: Naïve 
algorithm, Rabin-Karp scheme, FSA-based algorithm Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm; Complexity theory: Decidability of 
problems: Halting problem, NP-class of problems, P-class problems, NP=P question, Polynomial problem reduction, 
Boolean satisfiability and Cook’s theorem, NP-hardness and NP-completeness, NP-completeness FAQ including how 
to handle NP-hard problems, Examples of NP-completeness proofs: SAT to 3-SAT, 3-SAT to 3-D Matching, Reasoning 
with Cardinal algebra, Other models of computation: Art. Neural Net, Quantum Computing, DNA computing. Concept 
of lower bound theory & approximation algorithm. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and S. Rajasekaran, Fundamentals of Computer Algorithms, University Press, Indian reprint, 2009. 
2. T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, and R. Rivest and C. Stain, Introduction to Algorithms Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. H. Dave and H. B. Dave, Design and Analysis of Algorithm, Pearson Ed 2008. 
2. S. K. Basu, Design Methods and Analysis of Algorithms, Prentice Hall of India, 1st Ed, 2005. 
CS 333 OPERATING SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Evolution of Operating Systems and Overview, Basic Concepts: Batch processing, Multiprogramming, Interrupts, 
Hardware concepts, Different types of OS, Goals, OS Structure, System calls. Process Management: Process, 
Concurrent Processes, Threads, Multithreading, Scheduling Algorithms, Inter-process Communication: Critical 
Section problem, Synchronization Mechanisms: software and hardware, semaphores, monitors, message passing, 
Classical IPC problems, Deadlocks: conditions, Deadlock Handling Strategies. Memory Management: Fixed & Variable, 
Paging, Segmentation, Virtual Memory: Demand paging, page replacement algorithms, Trashing, Strategies to 
control Trashing. File & Device Management: Files, Directory, File system Implementation, Example File systems, 
I/O hardware, I/O buffering, RAID. Security & Protection: Breaches, Solutions, mechanisms, Inside Attacks, outside 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
249
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
attacks. Case study on UNIX. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. L. Peterson & A. Silberschatz, Operating System Concepts, John Wiley & Sons, 7th Ed, 2008. 
2. A. S. Tanenbum, Modern Operating Systems, Pearson, 3rd Ed, 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Harris, Schaum’s Outline of Operating Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 11th Reprint, 2006
2. Stallings, Operating Systems, Internals and Design Principles, 5th Ed, PHI, 4th print, 2008
3. M. J. Bach, the Design of the UNIX operating system, Prentice Hall, reprint 2006. 
CS 334 Operating	Systems	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	171/CS	172
Evolution of Operating Systems and Overview, Basic Concepts: Batch processing, Multiprogramming, Interrupts, 
Hardware concepts, Different types of OS, Goals, OS Structure, System calls. Process Management: Process, 
Concurrent Processes, Threads, Multithreading, Scheduling Algorithms, Queuing Models (M/M/1, M/M/K), 
Inter-process Communication: Critical Section problem, Synchronization Mechanisms: software and hardware, 
semaphores, monitors, message passing, Classical IPC problems, Deadlocks: conditions, Deadlock Handling 
Strategies. Memory Management: Fixed & Variable, Paging, Segmentation, Virtual Memory: Demand paging, page 
replacement algorithms, Trashing, Strategies to control Trashing. File & Device Management: Files, Directory, File 
system Implementation, Example File systems, I/O hardware, I/O buffering, RAID. Security & Protection: Breaches, 
Solutions, mechanisms, Inside Attacks, outside attacks. Concepts of Advanced OS: Distributed, Real Time, Multimedia, 
Multiprocessor, Network, Embedded, Database Operating Systems. Case studies – DOS, UNIX and Windows 2000. 
Basic OS Design Principles: Goals, Interface Design, Performance Considerations, Trends in Design. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. J. L. Peterson & A. Silberschatz, Operating System Concepts, John Wiley & Sons, 7th Ed, 2008. 
2. A. S. Tanenbum, Modern Operating Systems, Pearson, 3rd Ed, 2008. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Harris, Schaum’s Outline of Operating Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 11th Reprint, 2006. 
2. Crowley, Operating system, a Design-Oriented Approach, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006. 
3. M. J. Bach, The Design of the UNIX operating system, Prentice Hall, reprint 2006. 
4. Stallings, Operating Systems, Internals and Design Principles, 5th Ed, PHI, 4th print, 2008. 
CS 335 computer	graphics	and	Multimedia 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	MA	101,	MA	102
Introduction to Computer Graphics: Use of computer graphics, Elements of picture creation; Graphics Hardware: 
Display technologies, Graphics display devices, Graphics input primitives and devices; Two dimensional output 
primitives: Different forms of line equations, Points, Lines, Line drawing algorithms, Circle generating algorithms, 
Ellipse generating algorithm, Parallel algorithms, Filled area primitives; Two dimensional transformations: The 
geometries of transformations, Linear transformations, Translation, Rotation in plane, Rotation in space, Reflection, 
Homogeneous coordinates, Composite transformations; Polygons; Two dimensional viewing: Window to view port 
transformations, Line clipping, Polygon clipping; Three dimensional concepts: Display methods, Transformation, three 
dimensional viewing, Projections; Three dimensional shapes representations: Spline, Bezier curves and surfaces, 
Octrees, BSP trees, Fractal geometry; Halfspaces; Visible surface detection; Solid modeling; Shading; Advanced 
modeling techniques; Animation; Multimedia; Multimedia authoring tools; Graphics and image data representation; 
Color in Image & Video; Basics of Video and Audio; Compression; Content based retrieval. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Hearn and M. P. Baker, Computer Graphics, C Version, Pearson, 2nd Ed, 2003. 
2. Ze-Nian Li, M. S. Drew, Fundamentals of Multimedia, Pearson, 1st Ed, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. F. S. Hill, Computer Graphics using Open GL, Pearson, 2nd Ed, 2001. 
2. R. Steinmetz, K. Nahrstedt, Multimedia Systems, Springer, 2004. 
3. J. D. Foley, A. Van Dam, S. K. Feiner and J. F. Hughes, Computer Graphics - Principles and Practice, Second Edition in C, Addison 
Wesley, 2nd Ed, 2003. 
4. D. F. Rogers, J. A. Adams, Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 2001
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
250
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 336 dIGITAL	SIGNAL	PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	241,	MA	101,	MA	102
The DFT and Digital Convolution: The DFT and its relationship to other transforms, properties of the DFT, FFT, DIT 
and DIF FFT algorithms, prime factor FFT algorithms, Analysis and Design of discrete-time systems in the frequency 
domains, Frequency domain characteristics of LTI systems, LTI frequency selective filters, linear filtering method based 
on DFT, the Goertzel algorithm and chirp Z-transform algorithm. Inverse systems and Deconvolutions, Realisation of 
discrete systems: Design of digital filters, Quantization effects in Digital Signal Process,  Power Spectrum 
Estimation, Adaptive Filters. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. G. Proakis and D. G. Manolkis, Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithms and Applications, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd 
Ed, 1996, reprint 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. Oppenheim & R. W. Schafer, Digital Signal Processing, Prentice Hall of India, 8th Ed, 2002. 
2. S. W. Smith, Digital Signal Processing: A Practical Guide for Engineers and Scientists, Newness – Elsevier Science, 1sted, 2002. 
CS 338 SystemS SOFTWARE 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	341,	CS	334
System Software and Machine Architecture, IBM 360 Instruction Set Architecture and Assembly language programs, 
The simplified Instructional Computer, traditional (CISC) Machine, RISC Machines; Language Processing; Assemblers, 
Cross assemblers, Macro processor, Single pass and multi pass, Linkers, Loaders, Relocating loaders and direct linking 
loaders, Compilers and Interpreters, Cross compilers, Lexical analyzer, Syntax analyzer, Intermediate and Machine code 
generation, Implementation Examples; Formal grammars and languages, Software Toolsfor program Development, 
Editors, Debug Monitors, Programming Environments, user Interface. Introduction to Operating Systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. B. Brey, The Microprocessor 8086/8088, 80186/188, 80286, 80386, 80486 and Pentium and Pentium Pro Processors, 
Pentium 2, Pentium 3 and Pentium 4: Architecture, Programming and Interface, Prentice Hall of India, 7th Ed, 2007. 
2. M. A. Mazidi, JG Mazidi and RD Mckinlay, The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded System, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Liu & Gibson, Microcomputer System – The 8086/8088 Family Architecture, Programming and Design, Prentice Hall of India, 
2nd Ed, 2006
CS 341 MICROPROCESSORS	AND	MICROCONTROLLERS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	243
Architecture of the 8086/8088 microprocessor, Internal operations, Maximum mode, Minimum mode of operation, 
Addressing modes, Instruction Format, Instruction execution timing, 8088 vs 8086; Assembly Language Programming: 
Data Transfer instruction, Arithmetic and Logical instructions, String Manipulation instructions etc needed for ALP, 
Modular programming: Simple assembler directives and operators, Linking and relocation, Stack, Procedures, Interrupt, 
Macro, Programming examples. Byte and string manipulation, I/O programming. 8087 Numeric data processor and its 
use in the 8086/8088 system, 8089 I/O processor (IOP), Architecture, Communication between CPU & IOP. Arithmetic 
Coprocessor, MMX and SIMD Technology; Bus interface, The 80386/80486/Pentium/Pentium II/Pentium III/Pentium 
IV Microprocessors; 8051 Microcontroller: Architecture, Instruction, Programming and Interfacing. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. B. Brey, The Intel Microprocessors 8086/8088, 80186/188, 80286, 80386, 80486 and Pentium and Pentium Pro Processors, 
Pentium 2,, Pentium 3 and Pentium 4: Architecture, Programmingand Interface, Prentice Hall of India, 7thed, 2007. 
2. M. A. Mazidi, J. G. Mazidi and R. D. McKinlay, The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded Systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed, 
2006 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Liu & Gibson, Microcomputer Systems - The 8086/8088 Family Architecture, Programming and Design, Prentice Hall of India, 
2nd Ed, 2006. 
2. D. V. Hall, Microprocessor and Interfacing, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
251
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 343 DIGITAL	LOGIC	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
History and overview, logic circuits, switching, memory, registers, digital systems, Boolean logic, sequential logic, gates, 
circuits, combinational circuits, Switching theory, number systems, binary arithmetic, switching algebra, minimization 
of switching functions, design of medium scale combinational logic module, multiplexers, demultiplexers, encoders, 
decoders, comparators, multipliers, dividers, ALUs, Hierarchical design, Memory elements: clocked and unclocked 
memory devices, master-slave devices, basic flip flops, timing constraints and propagation delays, data registers, RAM, 
Sequential logic : FSM, Mealy and Moore models, Synchronous sequential circuits, functional units, Digital System 
Design: Hierarchical, Modular, synthesis, design principles and techniques, functional units, controlling concepts, 
timing concepts, PLDs, FPGA, PLA, ROM, PAL, PLD. Modeling and simulation: schematic capture, schematic modeling, 
hardware description languages (VHDL, verilog), Functional simulation, simulation test bench design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Brown and Z. Vranesic, Fundamentals of Digital Logic with VHDL Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2005
2. A. B. Marcovitz, Introduction to Logic Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rded, 2003. 
2. S. C. Lee, Digital Circuits & Logic Design, Prentice Hall of India, 2001. 
CS 371 DATA	COMMUNICATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Study of serial and parallel communication; Study of modem communication; Study of wireless communication; 
Principles of time division multiplexing; Voice communication; Principles of pulse code modulation techniques; Bit 
synchronization and frame synchronization; Principles of data reconditioning; Amplitude shift keying modulation and 
demodulation techniques; Delta modulation and demodulation. 
CS 372 SYSTEMS	ANALYSIS	AND	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
For Questions 1 – 10, do the followings: 
Prepare the SRS document. You have to identify the appropriate requirements for each problem.; Draw the Context 
flow diagrams, level 1 and level 2 DFDs, using any CASE tool. 
Draw the Structure charts, using any CASE tool.; Develop the corresponding software using C with a user friendly GUI 
and appropriate Database.; Develop a Library Information System for a technological University.; Develop a software 
for student registration in a technological University.; Develop a software for hall management of your Institute.; 
Develop a software for the Guesthouse automation of your Institute.; Develop a software for automating various 
bookkeeping activities of the student’s cooperative store of your Institute.; Develop the Student’s Academic Record 
Management Software of your Institute.; Develop a word processing software with some limited number of facilities 
such as making bold, italics, underline, cut, copy and paste etc.; Develop a graphics editor software package, using 
which one can create / modify several common types of graphics entities.; Develop a software for automating the 
various activities associated with developing a CASE tool for structured software analysis.; Develop software for 
automating various activities of the department offices of your Institute. 
CS 373 MICROPROCESSOR	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Design of a variable time delay counter (mod 8).; Measuring pulse width of a square wave.; Interfacing a stepper 
motor.; Interfacing a matrix keyboard (4×4).; Interfacing traffic light controller.; Implementing ADC.; Generating 
triangular saw tooth and square wave.; Communication between microprocessors using 8255PPI chip.; Generate 
various waveforms using DAC; Interfacing CRT to microprocessor.; Programming using 8086 kit. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
252
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
CS 374 OPERATING	SYSTEMS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Process related assignments: A parent process creates a child process that prints its PID.; The child creates a 
grandchild and sleeps 120 seconds.; The grandchild immediately exists.; The parent sleeps for 60 seconds and then 
kills all the processes.; message passing between child process and parent process using message queue; message 
passing through pipes and shared memory; Simulation of CPU Scheduling Algorithms. (FCFS, RR, SJF, SPN, SRTF, HRRN, 
Priority, Multilevel Queuing); Simulation of Dekker’s, Petersons, Bakery Algorithms; Program to test the creation 
of 15-message queue starting at id-number 0-14.; Program to solve classical DINNING PHILOSPHER PROBLEM; 
Simulation of Banker’s Algorithm for Deadlock Avoidance, Prevention; Simulation MVT and MFT with best fit, first fit, 
next fit and worst fit algorithms.; Program for FIFO, LRU, and OPTIMAL page replacement algorithm?; Simulate the 
following file organization techniques; (a) Single Level Directory;  (b) Two Level Directory; (c) Hierarchical (d) DAG; 
Basic Shell Script problems provided by Instructor on various shells of Unix
CS 375 COMPUTER	GRAPHICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Basic shapes rasterisation.; Scan conversion of polygons; Polygon, Pattern filling; Understanding 2D transformation; 
Realizing various Projections; Representing curves and surfaces; Realizing parametric cubic curves and bicubic 
surfaces; Visible Surfaces Determination; Realizaition of illumination and shading; Basics of OpenGL
Thematically oriented project for the whole duration of the course for individual students or group of students
CS 376 DIGITAL	SIGNAL	PROCESSING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Representation of digital signal; Waveform generation; Convolution and Deconvolution; Correlation, Cross Correlation; 
Signal Transformation; Filter Design; Filter requirements and specification; Zero-Pole Analysis; Spectral Analysis; Case 
studies in DSP
CS 377 COMPUTATIONAL	STATISTICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Data	Structure:	Vector and matrix data manipulation. Data input/output. Data format. Statistical	graphics:	scatter 
plots, histograms, quantile-quantile (QQ) plot. visualizing bivariate data.; Random numbers: probability integral 
transform, how to generate random variables, vectors, matrices and stochastic processes.; Matrix algebra: Singular 
value decomposition, Cholesky factorization, Generalized inverse (Psudo inverse). least-squares estimation.; Monte-
Carlo methods: Monte-Carlo integral, importance sampling, Monte-Carlo inference.; Markov	 Chains: random 
walks, transition probability. Chapman-Kolmogorov equation. invariant distributions.; Markov	 chain	 montecarlo 
(MCMC): Metropolis-Hastings algorithms. Gibbs sampler. Bayesian inference. Bayes estimates.; Bootstrap methods: 
Bootstraping techniques are introduced for estimation and inference problems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Wendy L. Martinez and Angel R. Martinez, Computational Statistics Handbook with MATLAB Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2002
CS 378 SYSTEMS	PROGRAMMING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Review of Instruction Set Architecture (8085, 8051 & IBM 360); Fixed Point Arithmatic, Text Processing, Keyboard 
and Screen Processing, Disk processing, Copy-Protection Schemes, Implementation of a simple editor, adding syntax 
directed facilities to an editor; Implementation of Assembler; Single Pass; Two-pass; Multi-pass; implementation of 
Macro Processor; Single Pass; Integration with Assembler; Implementation of Loaders and Linkers; Implementation of 
Compiler; Lexical analyzer (Lex); Parser (Yacc); Intermediate code generation; Machine Code Generation
CS 379 NETWORK	DESIGN	AND	SIMULATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Installation and configuration of NS2; Creating a network: nodes, links and queues; Creating connections, traffic 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
253
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and computing routers; Insertion of errors and analysis of trace file; Simple project on NS2 – wired, wireless and 
combination of wired and wireless; Implementation of new protocols in NS2. 
CS 382 SYSTEM	PROGRAMMING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Review of Instruction Set Architecture (8085, 8051 & IBM 360); Fixed Point Arithmetic, Text Processing, Keyboard 
and Screen Processing, Disk processing, Copy-Protection Schemes, Implementation of a simple editor, adding syntax 
directed facilities to an editor; Implementation of Assembler: SinglePass; Two-pass; Multi-pass; Implementation of 
Macro Processor; SinglePass; Integration with Assembler; Implementation of Loaders and Linkers; Implementation of 
Compiler; Lexical analyzer (Lex); Parser (Yacc); Intermediate code generation; Machine Code Generation
CS 384 ALGORITHM	ANALYSIS	AND	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Programming that uses recurrence relations to analyze recursive algorithms. Computing best, average, and worst case 
time complexity of various sorting techniques. Solving an optimization problem (TSP or 0-1 knap sack, or n-queen 
problem etc. ) using different algorithmic strategies: Brute-force algorithms, Greedy algorithms, Divide-and-conquer, 
Backtracking, Branch-and-bound, Heuristics, Randomized algorithms, Dynamic programming. Performance analysis of 
different internal and external sorting algorithms with different type of data set. Use of divide and conquer technique 
to solve some problem that uses two different algorithm for solving small problem. Implementation of different 
basic computing algorithms like Hash tables, including collision-avoidance strategies, Search trees (AVL and B-trees), 
Representations of graphs (adjacency list, adjacency matrix), Depth- and breadth-first traversals, Shortest-path 
algorithms (Dijkstra’s and Floyd’s algorithms), Transitive closure (Floyd’s algorithm), Minimum spanning tree (Prim’s, 
Solin’s and Kruskal’s algorithms), Topological sort, Pattern matching and string/text algorithms. Performance analysis 
of algorithms related to network Flow and matching problems Verification of lower bound of an algorithm, analyzing 
the performance of randomized algorithms for a specific problem; The laboratory work involves implementing various 
types of algorithms in C++, C (through the creation of header file) and Perl programming. 
CS 412 SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS312
Managing software projects Project management concepts, Software process and Project metrics, Software Project 
Planning, Risk Analysis and Management, Project scheduling and tracking, Software Quality Assurance, Software 
Configuration Management. Conventional methods for software engineering System Engineering, Analysis concepts 
and principles, Analysis Modeling, Design Concepts and principles, Architectural design, User Interface Design, 
Component level Design, Software Testing Techniques, Software testing Strategies, Technical metrics for software. 
Object oriented software engineering Object Oriented Concepts and principles, Object oriented analysis, object 
oriented Design, Object oriented testing, Technical metrics for object-oriented Systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. S. Pressman, Software Engineering A Practitioner’s Approach, Tata McGraw Hill, 6th Ed, 2005. 
2. I. Sommerville, Software Engineering, Pearson, 7th Ed, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. Jalote, An Integrated Approach to Software Engineering, Narosa, 2nd Ed, 1999. 
2. A. Behferooz & F. J. Hudson, Software Engineering Fundamentals, Oxford Univ. Press, 1996. 
3. R. Mall, Fundamentals of Software Engineering, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
CS 413 ADVANCED	PROGRAMMING	SKILLS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Different programming paradigms, Introduction to Java, Data types, Variables, Arrays, Operators, Control statements, 
Classes, Constructors, Destructors, Garbage collection, Overloading methods, Overloading Constructors, Argument 
passing, Returning objects, Recursion, Inheritance, Method overriding, Dynamic method dispatch, Abstract classes, 
Packages, Importing packages, Interfaces, Nested interfaces, Applying interfaces, Handling Exceptions, Java built-
in exceptions, Introduction to multi-threaded programming, The java thread model, Synchronization, Messaging, 
The thread class and runnable interface, Creating a thread, Creating multiple threads, Enumertions, I/O basics, 
Applets, The HTML applets tag, Java library, Handling events, Introduction to AWT, The concurrency utilities, Java 
beans, Introduction to swings, Servelets. Introduction to C#, Basic concepts of . NET: the C# environment, Literals, 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
254
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Variables and data types, Operators and expressions, Control statements, Methods in C#, Arrays, Strings, Structures 
and Enumertions, Classes and objects, Inheritance and polymorphism, Interfaces, Operator overloading, I/O basics, 
Handling Exceptions, multi-threading in C#, Windows and web based application development on . NET, Recent 
trends in programming methodologies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. Schildt, The Complete Reference Java, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, 7th Ed, 2006. 
2. E. Balagurusamy, Programming in C#: A Primer, Mc-Graw Hill, 2nd Ed, 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. E. Balagurusamy, Programming in JAVA, Mc-Graw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2007. 
2. J. M. Slack, Programming and Problem Solving with JAVA, Thomson/Brooks Core Publishing Company, 1st Indian Reprint, 2007. 
CS 414 SOFTWARE	PROJECT,	PROCESS	AND	QUALITY	MANAGEMENT 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 312, CS 412
Introduction to S/W project management, S/W project management competencies, responsibilities of a software 
project manager, Software process, S/W process models, project planning, organization of project team, S/W size 
estimation, estimation of effort & duration, Halstead’s software Science, models, dependency & scheduling, staffing, 
Organizing a software engineering project, S/W configuration management, monitoring & controlling S/W projects, 
developing requirements, risk management, project tracking & control, communication & negotiating, S/W quality, 
S/W quality engineering, defining quality requirements, quality standards, practices & conventions, ISO 9000, ISO 
9001, S/W quality matrices, managerial and organization issues, defect prevention, reviews & audits, SEI capability 
maturity model, PSP, six sigma
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Hughes, M. Cotterell, Software Project Management, McGraw Hill, 4th Ed, 2005. 
2. R. Walker, Software Project Management, Pearson, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. H. Thayer, Software Engineering Project management, IEEE CS Press, 2nd Ed, 1988. 
2. R. Pressman, Software Engineering A Practitioner’s approach, McGraw Hill, 4th Ed, 2005. 
CS 416 bioinformatics 4 credits [3-1-0]
Pre-requisite:	CS	332,	CS	425
Genetics
Cell and Molecular Biology
Biochemistry
Introduction; Databases - mapping, sequence, structure, non-redundant; Sequence alignment - pair wise and 
multiple; phylogenetics; Structure prediction methods - homology, threading, abinitio; Sequence analysis - class and 
secondary structure prediction; motifs - PROSITE; detecting functional sites in DNA; OR Finder; Computer science 
perspective - pattern recognition, hidden Markov models; Data Miming Using Soft computing Techniques. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. D. Baxevanis & B. F. F. Ouellette, Bioinformatics, Wiley Interscience, 1998. 
2. A. M. Lesk, Introduction to bioinformatics, OXFORD University Press, 1st Ed, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. L. Salzberg, D. B. Searls and S. Kasifeds, Computational methods in molecular biology, Elsevier, 1998. 
2. R. F. Doolittle, Computer methods for macromolecular sequence analysis, Academic Press, 1996. 
3. M. Bishop, Guide to human genome computing, Academic Press. 
CS 417 GRAPH	THEORY	AND	NETWORK	ALGORITHMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisite	:	CS326
Introduction: Graphs, Isomorphism, Walks, Paths, Circuits, Trees, Properties of Trees, Cotrees and Fundamental 
Circuits, Cut Sets, Fundamental Cut Sets and Cut Vertices, Planar and Dual Graphs, Metric Representation of 
Graphs, Coloring and covering and partitioning of a graph, chromatic number, chromatic partitioning, chromatic 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
255
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
polynomials, matching, covering, four color problem, Directed graphs, some type of directed graphs, Directed paths, 
and connectedness, Euler digraphs, trees with directed edges, fundamental circuits in digraph, matrices A, B and C 
of digraphs adjacency matrix of a digraph,, enumeration, types of enumeration, counting of labeled and unlabeled 
trees, polya’s  theorem, graph enumeration with polya’s theorem. 
Graph Algorithms: Elementary Graph Algorithms, Representations of graphs, Breadth-first search, Depth-first search, 
Topological sort, strongly connected components 
Minimum Spanning Trees: Growing a minimum spanning tree, The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim, Single-Source 
Shortest Paths: Shortest paths and relaxation, Dijkstra’s algorithm, The Bellman-Ford algorithm, Single-source 
shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs, Difference constraints and shortest paths, All-Pairs Shortest Paths: Shortest 
paths and matrix multiplication, The Floyd-Warshall algorithm, Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs, and A general 
framework for solving path problems in directed graphs; Maximum	Flow:	Flow networks, The Ford-Fulkerson method, 
Maximum bipartite matching, Preflow-push algorithms, The lift-to-front algorithm 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson and Ronald L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms, Prentice Hall of India, 3rded, 2006. 
2. N. Deo, Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering and Computer Science, Prentice Hall of India, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Douglas B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, 2nded, Prentice Hall of India, 2007. 
2. R. Diestel, Advanced Graph Theory, Springer Verlag Heidelberg, New York, 2005
3. M. T. Goodrich and R. Tamassia, Algorithm Design: Foundations, Analysis, and Internet Examples, Wiley, 1sted, 2001. 
CS 418 REAL	TIME	SYSTEMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS334, CS341
Introduction to Real-Time systems, applications of Real-Time systems, basic model of Real-Time systems, characteristics 
of Real-Time systems, types of Real-Time systems: hard, firm, soft, timing constraints, modeling timing constraints, 
Real-Time task scheduling: basic concepts, clock driven scheduling, table driven scheduling, cyclic, schedulers, 
hybrid schedulers, event driven scheduling, EDF Scheduling, RMA, DMA, resource sharing among RT tasks, Priority 
inversion, Priority Inheritance Protocol, Highest Locker Protocol, Priority Ceiling Protocol, Scheduling Real-Time tasks 
in multiprocessor and distributed systems, Fault-tolerant scheduling of tasks, clocks in distributed Real-Time systems, 
Commercial Real-Time Operating Systems, timers, UNIX and Windows as RT OS, POSIX, PSOS, VRTX, QNX, RT Linux, 
Lynx, other RT OS, benchmarking RT OS, RT communications, QoSframework, models, Real-Time Communication in a 
LAN, IEEE 802. 4, RETHER, Communication over Packet Switched Networks, Routing algorithms, RSVP, rate control, RT 
databases, Applications, characteristics of temporal data, Concurrency control, Commercial RT databases. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. A. Laplante, Real-Time Systems Design & Analysis, Willey, 3rd Ed, 2004. 
2. R. Mall, Real-Time Systems, Pearson, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. M. Krishna and K. G. Shin, Real-Time Systems, McGraw Hill, reprinted 2004. 
2. J. W. S. Liu, Real-time Systems, Pearson Education, 6th impression, 2008. 
CS 421 ComPuter NETWORKs 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	326
Network fundamentals: protocols and standards; reference models; the significance of layered network architectures; 
connections and connectionless protocols, Physical links and interfaces: modems and modem standards; LAN 
characteristics and concepts; interconnection of LANs; WAN characteristics and concepts, Link layer aspects, 
synchronous and asynchronous transmission; Framing, Error detection and correction, Sliding window protocols; 
MAC Layer; network layer aspects, addressing, connection vs connectionless, Routing Algorithms, internetworking; 
transport layer aspects, reliable transport connections, Internet Protocol (IP); naming and addressing; routing; the 
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP); application and management protocols, Exploring Internet services: the dial-in 
end-user; the direct connection user; the Internet Service Provider; the global Internet, Emerging technologies over 
the Internet, such as IPv6 and ATM for a multimedia network; Internet Telephone; 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. L. Peterson and B. S. Davie, Computer Networks – A System Approach, Elsevier, 4th Edition, Reprint 2009. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
256
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Pearson, 4th Ed, 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. A. Forouzan, TCP/IP protocol suite, Tata McGraw Hill, Reprint 2008
2. F. Halsall, Data Communication, Computer Networks and Open Systems, Addison Welsey, 4th Ed, 2003. 
CS 423 Ad-hoc	and	WIRELESS	NETWORKS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 421
Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Issues in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks, Ad Hoc Wireless Internet; MAC Protocols for Ad 
Hoc Wireless Networks: Issues in Designing a MAC Protocol for Ad Hoc Wireless Networks, Classifications of MAC 
Protocols; Routing Protocols for Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Issues in Designing a Routing Protocol for Ad Hoc 
Wireless Networks, Classifications of Routing Protocols, Power-Aware Routing Protocols; Multi-cast routing in Ad Hoc 
Wireless Networks: Issues in Designing a Multicast Routing Protocol, Classifications of Multicast Routing Protocols, 
Energy-Efficient Multicasting, Multicasting with Quality of Service Guarantees, Application-Dependent Multicast 
Routing; Security Protocols for Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Security in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks. Network Security 
Requirements. Issues and Challenges in Security Provisioning. Network Security Attacks. Key Management. Secure 
Routing in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks; Energy Management in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Classification of Energy 
Management Schemes, Transmission Power Management Schemes, System Power Management Schemes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. S. Ram Murthy, B. S. Manoj, Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols, Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Ed. 2005. 
2. RaminHekmat, Ad-hoc Networks: Fundamental Properties and Network Topologies, Springer, 1st Ed. 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Tavli and W. Heinzelman, Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Energy-Efficient Real-Time Data Communications, Springer, 1st Ed. 2006. 
2. G Anastasi, E Ancillotti, R Bernasconi, and E S Biagioni, Multi-Hop Ad Hoc Newtorks from Theory to Reality, Nova Science 
Publishers, 2008
CS 425 DATA	MINING	AND	DATA	WAREHOUSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 222, MA 201
Introduction to Data mining:  Motivation for Data Mining, its importance, Role Data in Data Mining, Data Mining 
functionalities, patterns in data mining, Type of patterns, Classification of Data Mining Systems, Major issues in Data 
Mining; Data Warehousing and OLTP technology for Data Mining, Data Mining Languages, and System Architectures, 
Concept Description: Characterization and Comparison, Mining Association Rules in Large Databases, Classification 
and Prediction, Cluster Analysis, Mining Complex Data, Applications and Trends in Data Mining Characteristics of data 
warehouse, Data Mart, Online Analytical Processing, OLAP tools, Data warehouse Architecture, Organizational Issuer, 
Tools for Data warehousing, Performance consideration, case studies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. Han & M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, Morgan Kaufmann, 2nd Ed, 2006. 
2. M. J. A. Berry and G. Linoff, Mastering Data Mining: The Art and Science of Customer Relationship Management, Wiley 
Computer Publishing, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. Adriaans & D. Zantinge, Data Mining, Addison Wesley, 1996. 
2. R. Mattison, Data Warehousing: Strategies, Tools and Techniques, McGraw Hill, 1996. 
3. P. Ponniah, Data Warehousing Fundamentals: A Comprehensive Guide for IT Professionals, Wiley, 2001. 
CS 427 NETWORK	SECURITY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	325
Key exchange protocols. Diffie-hellman and its variants, Man in the middle attack. PKI and certificate based key 
exchange. Key management. Protocol weakness in TCP/IP and other protocols. Various types of attacks. Security 
protocol at application level: PGP, SHTTP, SSH etc. Security protocol at socket level: SS/TSL. Security protocol at 
network level: IPSec. Security protocol for remote connections through dial-up etc: PPTP, L2TP. Firewall and packet 
filtering. Proxy or application level gateways as security devices. Virtual private networks, Intrusion detection system. 
Privacy protection and anonymity services. Electronic payment system. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
257
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Stalling, Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practices, 4th Ed, PHI, 2007. 
2. B. A. Forouzan, Cryptography and Network Security, McGraw Hill, 1st Ed. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. M. Kizza, Computer Network Security, Springer, 2005. 
2. Peterson and Davie, Computer Networks A System Approach, Elsevier, 3rd Ed. 
CS 430 INFORMATION	THEORY	AND	CODING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	MA	201
Introduction to information Theory, Information and entropy, properties of entropy of a binary memory less source, 
Measure of Information, Source Coding, Shannon-Fano coding, Huffman coding, Arithmetic Coding, Predictive 
Coding, Lempel Zivcoding, channel coding, Channel capacity, noisy channel coding theorem for DMC. Linear block 
codes, generator matrices, parity check matrices, encoder syndrome and error detection-minimum distance, error 
correction and error detection capabilities, cyclic codes, coding and decoding. Coding convolutional codes, encoder, 
generator matrix, transform domain representation state diagram, distance properties, maximum likelihood decoding, 
Viterbi decoding, sequential decoding, interleaved convolutional codes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Bose, Information Theory Coding and Cryptography, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008. 
2. Khalid Sayood, Introduction to Data Compression, Elseiver, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Roman, Coding and Information Theory, Springer, 1992. 
2. R. J. McEliece, The Theory of Information and Coding, Cambridge Uinv Press, 2004. 
3. T. M. Cover, J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, Wiley, 2008
4. F. J. MacWilliams, N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes, Elseiver, 1988. 
CS 431 COMPILER	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	331	&	CS	338
Introduction:	Introduction and overview of the compilation process, Model of a compiler, translators, interpreters, 
assemblers, languages, Types of compilers, assemblers, interpreters and compilers. Compilation of simple expressions 
and statements, Organization of a compiler, compiler design tools, bootstrapping, compiler, Computer architecture 
vs. compiler design; Context-Free Grammar and Syntax Analysis: Syntax analysis, Parsing: Top-Down and Bottom 
Up parsing, general parsing strategies. Brute-force approach, recursive descent parser and algorithms, simple LL(1) 
grammar, LL(1) with null and without null rules grammars, Bottom-up parsing- Handle of a right sentential form, 
Shift-reduce parsers, operator precedence parsing, LR, SLR, canonical LR and LALR grammar and parsers; Symbol-
Table	 contents,	 organization	 and	Management;	 Syntax	 –Directed	 Definitions	 and	 Translations: syntax-directed 
translation schemes, intermediates code generation, translation schemes for programming language constructs; 
Code	Optimization,	Code	Generation,	Error	Handling.	
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. V. Aho, Ravi Sethi & Jeffrey D. Ullman, Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, Pearson Education, 1st Ed, 2008. 
2. K. C. Louden, Compiler Construction Principles and Practice, Thomson Learning Inc. 1st Ed, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. W. Apple, Modern compiler implementation in C, Cambridge University Press, 1st Ed, 2003. 
2. W. A. Barrett, John D. Couch, C. Couch, Compiler Construction: Theory and Practice, Science Research Associates, 1979. 
3. K. C. Louden, Compiler Construction: Principle and practice, Galgotia, 1997. 
CS 432 DISTRIBUTED	OPERATING	SYSTEMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS334, CS421
Introduction to parallel Computing, Solving problems in parallel, Structures of parallel computers, Instruction level 
parallel processing, Parallel Algorithms, Parallel programming, Operating Systems for parallel computers, Performance 
Evaluation of parallel computers; Characterization of distributed systems, Design goals, Communication and computer 
networks, Distributed processing, Distributed operating systems, Client Server Communications, Remote Procedure 
calls, File Service, Name Service, Distributed transactions and concurrency control, fault tolerance and security. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
258
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Synchronization & Coordination, Distributed Algorithms, research issues. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. Coulororis, J. Dollimore & T. Kindberg, Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design, Addison-Wesley, 3rd Ed, 2001. 
2. M. Singhal & N. G. Shivaratri, Advanced Concepts in Operating Systems, McGraw Hill, 1994. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. K. Sinha, Distributed Operating Systems, IEEE Press, 1997. 
2. H. F. Jordan, Fundamentals of Parallel Processing, Pearson, 2004
3. C. Hughes & T, Hughes, Parallel and Distributed Programming Using C++, Pearson, 1st Ed, 2004. 
4. W. Buchanan, Distributed Systems and Networks, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004. 
5. P. S. Pacheco, Parallel Programming with MPI, Morgan Kaufmann, 1997. 
CS 433 ALGORITHM	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
History and overview: Identifying some contribution to algorithms and relate their achievements to the knowledge 
area. Associate some of the themes involved with algorithms, Name some applications where algorithms are 
important, Describe how computer engineering users or benefits from algorithm; Basic algorithm analysis: Asymptotic 
analysis of upper bound and average complexity bounds, Identifying difference among average, best and worst case 
behaviors, Big ‘O’, little ‘o’ omega, and theta notation, Empirical measurement of performance, Time and space 
tradeoffs in algorithms, Using recurrence relations to analyze recursive algorithm. Problem, problem representation, 
solution space, solution through best algorithm, methods of algorithm design and analysis. The relationship 
of algorithms to data structures; Algorithmic strategies: Categorizing algorithms by methodology, Brute-force/
exhaustive search algorithms, Greedy Algorithms, Divide and Conquer Strategy, Dynamic Programming, Backtracking 
algorithm and Branch-Bound Algorithm; Computing Algorithms: Simple numerical algorithms, sequential and binary 
search algorithms, sorting algorithms, Hash Table, including collision avoidance strategies, Binary search Trees, 
Representation of Graphs, Depth and Breadth first traversal, shortest path algorithms( Dijkstra and Floyd’s algorithm) 
Transitive closure (Floyd’s algorithm), Minimum spanning tree(Prim’s and Kruskal algorithm); Algorithmic complexity: 
Tractable and intractable problems, definition of the class P and NP, NP completeness (Cook’s theorem), Standard 
Np-complete problems, Uncomputable functions, The halting problem, Implications of Uncomputability, Coping with 
intractability. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and S. Rajasekaran, Fundamentals of Computer Algorithms, University Press, Indian reprint, 2008. 
2. T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, and R. Rivest and C. Stain, Introduction to Algorithms Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Weiss, Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Pearson, 4th Ed, 2008. 
2. S. K. Basu, Design methods and Analysis of Algorithms, Prentice Hall of India, 1st Ed, 2005. 
CS 434 IMAGE PROCESSING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Two-Dimensional Systems & Mathematical Preliminaries: Linear Systems and Shift Invariance; the Fourier Transform; 
Optical and Modulation Transfer Functions; Matrix Theory Results; Block Matrices and Kronecker Products; 
Random Signals; Discrete Random Fields; the Spectral Density Function; Some results from information theory. 
Image Perception, Image Sampling and Quantization, Image Transforms, Image Enhancement, Image Filtering and 
Restoration, Image Analysis and Computer Vision Spatial Feature Extraction; Transform Features; Edge Detection; 
Boundary extraction; Boundary, Region, Moment Representation; Structure; Shape Features; Texture; Scene Matching 
and Detection; Image Segmentation; Classification Techniques; Image Understanding. Image Reconstruction from 
Projections, Image Data Compression
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. C. Gonzalez & R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall, 3rd Ed, 2008. 
2. A. K. Jain, Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall of India, 1st Ed, 1989. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. K. Pratt, Digital Image Processing, Wiley-Interscience, 4th Ed, 2007. 
2. A. Rosenfled & A. C. Kak, Vol. I, Digital Picture Processing, Academic Press, 1976. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
259
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. J. S. Lion, Two Dimensional Signal and Image Processing, Prentice Hall, 1st Ed, 1989. 
CS 435 ARTIFICIAL	INTELLIGENCE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisite	:	NIL
Basic concepts of AI; Problems in AI; Applications; Production systems; Problem solving methods; Forward vs 
backward reasoning; Search in state spaces, state-space graph, uninformed search, heuristic search, general graph 
search algorithms, 2-agent games; knowledge representation using predicate calculus; rules of inference; converting 
arbitrary wff to conjunction of clauses, resolution reputation system; Answer extraction; Intro to expert system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Rich and K. Knight, Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nded, 1991. 
2. N. J. Nilsson, Principles of Artificial Intelligence, Narosa, 1986. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Russel and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: a modern Approach, Pearson, 2nded, 2003. 
2. D. W. Patterson, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
CS 436 soft	computing	TECHNIQUES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	211
Introduction to Neorofuzzy and Soft Computing, Fuzzy set theory, Fuzzy Rules, Fuzzy Reasoning, Fuzzy inference 
System, Neural Networks; Radial basis and recurrent neural networks, Hopfield Networks, Comparision of RBF and 
MLP Network, Running Algorithms, NeuroFuzzy Modeling, Applications of Soft Computing to Signal Processing, 
Image Processing, Forecasting, XOR Problem-traveling salesman problem, Image compression suing MLPs-character 
retrieval using hopfield networks, Introduction to Genetic Algorithm hybrid Systemsetc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Kecman, Learning and Soft Computing, Pearson, 1st Ed, 2001. 
2. D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search Optimization and Machine Learning, Addison Wesley, 3rd Ed. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Kosko, Neural Network and fuzzy systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
2. S. Goonatilake & S. Khebbal, Intelligent Hybrid Systems, Wiley, 1995. 
CS 437 soft	computing 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisite	:	NIL
Introduction to Neorofuzzy and Soft Computing, Fuzzy set theory, Fuzzy Rules, Fuzzy Reasoning, Fuzzy inference 
System, Neural Networks; Radial basis and recurrent neural networks, Hopfield Networks, Comparision of RBF and 
MLP Network, Running Algorithms, NeuroFuzzy Modeling, Applications of Soft Computing to Signal Processing, 
Image Processing, Forecasting, XOR Problem-traveling salesman problem, Image compression suing MLPs-character 
retrieval using hopfield networks, Introduction to Genetic Algorithm hybrid Systemsetc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Kecman, Learning and Soft Computing, Pearson, 1sted, 2001. 
2. D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search Optimization and Machine Learning, Addison Wesley, 3rded. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Kosko, Neural Network and fuzzy systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
2. S. Goonatilake & S. Khebbal, Intelligent Hybrid Systems, Wiley, 1995. 
CS 438 PATTERN RECOGNITION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 102, MA 102, MA 201
Introduction to pattern recognition, statistical pattern recognition, decision trees, classification using decision 
trees, obtaining Prules from decision trees, missing attribute values, error rates on recall sets, pruning decision 
trees, obtaining Prules by evolution, Bayes classification, estimation of probabilities, nearest neighbor classification, 
performance issues of a nearest neighbor classifier, Neural classifier, training of neural classifier, clustering, 
Agglomerative hierarchical clustering, K-means clustering, syntactic pattern recognition. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
260
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Shighal, Pattern Recognition: Techniques and Applications, Oxford University Press, 1st Ed, 2006. 
2. Christopher M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, Oxford University Press, 1st Ed, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. William Gibson, Pattern Recognition, Berkley Press, 1st Ed, 2005. 
2. Christopher M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 1st Ed, 2007. 
CS 439 COMPUTER	VISION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisite	:	NIL
Image Formation and Image Models: Cameras; Radiometry – Measuring Light; Shadows and Shading; Color 
representation; Linear filters; Edge Detection; Pyramids and Textures; Multiple view geometry; Stereo; Optical flow; 
Affine structure from motion; Projective structure from motion; Calibration; Segmentation; Fitting; Linear Tracking; 
Non-Linear Tracking; Template Matching; Object Recognition; Case study of various applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. A. Forsyth, J. Ponce, Computer Vision – A Modern Approach, Pearson, 2005. 
2. Linda. G. Shapiro, George C. Stockman, Computer Vision, Prentice Hall, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Bernd Jähne, Horst Haußecker, Computer Vision and Applications – A Guide for Students and Practitioners, Academic Press, 
2000. 
2. R. J. Schalkoff, Digital Image Processing and Computer-Vision, John Wiley and Sons, 1989. 
CS 441 advanced	computer	architecture 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 242, CS 341
Metrics for computer performance: clock rate, MIPS, CPI; Strength and weakness of performance metrics; role of 
Amdalh’s in computer performance; Classification of computer architecture: SIMD, MIMD, SISD and MISD; Processing 
unit design: Data path implementation, Microprogrammed execution. Instruction pipelining and parallel processing, 
Instruction level parallelism: VLIW, Vector processor, Multithreaded processor, Superscalar architecture; branch 
prediction; Prefetching; Speculative execution; Principles of pipelining and vector processing: Pipelining, Instruction 
and Arithmetic Pipelines, Principles of Designing Pipelined Processor, Vector Processing Requirements. Structure 
and Algorithms for array processors: SIMD Array Processors, SIMD Interconnection Networks, Parallel Algorithms 
for array Processors, Associative Array Processing. Multiprocessor architecture and programming: Inter-processor 
Communication Mechanisms, System Deadlocks and Protection, Multiprocessor Scheduling Strategies, Parallel 
Algorithm for Multiprocessor. Multiprocessor architecture. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Hwang and F. A. Briggs, Computer Architecture and Parallel Processing, McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2001. 
2. N Carter, Computer Architecture, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed. 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. L. Heressy and D. A. Pattersan, Computer Architecture A Quantitative approach, Elsevier, 3rd Ed. 2006. 
2. K. Hwang, Advanced Computer Architecture: Parallelism, Scalability, Programmability, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2004. 
CS 442 COMPUTER	SYSTEM	ARCHITECTURE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Organization of a computer, Von-Neumann stored computer architecture, Processor Organization: Information 
representation, Number formats, Instruction format; execution cycle, Instruction sets: Addressing modes and 
Formats, Fixed point arithmetic, ALU design, CPU structure and functions, Reduced Instruction set Computer: 
CISC Characteristics, RISC characteristics. Memory Organization: Memory technology: Memory device technology, 
Random access memory Virtual Memory, High speed Memory, Internal memory: semiconductor main memory, cache 
memory, Advanced DRAM organization, External memory, magnetic disk, RAID, Optical memory, magnetic tape. I/O 
organization: Bus control, Serial I/O (study of Asynchronous and synchronous modes, USART & VART), Parallel Data 
transfer: (Program controlled: Asynchronous, synchronous & Interrupt driven modes, DMA mode, interrupt controller 
and DMA controller). 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
261
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Carl Hamacher, Z. G. Veranesic, and S. G. Zaky, Computer Organisation, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, 5th Ed, 2002. 
2. William Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture Design for Performance, Prentice Hall of India, 7th Ed, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Morris Mano, Computer System Architecture, Prentice Hall of India, 1982. 
2. J. P. Hayes, Computer Architecture and Organisation, Mc-Graw Hill, 3rd Ed, 2006. 
3. D. A. Pattersen and J. L. Hennesy, Computer Organisation and Design: The HardwareSoftware Interface, Elsevier, 2nd Ed. 
CS 443 embedded systems 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 334, CS 341, CS 242, CS 243, CS 343
Introduction: Embedded system, Processor, hardware units, software embedding, SOC, NOC, VLSI circuit; Device 
and Device drivers, I/O devices, timer and counting devices, serial communication using IC, LAN and advanced I/O 
buses between the networked multiple devices, Host system, parallel communication using ISA, PCI, PCI-X, and 
advanced buses, device drivers, parallel port device drivers in a system, serial port device drivers. Interrupt service 
handling mechanism; Software and programming concepts: processor and memory selection for embedded system, 
embedded programming in C++, Java and UML, multiple processes and applications, problem of sharing data by 
multiple tasks and routines, interprocess communication; Real time OS: OS services, I/O subsystem, Network OS, 
Real-time Embedded system, Need of well tested and debugged RTOS, Introduction to C/OS-II. Case Studies of 
programming with RTOS: Smart card embedded system, Hardware and Software co-design: specification and design 
of an embedded system, use of software tools for development of an embedded system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Kamal, Embedded System Architecture, Programming and Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2005
2. R. Niemann, Hardware Software Codesign of Embedded System, Kulwer Academic, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. V. Iyer & P. Gupat, Embedded Real Time System Programming, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004. 
2. W. Wolf, Computer as Components: Principles of Embedded Computer System Design, Elsevier, 2005
3. S. Heath, Embedded System Design, 2nd Ed, Elsevier, 2005. 
4. R. Mall, Real Time Systems Theory and Practice, Pearson, 2008
5. F. Vahid & T. Givargis, Embedded Ssytem design: A unified Hardware/Software approach, Wiley, 2007
6. G. D. Michelli & L. Benin, Network-on-Chip, Morgan & Kaufman Publication, 2004. 
CS 444 cluster	and	grid	computing 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 334, CS 421, CS 332
Introduction	:	High Performance Computing (HPC), Grand Challenge Problems-Computational and communication 
intensive, Parallel Architectures-Classifications-SMP, MPP, NUMA, Clusters and Components of a Parallel Machine, 
Conventional Supercomputers and it’s limitations, Multi-processor and Multi-Computer based Distributed Systems. 
Cluster and Grids: Cluster Components-Processor/machine, High Speed Interconnections-goals, topology, latency, 
bandwidth, Example Interconnect: Myrinet, Inifiniband, QsNet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, Light weight 
Messaging system/Light weight communication Protocols, Cluster Middleware-Job/Resource Management System, 
Load balancing, Scheduling of parallel processes, Enforcing policies, GUI, Introduction to programming tools such 
as PVM, MPI, Cluster Operating Systems Examples: Linux, MOSIX, CONDOR, Characteristics of Grid, Computational 
services, Computational Grids, Data grids/Storage grids, management and applications, Different components of 
Grid-Grid fabric, Grid middleware, Grid applications and portal, Globus toolkit Ver. 2. 4, web services, MDS, GRAM, 
Grid Security –Cryptography, Authentication, Integrity, Digital Signature, Digital Certificates, Certificate Authority, 
MD-5, RSA, GSI, GSSAPI, Directory Service, LDAP, GRID FTP, GASS Fault Tolerance: Fault detection and diagnosis of 
Clusters and Grids. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Janakiram, Grid Computing, Tata McGraw Hill, 2005
2. R. K. Buyya, High Performance Cluster Computing: Programming and Applications, Vol 2, Prentice Hall, NJ, USA, 1999. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. PankajJalote, Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems, Prentice Hall, 1994. 
2. J. J. Jos & R. K. Buyya, High Performance Cluster Computing: Architectures and Systems, Vol I, Prentice Hall, NJ, USA, 1999. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
262
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. R. K. Buyya & C. Szyperski, Cluster Computing, Nova Science, New York, USA, 2001. 
4. R. K. Buyya & K. Bubendorfer, Market Oriented Grid and Utility Computing, Wiley, 2008. 
5. J. Jaseph & C. Fellenstein, Grid Computing, Pearson, 1st Ed, 2004. 
CS 445 PARALLEL	ALGORITHMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 242, CS 332, CS 421
Modeling; Synchronous Network Model, Leader Election in a Synchronous Ring, Algorithms in General Synchronous 
Networks, Distributed Consensus with Link Failures, Distributed Consensus with Process Failures, More Consensus 
Problems, Asynchronous System Model, Asynchronous Shared Memory model, Mutual Exclusion, Resource Allocation, 
Consensus, Atomic Objects, Asynchronous Network Model, Basic Asynchronous Network Algorithms, Synchronizers, 
Shared Memory versus Networks, Logical Time Global Snapshots and stable properties, Network Resource allocation, 
Asynchronous Networks with Process Failures, Data Link Protocols, Partially Synchronous Models, Mutual Exclusion 
with Partial Synchrony, Consensus with Partial Synchrony. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Wilkinson & M. Allen, Parallel Programming, Pearson, 2nd Ed, 2005
2. M. J. Quinn, Parallel Programming in C with MPI and OpenMP, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. Groop, E. Lusk & A. Skjellum, Using MPI: Portable Parallel Programming with the Message-passing Interface, MIT Press, 
1999. 
2. H. F. Jordan and G. Alaghband, Fundamentals of Parallel Processing, Pearson, 1st Ed, 2003. 
3. G. V. Wilson & G. Wilson, Practical Parallel Programming, MIT Press, 1995. 
CS 446 GRAPH THEORY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	326,	CS	332
Introduction: Graphs, Isomorphism, Walks, Paths, Circuits, Trees, Properties of Trees, Cotrees and Fundamental 
Circuits, Cut Sets, Fundamental Cut Sets and Cut Vertices, Planar and Dual Graphs, Metric Representation of 
Graphs, Coloring and covering and partitioning of a graph, chromatic number, chromatic partitioning, chromatic 
polynomials, matching, covering, four color problem, Directed graphs, some type of directed graphs, Directed paths, 
and connectedness, Euler digraphs, trees with directed edges, fundamental circuits in digraph, matrices A, B and C 
of digraphs adjacency matrix of a digraph,, enumeration, types of enumeration, counting of labeled and unlabeled 
trees, polya’s theorem, graph enumeration with polya’s theorem. 
Graph Algorithms: Elementary Graph Algorithms, Representations of graphs, Breadth-first search, Depth-first search, 
Topological sort, strongly connected components 
Minimum Spanning Trees: Growing a minimum spanning tree, The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim, Single-Source 
Shortest Paths: Shortest paths and relaxation, Dijkstra’s algorithm, The Bellman-Ford algorithm, Single-source 
shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs, Difference constraints and shortest paths, All-Pairs Shortest Paths: Shortest 
paths and matrix multiplication, The Floyd-Warshall algorithm, Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs, and A general 
framework for solving path problems in directed graphs, Maximum Flow: Flow networks, The Ford-Fulkerson method, 
Maximum bipartite matching, Preflow-push algorithms, The lift-to-front algorithm  
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson and Ronald L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Ed, 2006. 
2. N. Deo, Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering and Computer Science, Prentice Hall of India, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, 2nd Ed, Prentice Hall of India, 2007. 
2. R. Diestel, Advanced Graph Theory, Springer Verlag Heidelberg, New York, 2005
3. M. T. Goodrich and R. Tamassia, Algorithm Design: Foundations, Analysis, and Internet Examples, Wiley, 1st Ed, 2001. 
CS 448 ARTIFICIAL	INTELLIGENCE	&	NEURAL	NETWORK 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	171,	CS	211,	CS	332
Basic concepts of AI; Problems in AI; Applications; Production systems; Problem solving methods; Forward vs 
backward reasoning; Search in state spaces, state-space graph, uninformed search, heuristic search, general graph 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
263
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
search algorithms, 2-agent games; knowledge representation using predicate calculus; rules of inference; converting 
arbitrary wff to conjunction of clauses, resolution reputation system; Answer extraction; Intro to expert system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Rich and K. Knight, Artificial Intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed, 1991. 
2. N. J. Nilsson, Principles of Artificial Intelligence, Narosa, 1986. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Russel and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: a modern Approach, Pearson, 2nd Ed, 2003. 
2. D. W. Patterson, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
CS 449 VLSI	SYSTEM	DESIGN 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	CS 243, CS 331, CS 343
Deep sub-micron digital IC design; Transistors and Devices: MOS transistors; Bipolar transistors and circuits; 
Fabrication: IC fabrication technology; Simulation: Modeling the MOS transistor for Circuit Simulation; Silicon-
on-Insulator technology; MOS Inverter circuits: Voltage transfer characteristics; Noise margin definitions; NMOS 
transistors as load devices; COMS inverter. Static MOS Gate circuits: CMOS gate circuits; Complex CMOS Gates; XOR 
and XNOR Gates; Flip-Flops and Latches; Semiconductor memory design: MOS decoder; Static RAM cell design; SRAM 
column I/O circuitry; Power Grid and Clock design: Power distribution design; clocking and timing issues; Phase-
locked loop/Delayed-locked loop. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. A. Hodges, H. G. Jackson & R. A. Saleh, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated circuits, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Ed. 2008. 
2. D. A. Pucknell & K. Eshraghian, Basic VLSI Design, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Ed. 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. H. Wolf, Modern VLSI Design System-on-chip design, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd Ed. 2004. 
2. C. Mead & L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI system, Addison Wesley, 2004. 
CS 450 multimedia	&	COMPUTER	VISION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	CS	171,	CS	335
Image Formation and Image Models: Cameras; Radiometry – Measuring Light; Shadows and Shading; Color 
representation; Linear filters; Edge Detection; Pyramids and Textures; Multiple view geometry; Stereo; Optical flow; 
Affine structure from motion; Projective structure from motion; Calibration; Segmentation; Fitting; Linear Tracking; 
Non-Linear Tracking; Template Matching; Object Recognition; Case study of various applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. A. Forsyth, J. Ponce, Computer Vision – A Modern Approach, Pearson, 2005. 
2. L. G. Shapiro, G. C. Stockman, Computer Vision, Prentice Hall, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Jähne, H. Haußecker, Computer Vision and Applications – A Guide for Students and Practitioners, Academic Press, 2000. 
2. R. J. Schalkoff, Digital Image Processing and Computer-Vision, John Wiley and Sons, 1989. 
CS 471 NETWORK	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Study of network simulator NetSimver 2. 0 and Qual Net; Simulation study of pure ALOHA protocol; Simulation study 
of slotted ALOHA protocol; Simulation study of Token Bus LAN protocol; Simulation study of Token Ring LAN protocol; 
Simulation study of WAN protocol like Frame Relay, X. 25; Implementation of shortest path routing algorithm; Study 
of 802. 11 wireless LAN protocols. 
CS 472 SOFTWARE	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
For Questions 1 – 8, do the followings: 
Prepare the SRS document. You should identify the appropriate requirements for each problem.; Draw the Use Case 
diagrams, Domain Models, and Class Diagrams using Rational Rose.; Draw the Sequence Diagrams and Collaboration 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
264
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Diagrams for each Use Case, using Rational Rose.; Draw the State Chart Diagrams and Activity Diagrams using Rational 
Rose, wherever necessary.; Develop the corresponding software using Java with an interactive GUI and appropriate 
Database.; Develop software to automate the bookkeeping activities of a 5-star hotel.; The local newspaper and 
magazine delivery agency wants to automate the various clerical activities associated with its business. Develop a 
software for this.; A small automobile spare parts shop sells the spare parts for vehicles of several makes and models. 
Each spare part is typically manufactured by several small industries. To streamline the sales and supply ordering, the 
shop owner wants to automate the activities associated with his business.  Develop a software for this.; Develop a 
software for the automation of the dispensary of your Institute.; Develop a software for automating various activities 
of an Estate Office.; Develop a word processing software with some limited number of facilities such as making 
bold, italics, underline, cut, copy and paste etc.; Develop a graphics editor software package, using which one can 
create/modify several common types of graphics entities.; Develop a software for automating various activities of the 
department offices of your Institute.; Write a C function for searching an integer value from a large sorted sequence 
of integer values stored in array of size 100, using the binary search method. Build the control flow graph of this 
function using any compiler-writing tool. Write a program in Java to determine its cyclomatic complexity.; Write a 
program in Java to determine the number of defects still remaining after testing, using error seeding methodology. 
CS 473 REAL	TIME	SYSTEMS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Installation of RT Linux on Linux, Simulation of various scheduling algorithms such as Table driven scheduling, Cyclic 
scheduling, EDF scheduling, RMA etc., Comparison of the relative performances such as response time etc. of the 
schedulers, Develop a watch dog timer, Comparing the features of various real time operating systems such as RT 
POSIX, PSOS, VRTX, Vx Works, QNX, C/OS-II, Lynx, Windows CE etc., Development of a real time database. 
CS 474 IMAGE	PROCESSING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Understanding the image formation; Exercise on image transformations; Assignments on image enhancement by 
point processing; Image enhancement in frequency domain; Understanding the concept of image degradation; 
Realizing different approaches of restoration; Implementation of different image compression techniques; Detection 
of discontinuity, edge linking, boundary detection; Region oriented segmentation; Thematically oriented project for 
the entire duration of the course for individual students or group of students. Laboratory works are to be done in C 
or MATLAB. 
CS 477 SOFT	COMPUTING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Implementation of selected soft-computing methods presented during the lecture.; Implementation of various 
learning strategies; Realization of MLP, RBF, Hopfield networks etc; Solving optimization problems; Understanding and 
realizing Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy inference; Programming Genetic Algorithms.; Understanding probabilistic reasoning, 
rough sets, chaos.; Realization of hybrid approaches
CS 478 PARALLEL	COMPUTING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites: NIL
Study of MPI and PVM; Inter-process Communication using UNIX/LINUX, Critical Section simulation; Readers/
Writers Simulation, Producers/Consumers Simulation, Implementation of semaphores; Parallel Quicksort, Matrix 
Multiplication using Processes; Finding Patterns in a set of files, Multithread Programming; Parallel Algorithm for Array 
processors, Parallel Image Processing Applications; Processor virtualization using MPI implementation,; Programming 
under Cluster and Grid environments
CS 479 ADVANCED	LINUX	PROGRAMMING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Editing with Emacs, Compiling with GCC, Automating the Process with GNU Make, Debugging with GNU 
Debugger(GDB). Processes: Creating Processes, Signals, Process Termination. Threads: Thread Creation, Thread 
Cancellation, Thread-Specific Data, Synchronization and Critical Sections, GNU/Linux Thread Implementation . 
Interprocess Communication: Shared Memory, Processes Semaphores, Mapped Memory, Pipes, Sockets. Devices: 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
265
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Device Types &  Numbers, Device Entries, Hardware Devices & Special Devices, PTYs, and ioctl . The /proc File System: 
Extracting Information from /proc, Process Entries, Hardware Information, Kernel Information, Drives, Mounts, and 
File Systems, System Statistics. Linux System Calls: Using strace, access: Testing File Permissions, fcntl: Locks and 
Other File Operations, fsyncandfdatasync: Flushing Disk Buffers, getrlimitandsetrlimit: Resource Limits, getrusage: 
Process Statistics, gettimeofday: Wall-Clock Time, The mlockFamily: Locking Physical Memory, mprotect: Setting 
Memory Permissions, nanosleep: High-Precision Sleeping, readlink: Reading Symbolic Links, sendfile: Fast Data 
Transfers, setitimer: Setting Interval Timers, sysinfo: Obtaining System Statistics, uname etc. . 
CS 481 COMPILER	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Programming with different compiler writing tools like lex and yacc, or Flex and Bison for object and non object 
oriented language. Understanding to the file structure, the tokens in which data is to be parsed, the tree in which 
parsed data is to be stored with lex and yacc. Compiling & running simple programs for specific problems (thermostat 
controller, finding the header files required for specific function used by programmers in program, designing a desk 
calculator, Implement an alternative grammars for infix expressions, Write a grammar for complete s-expressions; 
Programs relating to code generation, and register allocation: program to generate code for a specific assembler, 
program to identify specific control structures, inserting comments, identifying specific blocks for code partitioning. 
Build a lexical analyzer and a syntactic analyzer for EBNF( Students are encouraged to use some thing different like 
ANTLR and JAVACC); writing a simple HTML-to-TXT translator that reads from standard input text file and writes to 
standard output and write program that involves embellishing the parser so that it enforces some simple grammatical 
rules; Introduction to an Object Oriented version of YACC, Concepts to learn multiple instances of same parser which 
can be used concurrently or in parallel. Designing an XML	Parser,	Converting Lexacy Data to XML using a Lexer/Parser 
Generator, Using a Lexer/Parser Generator as a Multipurpose XML Tool Builder. 
CS 482 DISTRIBUTED	COMPUTING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Familiarization with JAVA, C++, MPISIM, PVM; Client-Server Chart, TCP Simple Message Transfer; DNS using UDP, File 
Transfer using FTP; File Transfer using RS-232C; Implementation of RPC; Remote file reading using Sockets, Client and 
Server Classes; Remote data base using remote method invocation (RMI), Interface, Client and Server; Programming 
Clusters and Grids; Familiarization with Web Programming and Globus Tool Kits. 
CS 485 ARTIFICIAL	INTELLIGENCE	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Write a program to solve Traveling Salesman problem. The heuristic function used, number of nodes generated, 
depth of the search at each stages should be given in the form of a table; Write a program to solve 8 puzzle problem 
with different heuristics; Implement the alpha – beta search procedures. Use it to play the game tic-tac-toe. At the 
end of the game your program should give the number of nodes generated, cut-off values at each stages in the 
form of a table; Write an ATN interpreter. Minimize the amount of information that must be stored at each node to 
allow back-up; Write an Eliza like program to converse in some domain. The program should consist of two parts, 
a database of rules and the code that matches rules against the input and uses them to generate output. The left 
side of each rule should be a pattern that can be matched against a sentence input by the user. The right side should 
specify the response that the system will generate if the corresponding left side matches; Develop an knowledge base 
system consisting of facts and rules about some specialized knowledge domain of your choice; Implement Unification 
Algorithms. Input data sets may be any Well Formed Formulas; Write a program to schedule a meeting between five 
busy people using default reasoning. The output should give the time, place and day of the meeting. 
CS 489 COMPUTER	VISION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prerequisites:	NIL
Fitting a Curve, Plane, Conic Section; Implementation of linear and non-linear calibration algorithm; Surface 
Rendering, Shadow and Illumination; Implementation of Stereo Systems; Color constancy algorithm; Realization of 
different filters, implementation edge detection algorithms; Implementation of different approaches to stereopsis; 
Understanding Affine structure from motion; Segment based clustering; Object recognition; Individual student would 
be assigned a project work to be executed during the tenure of the course. C, MatLab, OpenGL softwares are to be 
used for this laboratory works. 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detail Syllabi
266
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Detail Syllabi
267
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	ELECTRONICS	AND	COMMUNICATION	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
EC 100 Basic Electronics 3-1-0 4
EC 200 Fundamentals of Communication Systems 3-0-0 3
EC 201 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
EC 202 Digital Electronics 3-0-0 3
EC 203 Networks 3-1-0 4
EC 204 Semiconductor Devices 3-0-0 3
EC 232 Electrical and Electronics Measurements 3-0-0 3
EC 270 Basic Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 273 Circuit Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 274 Analog Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 276 Digital Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 300 Microprocessor 3-0-0 3
EC 301 Microprocessor 3-0-0 3
EC 311 Analog Communication Systems 3-1-0 4
EC 312 Electromagnetic Theory 3-0-0 3
EC 314 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3
EC 320 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
EC 322 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
EC 330 Process Control & Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 331 Control System Engineering 3-1-0 4
EC 332 Electronics Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 334 Instrumentation Devices 3-1-0 4
EC 336 Industrial Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 338 Virtual Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 340 Fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
EC 341 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
EC 370 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 371 Microprocessors Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 372 Digital Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 373 Analog Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 374 Instrumentation Device Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 375 DSP Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 376 Virtual Instruments Lab 0-0-3 2
EC 377 Electronics Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 378 Microwave Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 379 PCB Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 380 Control System Lab 0-0-3 2
EC 382 Communication System Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 390 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Communication Engg - I 0-0-3 2
EC 391 Special Topic in Electronics & Instrumentation – I 3/4
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
268
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 392 Special Topic in Electronics & Instrumentation – II 3/4
EC 393 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Instru Engg - I 0-0-3 2
EC 394 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Instru Engg - II 0-0-3 2
EC 395 Engineering Product Development Project - I 0-0-6 4
EC 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4
EC 397 Special Topic in Electronics & Communication Engg – I 3/4
EC 398 Special Topic in Electronics & Communication Engg – II 3/4
EC 399 Special Laboratory in Electronics & Communication Engg – II 0-0-3 2
EC 410 Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 3
EC 411 Coding Theory and Secure Communication 3-0-0 3
EC 412 Antenna Analysis and Synthesis 3-1-0 4
EC 413 Optical Communication 3-1-0 4
EC 414 Information Theory and Coding 3-1-0 4
EC 415 Mobile Communication 3-1-0 4
EC 416 Microwave Engineering 3-1-0 4
EC 417 Satellite Communication 3-1-0 4
EC 419 Computer Communication Network 3-1-0 4
EC 421 Digital VLSI Design 3-1-0 4
EC 423 HDL and High Level VLSI 3-1-0 4
EC 424 Embedded Computing Systems 3-1-0 4
EC 430 Industrial Electronics & Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 431 PC Based Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 432 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 433 Process Control and Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 434 Analytical Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 437 Radar Engineering 3-0-0 3
EC 436 Biomedical Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EC 438 Virtual Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EC 439 Advanced Process Control 3-1-0 4
EC 440 Soft Computing Techniques 3-0-0 3
EC 442 Advanced Techniques in Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 443 Digital Image Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 444 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
EC 446 Adaptive Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EC 448 Evolutionary Computing Techniques 3-1-0 4
EC 450 Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing 3-0- 3
EC 471 Optical communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 472 Image Processing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 473 High Level VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 474 DSP Processor Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 475 VLSI Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 476 Bio-Medical lab 0-0-3 2
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
269
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 477 Mobile Communication Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 478 Antenna Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EC 479 Process Control Lab 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
EC 100 BASIC	ELECTRONICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to electronics: Signals, frequency spectrum of signals, analog and digital signals, amplifiers, frequency 
response of amplifiers, digital logic inverters. Linear wave-shaping circuits: RC Low pass filter, integrator; RC High pass 
filter, differentiator. Operational Amplifiers: Ideal OPAMP, Inverting, Adder, Integrator, Differentiation, Non-inverting 
applications, ADC and DAC. Diodes: The p-n junction theory, Analysis of Diode circuits, Small signal model, Different 
types of diodes. Bipolar Junction Transistors (BJTs): Physical structure and modes of operation, characteristics, DC 
Analysis, Introduction to Small Signal Analysis, Biasing Circuits. Field Effect Transistors: Structure and physical operation 
of Enhancement type MOSFET, Current voltage characteristic of enhancement MOSFET, depletion MOSFET, MOSFET 
circuits in DC, JFET and MSFET. Electronic Instruments: Ammeter, Voltmeter, Multimeter, Digital Multimeter, Cathode 
Ray Oscilloscopes. Fundamentals of Communication Systems: Principle of communication system, Fundamental of 
AM & FM, Radio & TV Transmitters and Receivers. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. S. Sedra, K. C. Smith, Microelectronic Circuits, Oxford University Press, India, 2005
2. A Malvino, D J Bates; Electronic Principles, Tata McGraw Hill, India, (ISBN: 0-07-063424-6); 2007
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R C Jaeger, T N Blalock, Microelectronic Circuit Design; Tata McGraw Hill, 2006 (ISBN: 0-07-060162-3). 
EC 200 FUNDAMENTALS	OF	COMMUNICATION	SYSTEMS 2 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to communication systems, signals and spectrum, noise, types of modulation; AM, FM, PM and radio 
receivers. Fourier Transform Analysis, generation and demodulation of AM and FM signals including double-sideband 
suppressed carrier, SSB. Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM). Digital Modulation Techniques, Sampling theorem, 
pulse code modulation, delta modulation, base band transmission, transmission errors, entropy, channel capacity, A 
brief introduction to Optical Communication and cellular communication. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. George Kennedy, “Electronic Communication Systems, ” TATA McGraw-Hill Publishing House. 
2. S. Haykin, Communication Systems, 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, 2001
Supplementary Reading: 
1. T. Schilling, “Principles of Communication Systems” TATA McGraw-Hill Publishing House. 
2. B. P. Lathi, “Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, ” Oxford University Press
3. G. Keiser, “Optical Fiber Communications, ” TATA McGraw-Hill Publishing House. 
EC 201 ANALOG	ELECTRONICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	100:	Basic	Electronics
Bipolar Junction Transistor: Review of BJT operation and DC biasing, Small Signal model, BJT biasing for discrete 
circuit design, single stage amplifier analysis, complete static characteristic, internal capacitances and second order 
effect.; Field-Effect Transistor: Review of JFET, Depletion and Enhancement MOSFET operation, characteristic and DC 
biasing, MOSFET as amplifier, biasing of MOS amplifier circuits, single stage IC-MOS amplifiers, CMOS logic inverter, 
MOSFET as analog switch, Small signal model of MOSFET for high and low frequencies.; Spice model and analysis of 
FET circuits.; Frequency Response Analysis: S-domain analysis, Bode plot, amplifier transfer function, low frequency 
and high frequency response of common-source and common drain amplifiers, frequency response analysis of other 
single stage transistor amplifier configuration.; Feedback Amplifier: General feed-back structures, negative feedback, 
the 4 basis feedback topologies and their analysis, close loop gain calculation, amplifier stability analysis using Bode 
plot.; Output stage and Power Amplifier: Classification of output stages, Class A, Class B, Class AB amplifiers, power 
BJT, IC power transistors and MOS power transistors.; Differential and Multistage Amplifier: BJT differential amplifier, 
Small signal operation of BJT differential amplifier, non-ideal characteristics of differential amplifier, biasing of BJT ICs, 
multistage amplifiers; Spice model and analysis of all circuits. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
270
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. S. Sedra and K. C. Smith, Microelectronic Circuits, Oxford University Press; 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Spencer and Ghausi, Introduction to Electronic Circuit Design, Pearson Education, 2003
2. A. Dutta, Semiconductor Devices and Circuits, Oxford University Press, ND 2008
EC 202 DIGITAL	ELECTRONICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	100:	Basic	Electronics
Design Concepts: Digital Hardware, Design Process, Hardware, Logic Circuit Design, Theory and Practice; Introduction 
To Logic Circuits: Variables and Functions, Inversion, Truth Tables, Logic Gates and Networks, Boolean Algebra, 
Systhesis using AND, OR AND NOT Gates, Design Examples, Introduction to Cad Tools, Introduction to VHDL.; 
Implementation Technology: Transistor Switches, NMOS Logic Gates, CMOS Logic Gates, Negative Logic System, 
Standard Chips, Programmable Logic Devices, Custom Chips, Standard Cells and Gate Arrays Practical Aspects, 
Transmission Gates, Implementation details for FPGAs.; Optimized Implementation of Logic Functions: Karnaugh 
Map, Strategy for Minimization, Minimization of Product-of-Sums Forms, Incompletely Specified Functions, Multiple-
Output Circuits, NAND and NOR Logic Networks, Multi-Level Systhesis, Analysis of Multi-Level Circuits, CAD Tools.; 
Number Representation And Arithmetic Circuits: Positional Number Representation, Addition of Unsigned Numbers, 
Signed Numbers, Fast Adders, Design of Arithmetic Circuits Using Cad Tools.; Combinational Circuit Building Blocks: 
Multiplexers, Decoders, Encoders, Code Copnverters, Arithmetic Comparison Circuits, VHDL for Combinational 
Circuits.; Flip-Flops, Registers And Counters, A Simple Processor: Basic Latch, Gated SR Latch, Gated D Latch. Master-
Slave and Edge-Triggered D Flip-Flops, T Flip-Flop, JK Flip-Flop, Registers, Counters, Reset Synchronization, Other 
Types of Counters, Using Storage Elements with Cad Tools, Using Registers and Counters With Cad Tools, Design 
Examples.; Synchronous Sequential Circuits: Basic Design Steps, State Assignment Problem, Meanly State Model, 
Design of Finite State Machines using CAD Tools, Serial Adder Example, State Minimization, Design of a Counter using 
the Sequential Circuit Approach, FSM as an Arbiter Circuit, Analysis of Synchronous Sequential Circuits. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Brown and Z. Vranesis, Fundamental of Digital Logic with VHDL design Tata Mc GRAW-Hill, 2003
Supplementary Reading: 
1. F. Vahid: Digital Design: Wiley Student Edition, 2006
2. J. F. Wakerly, Digital Design Principles and Practices, Fourth Edition, Prentice-Hall, 2005. 
3. R. L. Tokheim, Digital electronics, Principles and applications, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Edition, 2003
EC 203 NETWORKS 4 credits [3-1-0]
RESONANCE	IN	AC	CIRCUITS: Series and parallel resonance, Characteristics, Properties of resonant circuit, Selectivity, 
band width and Q factor. COUPLED	CIRCUITS: Coefficient of coupling, Dot convention, Analysis of coupled circuits. 
COMPLEX	WAVES: Fourier Series Representation, Evaluation of Fourier coefficients, Wave Symmetry, RMS values 
of Complex waves. IMPEDANCE	 FUNCTION	 AND	 NETWORK	 THEOREMS: The concept of complex frequency, 
Transform impedance and transform circuits, Series and parallel combinations, Super-position and reciprocity, 
Thevenin’s Theorem and Norton’s Theorem, Miller Theorem, Substitution, Compensation, Milliman, Maximum 
Power transfer theorem, Solution of Networks consisting of linear elements (Resistance, Inductance, Capacitance) 
with initial condition, Active elements like voltage and currrent sources, controlled sources by using loop variable, 
node voltage variable, Thevenin and Norton’s method in transformed domain.; NETWORK	 FUNCTIONS,	 POLES	
AND	ZEROS:	Network function for one port and two ports, Calculation of network functions like ladder networks, 
General Networks, Poles and zeros of network functions, Time domain behaviour from Pole and zero plot. TWO PORT 
PARAMETERS	(TRANSFORM	DOMAIN):	Relation between two port network variables, Short circuit admittance, Open 
circuit impedance parameters, Hybrid parameters, Two generator equivalent circuit, One generator equivalent circuit, 
Transmission and inverse transmission parameters, Relation between parameter sets, Equalization of parameters of 
two port networks, Networks containing passive elements and controlled sources, Input and output impedance, 
transfer functions, Input output relationship, Voltage and current gain.; NON-SINUSOIDAL	PERIODIC	WAVEFORM:	
Waveform Synthesis, response to non-sinusoidal periodic waveform, response of the circuit to the excitation with 
finite number of discontinuities NETWORK SYNTHESIS: Definition of positive real functions, Properties of positive 
real function, Properties of LC, RC and RL driving point function, Synthesis of LC, RC and RL driving point functions in 
FOSTER I & II and CAUER I & II forms. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
271
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Valkenburg, Network Analysis PHI, 1974
2. V. Valkenburg, Network Synthesis PHI
3. Supplementary Reading: 
4. F. Kuo, Network Analysis and Synthesis
EC 204 SEMICONDUCTOR	DEVICES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	100:	Basic	Electronics
Semiconductor Crystals: Atomic Bond Model; Drift: Energy Bands, Ohm’s Law, Carrier mobility; Diffusion: Current 
equation, Einstein’s Relationship, Continuity equation; Generation & Recombination: Mechanisms, Minority Carrier 
Lifetime; P-N junction: Principles, DC model, Capacitance of Reverse bias PN junction, store charge effects, Metal 
Semiconductor contacts: Schottky diode, Mos Capacitor; MOSFET: Principles, C-V Characteristics, Second order 
effects; BJT: Principles, C-V Characteristics, Second order effects; IC Technology: Diode in IC Technology, MOSFET 
Technologies; Bipolar IC Technologies; Photonic Devices: LEDs, Photo Detectors, Solar Cells, LASERs; Microwave FETs 
& Diodes; Power Devices: IGBT, Thyristors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Dimitrijev, Principles of Semiconductor Devices: Oxford University Press, 2005
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Benman- Introduction to Semi conductor Devices – Cambridge. 2004
2. Dasgupta & Dasgupta, Semiconductor Devices PHI, 2004
EC 232 ELECTRICAL	AND	ELECTRONICS	MEASUREMENTS 3 credits [3-0-0]
FUNDAMENTALS OF MEASUREMENT: Systems and Standards; GALVANOMETERS: Construction, Performance, Steady 
state and Dynamic Behaviors of d’Arsonval, Vibration, and Ballistic Galvanometers.; ELECTROMECHANICAL INDICATING 
INSTRUMENTS: Ammeters and Voltmeters: PMMC, Moving-Iron, and Electrodynamic type; Ohmmeters: Series-
type and Shunt-type Ohmmeters; Thermo-instruments, Watt-hour Meters, Power-Factor Meters and Instrument 
Transformers; POTENTIOMETERS: DC and AC; BRIDGES: D. C. Bridges: Wheatstone bridge, and Kelvin bridge., A. 
C. Bridges and their Applications: Maxwell bridge, Hay bridge, Schering bridge, and Wein bridge, Measurement of 
high resistance by Megger; ELECTRONIC INSTRUMENTS FOR MEASURING BASIC PARAMETERS: Amplified DC Meter, 
AC Voltmeter Using Rectifiers, True RMS– Responding Voltmeter, Electronic Multimeter, Digital Voltmeters: Ramp-
type, Integrating type, and Successive-Approximation type; Component Measuring Instruments: Q-meter, Vector 
Impedance Meter, Vector Voltmeter, RF Power and Voltage Measurements. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. E. W. Golding, F. C. Widdis, Electrical Measurement and Measuring Instrument, Wheeler Publishing, 2003
2. W. D. Cooper, A. D. Helfrick, Modern Electronic Instrumentation and Measurement Techniques, Pearson Education, 2007. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. J B Gupta – A course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements and instrumentation; S K Kataria and Sons, 2003. 
2. A. K. Sawhney - A course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements and Inst., Dhanpat Rai & Sons, 2002
EC 270 BASIC	ELECTRONICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Familiarization with electronic components, and general purpose Laboratory equipment.; Use of CRO and function 
generator and calculation of amplitude, frequency, time period of different types of ac signals.; Verification of Junction 
Diode and Zener Diode characteristic and determination of static and dynamic resistance at the operating point.; 
Verification of input and output characteristics of a Bipolar Junction Transistor and determination of the operating 
point ad load line.; Verification of input and output characteristics of a Field Effect Transistor and determination 
of the operating point ad load line.; Verification of Series and Parallel Resonance theory.; Operation of diode as 
different form of rectifier and effect of different types of passive filters on the output.; Determination of frequency 
response of passive high pass and low pass filters.; Determination of frequency response of a RC coupled amplifier 
and determination of bandwidth and signal handling capacity.; Verification of truth table for different types of Logic 
gates viz. AD, OR, NAND, NOR, NOT, EX-OR with 2/ 3/ 4 inputs.; Use of OP-AMP as an inverting and non-inverting 
amplifier for different gains.; Introduction to circuit analysis using p-spice through frequency response study of a RC 
filter. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
272
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 274 ANALOG	ELECTRONICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design of 2 stage RC coupled amplifier.; Design of integrator and differentiator using OP-AMPS.; Design and verification 
of different amplifier configurations with OPAMPS.; Determination of different electrical parameters of OPAMP.; 
Design of OPAMP application circuits using P-SPICE simulator. 
EC 276 DIGITAL	ELECTRONICS	LAB 2 credits [0-0-3]
Static and Dynamic Characteristic of NAND and Schmitt-NAND gate(both TTL and MOS); Synthesis of a logic function 
by NAND gates only. (minimized and two level). Measurement of delay of the logic sp synthesized; Design a clock by 
using NAND gates and R-C network as well as crystal; Study the functionality of Multiplexer and using it design and 
implement a logic circuit; Study the principle of a Demultiplexer and implement multi-output logic circuit; Experiment 
on Serial-in, Parallel-in Serial-out right shift register with preset and clear. Generate maximally long linear sequence 
using this shift register and other necessary logic gates; Study the dynamic characteristic of a J-K flip-flop and hence 
find out maximum operational frequency; Design a ripple modulo counter and set-rest feedback method. Verify the 
states of count. Determine each stage delay and total delay. Determine the maximum clock frequency that it is able 
to count; Design a sequential circuit and implement it by J-K flip-flops and other related logic gates. 
EC 301 MICROPROCESSOR 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	202:	Digital	Electronics
INTRODUCTION TO 16 BIT MICROPROCESSORS: Architecture of 8086 CPU Architecture, Internal operations, Machine 
Language instructions, Addressing mode, Instruction Format, Instruction execution timing, comparison of 8088 with 
8086. ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE PROGRAMMING AND INSTRUCTIONS: Assembler instruction Format, Data Transfer, 
Arithmetic, Branch, Flag manipulation, Logical, Shift and Rotate, String Manipulation, Stack Manipulation, Call and 
return instructions, REP Prefix, Segment override prefix, and simple assembler directives such as label, Variable, DB, 
DW, DD, EQU, END, Assume, Pointer (byte, Word, Double Word, Near, Short, and Far).; SYSTEM BUS STRUCTURE: Basic 
8086/8088 configuration, Minimum Mode, Maximum Mode, System Bus timing, Interrupt Priority management with 
8259 single and multiple. I/O PROGRAMMING: Fundamentals of I/O, Programmed I/O, Interrupt I/O, Block Transfer 
and DMA, I/O and memory configuration and design example. I/O INTERFACE: Serial communication interface 
using 8251, parallel communication interface using 8255, Use of 8255 for A/D and D/A conversion with examples, 
Programmable timer and event counter using 8254, its application to ADC, Key board and display controller using 
8279,; A SIMPLE PROCESS CONTROL MODEL USING 8086/8088 IN MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM MODE.; ASSEMBLY 
LEVEL PROGRAMMING: Directives and operators, Linking and relocation, Near and far procedure, external identifiers 
and procedures. INTRODUCTION TO Multiprogramming. INTRODUCTION TO Multiprocessor configuration. 
INTRODUCTION TO 80286, 80386, 80486, 80586 (Pentium) MICROPROCESSOR Introduction, Architecture, internal 
operations, Addressing modes, instructions sets (brief)
Essential	Readings:	
1. W. A. Triebel and A. Singh, The 8088 and 8086 Microprocessor Programming: interfacing Software and hardware applications, 
2002, PHI. 
2. B. B. Brey, The Intel microprocessor: 8086/8088, 80186/80188, 80286, 80386, 80486, Pentium and Pentium processor, 2002, 
Pearson Education India
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Liu and Gibson; Microprocessor Systems: The 8086/8088 Family: Architecture, Programming and design, PHI
EC 311 ANALOG	COMMUNICATION	SYSTEMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
SPECTRAL	ANALYSIS:	Fourier series, Response of a linear system, Normalized power in a Fourier expansion, Power 
spectral density. The Fourier transform, Convolution, Parseval’s theorem, Power and energy transfer through a 
network, Auto and Cross correlations. RANDOM	VARIABLES	AND	PROCESSES:	Probability, Mutually exclusive events, 
Joint probability, Statistical independence, Random variables, Probability density function, Average and variance. The 
Gaussian probability density. The error function, Mean and Variance of sum of random variables, Probability density 
of Z = X+Y. The Central limit theorem, correlation between random variables, auto correlation, power spectral density. 
AMPLITUDE	MODULATION	SYSTEMS:	Frequency translation, Recovery of base band signal, Amplitude Modulation, 
Maximum Allowable Modulation. The square Law demodulator, Spectrum of AM signal, Balanced Modulator, SSB 
modulation and generation, VSB, FDM. FREQUENCY	MODULATION	SYSTEM:	Phase and frequency modulation and 
their relationship, Frequency deviation, spectrum of FM Signal, BW of FM signal, Effect of modulation on BW, constant 
BW, FM phasor diagram, Narrow band FM, Armstrong and Parameter Variation methods of FM generation. FM 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
273
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Demodulators. ANALOG	TO	DIGITAL	CONVERSION: Pulse Modulation Systems, Sampling theorem, Pulse Amplitude 
Modulation, Quantization of signals, Quantization error, Pulse code modulation (PCM) system, Companding, Time 
division multiplexing (TDM), DPCM, DM, ADM. NOISE	IN	COMMUNICATION	SYSTEM:	Resistor noise, Available power, 
Noise temperature, Noise bandwidth, Two ports Noise bandwidth, Input Noise temperature, Noise figure, Equivalent-
Noise temperature of a cascade, An example of receiving system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. Taub, D. L Schilling, G. Saha, Principles of Communication System, 3rd Edition; 2008, Tata McGraw Hill, India; ISBN: 
0070648115. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. B. Carlson, Communication system - by Mc. Graw Hill. 
2. G. P. John, S. Masoud, Communication Systems Engineering, Second Edition; 2002; PHI, India; ISBN : 81-203-2750-0
EC 312 ELECTROMAGNETIC	THEORY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Laplace and Poisson’s equation, Solution of Laplace equation by separation of variables in Cartesian, cylindrical and 
spherical co-ordinates, cylindrical and spherical harmonics, Examples.; Maxwell’s equations for static fields, their 
modifications for time-varying fields conducting and dielectric media.; EM Wave equations and uniform plane waves, 
in free space and in lossy medium, wave propagation in good dielectrics, in good conductors: Depth of penetration, 
Poynting vector and power flow, Reflection and refraction of EM Waves.; Transmission lines: Transmission line 
equations, Parameters- primary and secondary constants, Reflection coefficient and SWR, Matched Transmission 
line, Impedance matching, Smith chart problems, Analogy of transmission lines with e. m. waves.; Guided waves and 
Waveguides: Electric and magnetic fields in rectangular waveguide; TE, TM and TEM modes, Dominant modes, λc, λg, vp, 
vg, Numerical examples.; Radio Wave Propagation: Modes of propagation, Structure of Troposphere, Tropospheric+-* 
Scattering, Ionosphere, Ionospheric Layers - D, E, F1, F2, regions. Sky wave propagation - propagation of radio waves 
through Ionosphere, Effect of earth’s magnetic field, Virtual height, Skip Distance, MUF, Critical frequency, Space 
wave propagation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. N. Ida, Engineering Electromagnetics, Springer, 2004
2. E. C. Jordan and K. G. Balmain, Electromagnetic waves and Radiating systems, Prentice hall, 2004
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. N. O. Sadiku, Elements of Electromagnetics- Oxford University Press, 2006
2. W. H. Hayt, Engineering Electromagnetics, McGraw Hill, 2007 
EC 314 DIGITAL	COMMUNICATION.	 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	311:	Analog	Communication	Systems
DIGITAL	MODULATION	TECHNIQUES:	BPSK, BFSK and DPSK, QPSK, M-ary PSK, MSK, M-ary FSK, GMSK. OPTIMUM	
RECEIVERS	FOR	AWGN	CHANNEL: Optimum receiver for signals corrupted by AWGN, performance of optimum receiver 
for memory less modulation, optimum receiver for CPM signals, optimum receiver for signals with random phase in 
AWGN channel. CARRIER	AND	SYMBOL	SYNCHRONIZATION:	Signal Parameter estimation, carrier phase estimation, 
symbol timing estimation, Joint estimation. CHANNEL	CAPACITY	AND	CODING: Channel models and channel capacity, 
Block codes – coding and decoding, cyclic codes, algebraic codes, Reed-Solomon Code, Convolutional codes; SPREAD	
SPECTRUM	SIGNALS	FOR	DIGITAL	COMMUNICATION:	Direct sequence (DS) spread spectrum and its applications, 
frequency hopping (FH) spread spectrum, synchronization of spread spectrum systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. Taub and D. L. Schilling, Principle of Communication Systems, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill, 1986. 
2. J. G. Proakis, Digital Communication, McGraw-Hill Publications, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Sklar, Digital Communications, Pearson Education, India, 2001
2. J. G. Proakis, M. Salehi, Communication Systems Engineering, Pearson Education International, 2002
3. Lee & Moseschmitt, Digital Communication, Springer, 2004. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
274
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 316 MICROWAVE ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	312:	Electromagnetic	Theory
Introduction: Microwave frequencies, Standard Frequency bands, Behaviour of circuits at Conventional and microwave 
frequencies, Microwave application, Review of Maxwell’s equations; Waveguide: Overview of guided waves; TE, TM 
and TEM modes, circular wave guide, Choice of the type of waveguide dimensions, waveguide problems.; Microwave 
Components & Devices : Scattering matrix and its Properties, coupling probes, coupling loops, windows, Waveguide 
tuners, Termination, E-plane Tee, H-plane Tee, Magic Tee, Phase-Shifter, attenuators, Directional coupler, Gunn diode, 
Microwave transistor MASER, Resonator and circulators.; Microwave Generators: Transit-time effect, Limitations 
of conventional tubes, Two-cavity and multi-cavity Klystrons, Reflex Klystron, TWT and Magnetrons.; Microwave 
Measurements : Power measurement; Calorimeter method, Bolometer bridge method, thermocouples, Impedance 
measurement, Measurement of frequency and wavelength, Measurement of unknown loads, Measurement of 
reflection coefficient, VSWR and Noise, Microwave test bench. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D M Pozar, Microwave Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, 2004
2. S Liao, Microwave Devices & circuits, Prentice halls, India, 2004
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M L Sisodia, V. L. Gupta, Microwaves: Introduction to Circuits, Devices and Antennas, New Age, 2001
2. R E Collin, Foundations of Microwave Engg. McGraw-Hill 2001
EC 322 EMBEDDED	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
INTRODUCTION TO 8-bit and 16 bit microcontroller: 8051 family of microcontroller, architecture, memory 
organization, special function registers, timer counter, serial interface, interrupt organization, instruction sets and 
programming, instruction timing and interfacing, practical applications, introduction to 16-bit microcontroller 8096; 
INTRODUCTION TO Embedded systems, Processor and memory organization, Devices and Buses for device networks, 
Device drivers and Interrupt servicing mechanism, Programming concepts and Imbedded programming in C and C++, 
Program modeling concepts in single and multiprocessor- development Process, Real time operating system. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. R. Kamal, EMBEDDED SYSTEMS Architecture, Programming and Design, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, 2003. 
2. M. A. Mazdi & J. G. Mazdi, The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded System, Pearson Education India, 2005. 
Reference Readings: 
1. K J Ayala, The 8051 Microcontroller Architecture, Programming and Application, Penram International Publishing (India), 2004. 
2. T. D Morton, Embedded Microcontrollers, Pearson Education, India, 2003. 
EC 331 CONTROL	SYSTEMS	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
INTRODUCTION; MATHEMATICAL MODEL: Mathematical representation of physical systems, Transfer function 
and impulse response of linear systems, Block diagram, Signal flow graphs; CONTROL SYSTEM COMPONENTS: 
Potentiometer, Synchros, LVDT, modulators, demodulators, ac servo motors, ac and dc tacho generators, HYDROULIC 
SYSTEMS and PNEUMATIC SYSTEMS; GENERAL FEEDBACK THEORY: Feedback, The effect of feedback, Mathematical 
definition of feedback; TIME RESPONSE OF FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS: Typical test signal for the transient analysis, 
time domain performance characteristics, transient response, PI, PD Controllers, Tacho meter feedback, Steady state 
response, steady state error, The generalized error analysis, Stability, The Routh-Hurwitz criterion; THE FREQUENCY 
RESPONSE METHOD: Bode’s Plot, Frequency domain specifications, MP and ωP for a second order system; THE 
NYQUIST CRITERION AND STABILITY: Nyquist criterion and the GH Plot, Relative stability, gain margin, phase margin, 
conditionally stable systems; THE ROOT LOCUS TECHNIQUE: Introduction, Root Locii, Root locus of conditionally 
stable systems; STATE VARIABLE ANALYSIS: Introduction, state, state variable and state model, State equations of 
continuous data control system, Derivation of state model from transfer functions and Vice-versa. Diagonalisation, 
solution of state equation. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, 2001, Prentice Hall of India. 
2. N. S. Nise, Control system engineering, 1992, John Wiley & Sons. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control System, 1995, PHI. 
2. J. Diazzo and C. F. Houpis, Feed back Control system analysis and synthesis. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
275
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 332 ELECTRONIC	INSTRUMENTATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	100:	Basic	Electronics
REVIEW OF MEASUREMENTS AND ERROR: Definition, accuracy and precision, Significant figures, Types of error, 
Statistical analysis, Probability of error, limiting error; CATHODE RAY OSCILLOSCOPE: Introduction, Block diagram of 
CRO, cathode ray tube, CRT circuits, Vertical deflection system, delay line, horizontal deflection systems, Multiple 
trace, Oscilloscope probes and transducers, Measurements with CRO, special oscilloscope.; SIGNAL GENERATION: 
Sine-wave generator, Frequency synthesized signal generator, Frequency divider generator, Sweep frequency 
generator, pulse and square wave generator, Function generators, Audio frequency signal generator, Digital and 
Analog Noise generator SIGNAL ANALYSIS: Wave analyser, Distortion analyser and spectrum analyser; FREQUENCY 
AND TIME INTERVAL MEASUREMENT: Simple frequency counter, measurement error, extending frequency range of 
counter, Automatic computing counter, Measurement of higher frequency by wave meter, heterodyne freq. meters; 
ANALOG AND DIGITAL DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEMS: Introduction, Signal conditioning of input, Single channel data 
acquisition systems, Multi channel data acquisition systems, Data conversion, A/D and D/A converters, Multi-plexers, 
Sample and hold circuits; INPUT OUTPUT DEVICES AND DISPLAY: Introduction, Analog displays and recorders, Digital 
I/O devices, Displays, Display multiplexing, Zero suppressing. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. A. D. Helfrick, W. D. Cooper, ModernElectronic Instrumentation and Measurement Techniques, PHI, New Delhi, 2002. 
2.  D. A. Bell, Electronic Instrumentation and Measurement, PHI, New Delhi, 2003. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. C. S. Rangan, G. R. Sarma and V. S. V. Mani, Instrumentation Devices and Systems, TMH, 2000 
2. H. S. Kalsi, Electronic Instrumentation, TMH, 2000. 
3. D. Patranabis, Principles of Electronic Instrumentation, PHI, 2008. 
EC 334 INSTRUMENTATION	DEVICES 4 credits [3-1-0]
THE GENERAL MEASUREMENT SYSTEM: Measurement System – Purpose, structure and elements. STATIC 
CHARACTERISTICS OF MEASUREMENT SYSTEM ELEMENTS: Systematic characteristics, Generalised Model of 
System element, statistical characteristics. THE ACCURACY OF MEASUREMENT SYSTEM IN THE STEADY STATE: 
Measurement error of a system of ideal elements. The error probability density function of a system of non-ideal 
elements. Error reduction techniques. DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS: Transfer function 
for typical system elements, step and frequency response. Dynamic errors in measurement systems. Techniques 
for dynamic compensation. LOADING EFFECTS IN MEASUREMENT SYSTEM: Electrical loading, Generalised loading. 
SIGNAL AND NOISE IN MEASUREMENT SYSTEM: Statistical representation of random signals: Effects of Noise and 
interference on Measurement circuits, Noise sources and coupling mechanism, Method of reducing effects of Noise 
and interference. SENSING ELEMENT: Resistive (Potentiometers, Resistance Thermometer, Strain Gauges), Inductive 
(Variable reluctance, LVDT), Capacitive, Electromagnetive, Thermoelastic, Elastic, Piezoelectric, Photoelectric, Hall 
effect, Synchors and Resolvers, Digital Displacement Eddy current. SIGNAL CONDITIONING CIRCUITS: Potentiometer 
Circuit (Constant voltage and constant current), Wheatstone Bridge (Constant voltage and constant current). 
Essential	Readings:	
1. J. P. Bentley, Principles of Measurement System, Pearson Education, Third edition, 2003. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. J. W. Dally, W. F. Riley, K. G. McConnell, Instrumentation for Engineering Measurements, John Wiley, 2001. 
2. J. B. Gupta, A course in Electronic and Electrical Measurements and Instrumentation, S. K. Kataria and Sons, 2000. 
EC 336 INDUSTRIAL	INSTRUMENTATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	334:	Instrumentation	Devices
CHARACTERISTICS OF MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS: Introduction, Classification, Performance characteristics, Errors; 
PRESSURE MEASUREMENT: Basic methods, Measurement of mid-range pressures – U-tube manometer, Dead-
weight gauge, Diaphragm, Bellows, Bourdon tube; Low-pressure measurement – Thermocouple gauge, Pirani gauge, 
Thermistor gauge, McLeod gauge, Ionization gauge; High-pressure measurement; TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT: 
Introduction, Thermal expansion methods – Liquid-in-glass thermometer, Bimetallic thermometer, Pressure 
thermometer; Thermoelectric-effect instruments – Thermocouples; Varying-resistance devices – Resistance 
thermometers, Thermistors; Radiation thermometers – Optical pyrometers, Radiation pyrometers; FLOW 
MEASUREMENT: Introduction, Obstruction type flow meters, Variable-area flow meters, Positive-displacement flow 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
276
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
meters, Turbine meters, Electromagnetic flow meters, Vortex-shedding flow meters, Ultrasonic flow meters; LEVEL 
MEASUREMENT: Dipsticks, Float systems, Pressure-measuring devices, Capacitive devices, Ultrasonic level gauge, 
Radiation methods, Hot-wire elements. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. E. O. Doebelin, Measurement Systems, Application and Design, McGraw Hill International Edition, Singapore, 2003. 
2. D. Patranabis, Principles of Industrial Instrumentation, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2000. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. B. C. Nakra and K. K. Chaudhury, Instrumentation Measurement and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 2003. 
2. A. K. Ghosh, Introduction to Instrumentation and Control, PHI, 2000. 
EC 338 VIRTUAL	INSTRUMENTATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	334:	Instrumentation	Devices
FLOW MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS: Measurement of velocity at a point in a fluid, pitot-static tube, Measurement of 
volume flow rate: differential pressure, mechanical and vortex flow meters, Measurement of mass flow rate, inferential 
and direct methods, Measurement of flow rate in difficult situations: electromagnetic and cross-correlation flow 
meters. OPTICAL MEASUREMENT SYSTEMS: Introduction, types of systerm, Source: Principles, hot body, LED and 
Laser sources, Transmission medium: principles, optical fibers, Geometry of coupling of detector to source, Detectors 
and signal conditioning elements: thermal and photon detectors, Measurement systems: intensity and wave length 
modulation, interferometers. GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY: Principles and basic theory, typical gas Chromatograph, 
Signal processing and operations sequencing. DIGITALTIME MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES: DIGITAL FREQUENCY 
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES: DIGITALLY PROGRAMMABLE CIRCUITS. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. J. P. Bentley, Principles of Measurement Systems, Pearson Education, 3rd Edition, 2003. 
2. T. S. Rathore, Digital Measurement Techniques, Narosha Publishing Home, 2001. 
EC 341 DIGITAL	SIGNAL	PROCESSING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction:	Signals, systems and signal processing, concept of frequency in continuous and discrete time signal; 
Discrete-time	Signals	and	Systems:	Discrete time signals and systems, analysis of LTI system and implementation, 
correlation; Z-transform: Review, Analysis of LTI system in z-domain.; Frequency	 Domain	 Analysis:	 Frequency 
analysis of continuous-time and discrete-time signals and LTI systems, LTI system as frequency selective filter, inverse 
system and de-convolution.; Discrete	 Fourier	 Transform:	 Properties and Applications, Analysis using DFT; Fast 
Fourier Transform Algorithms: FFT algorithms and Applications, linear filtering approach to computation of DFT; 
Implementation	of	Discrete-Time	System:	FIR system, IIR system, representation of numbers, quantization of filter 
coefficients, round-off effects; Design	of	Digital	Filters:	Design of FIR and IIR filters, Recent	Developments.	
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. G. Proakis and D. G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing: Principles Algorithms and Applications, Pearson Education, 2005
Supplementary Readings: 
1. A. V. Oppenheim, R. W. Schafer, Digital Signal Processing, Pearson Education, 2004
2. S. K. Mitra - Digital Signal Processing: A computer based approach, TMH, 2001
3. L. R. Rabiner and B. Gold, Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing, Pearson Education, 2004
EC 370 EMBEDDED	SYSTEM	LAB 2 credits [0-0-3]
Microcontroller architecture. overall hardware architecture of microcontrollers, including busses, memories, 
and input/output subsystems. Application of timer and A/D subsystems to solve measurement and control tasks. 
Microcontroller interfacing. derive waveforms for serial communications interfaces. Apply microcontrollers and 
external circuitry to interface to a variety of sensors and actuators; Applications: Traffic light control using micro 
controller; Stepper motor control using micro controller; Downloading and uploading from /on PC memory; Structured 
approach and developing an embedded system (Mini Project); Initial Planning; Detailed hardware planning: Software 
Development; Instruction details; Future Improvements. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
277
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 371 MICROPROCESSOR	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Arranging a set of date in ascending and descending order; Finding out the number of positive, negative and zeros 
from a data set; Transfer of data from one memory location to another memory location; Searching the existence 
of a certain data in a given data set; Gray – to – Binary and Binary – to – Gray conversion and BCD – to – Binary and 
Binary – to – BCD Conversion; Design a Up/down Counter; Multiply two 8 Bit numbers using Successive addition and 
shifting method; Add a series of unsigned 8- Bit data. Extend the experiment to add signed number and multi byte 
numbers; Generate a Square wave and rectangular wave of given frequency at the output pin of 8255 chip; Finding 
out 10’s complement of a 4- digit BCD number; Add a series of Decimal numbers; Division of 8 Bit unsigned numbers 
by two. Division of a unsigned numbers by two; Disassembling of the given 2 digit decimal number into two nibbles; 
Transmission of series data by using SOD lines; Generation of different types of analog signal using DAC; Sampling of 
analog signal using ADC; A small project work for construction of a display system/ real time digital clock. 
EC 372 DIGITAL	COMMUNICATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
To study Time division multiplexing; To study PCM; To study the different channel coding and decoding technique; 
Generation and reception of different types of signals like ASK, PSK, FSK; To transmit and receive three separate signal 
audio, video, tone simultaneously through satellite link; To transmit PC data through satellite link using a satellite 
communication demonstration unit; Experimentally compare different forms of BPSK, QPSK, OQPSK and analyze 
their spectrum with spectrum analyzer; Spreading and dispreading using additive white Gaussian noise generation/ 
Gold code and other forms of spreading techniques; Transmit different types of signals suing a ISDN system; Analyze 
the process of data communication in LAN using LAN trainer and compare the performance different media access 
techniques. 
EC 373 ANALOG	COMMUNICATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study and design of AM modulator and demodulator. (Full AM, SSB, DSBSC, SSBSC); Study of FM modulation and 
Demodulation Techniques; Observer the process of quantization and determination of quantization noise; Using 
MATLAB generate a carrier and a modulating signal Modulate the carrier using AM. Show the waveform in time 
domain and analyze its frequency spectrum. Repeat the simulation for modulating signal being square, triangular 
and other forms waveform; Using MATLAB generate a carrier and a modulating signal Modulate the carrier using 
FM. Show the waveform in time domain and analyze its frequency spectrum. Repeat the simulation for modulating 
signal being square, triangular and other forms waveform; Using Lab-View software simulate AM modulation and 
demodulation system; Using Lab-View software simulate FM modulation and demodulation system; Design a receiver 
to demodulate and receive the signal from a AM radio station; Design a receiver to demodulate and receive the signal 
from the local FM radio station. 
EC 374 INSTRUMENTATION	DEVICE	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of Temp. -Resistance & Temp. —Voltage characteristics of the Thermistor; Determination of Temp. 
-Resistance & Temp. —Voltage characteristics of the RTD (pt-100); Determination of Temp. using Thermocouple with 
compensation & without compensation . Plot the graph for Actual Temp. vs %Error; Determination of characteristics 
between strain applied & the voltage output, as well as the signal conditioned voltage of a cantilever strain gauge; 
To study the characteristics of a LVDT with respect to secondary output voltage & Signal conditioned output voltage. 
Calibrate the LVDT & plot the graph between displacement & % Error; To study the response of optical sensor by 
varying the distance from light source; Study of PID controller; Study of Temperature control system. 
EC 375 DSP	LABORATORY 2 credit [0-0-3]
Write a program for linear convolution of two sequences; Write a program for circular convolution; Write a program 
to perform linear convolution using circular convolution; Write a program to perform N-point DFT. Also perform the 
IDFT on the result obtained to verify the result; Write a program to perform circular correlation using: Direct method 
b) circular convolution using rotation method; Write a program to perform circular convolution and correlation using 
DFT; Write a program to perform linear convolution using (a)overlap save method (b) overlap add method; Write 
a program to perform FFT on a sequence using the following methods. (a) Decimation in time (b) Decimation in 
frequency; Write a program to perform IDFT on a transformed sequence using DFT; Write a program to design an 
FIR filter using windowing technique; Write a program to design an IIR filter using (a) impulse invariant method (b) 
bilinear transformation method. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
278
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 376 VIRTUAL	INSTRUMENTATION	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Water Level Control by PLC model IM-23; Elevator Control by PLC model IM-20A; Temperature Control by PLC Trainer 
model IM-30; Performance analysis of Accelerometer; To study the characteristics of the Hall effect through the Hall 
sensors; Experiment based on Mechatronics Trainer System; Experiments on PLC Trainer Model VPLCT-02S. 
EC 378 MICROWAVE	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Using	Gunn	Oscillator	Based	Microwave	Test	bench:	Study of Gunn Oscillator; Study of Frequency, Guide wavelength; 
Measurement of VSWR, Reflection coefficient, Impedance measurement; Study of Directional coupler; Study of 
Variable Attenuator; Using	Microwave	 Test	 bench	 for	 Antenna	Measurement:	 To plot the polar pattern & gain 
characteristics of the following Antennas; Pyramidal Horn; Pickup Horn; Slotted Horn; Slotted Wave Guide Antenna; 
Dielectric Antenna; Sectorial Horn (E & H-Plane); Parabolic Dish; Using	IE3D	&	WIPLD	Electromagnetic	Simulator:	
Simulation of Microstrip patch Antenna to study the following parameters; Impedance Plot; Radiation pattern; 
Bandwidth; S-parameters(S11, S12, S22 etc).; Gain; Efficiency
EC 380 CONTROL	SYSTEM	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Evaluate the effect of pole and zero location on the time response of first and second – order systems; Evaluate the 
effect of additional pole and zeros on the time response of second- order systems; Verify the equivalency of the basic 
forms, including cascade, parallel and feedback forms. To verify the equivalency of the basic moves, including moving 
blocks past summing junctions and moving blocks past pickoff points; Verify the effect of pole location upon stability 
of a system. Extend the experiment to check the stability with negative feedback; Verify the effect of input waveform, 
loop gain and system type upon steady-state      errors; See the effect of open-loop poles and upon the shape of the 
root locus. Also verify the root locus as a tool for estimating the effect of open-loop gain upon the transient response 
of closed-loop systems; To perform a trade-off study for lead compensation. To design a PI controller and see its effect 
upon steady- state error; To examine the relationships between open-loop frequency response and stability, open-
loop frequency response and closed-loop transient response and the effect of additional closed-loop poles and zeros 
upon the ability to predict closed-loop transient response; To design a PID controller using MATLAB’s SISO design tool. 
Observe the effect of a PI and a PD controller upon the magnitude and phase responses at each step of the design of 
a PID controller; To simulate a system that has been designed for transient response via a state- space controller and 
observer; Design the gain of a digital control system to meet a transient response requirement; to simulate a digital 
control system to test a design and observe the effect of sampling rate upon the time response of a digital system. 
EC 382 COMMUNICATION	DESIGN	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Design a AM transmitter and receiver system using p-spice and test the circuit designed using discrete components; 
Design a FM transmitter and Receiver system using p-spice and test using discrete components; Design a 10m FM 
transmitter using available ICs and receive the transmitter signal using a commercial FM receiver; Design a PCM 
system to transmit voice signal. Include multiplexing of 8voice channels for the purpose and design the receiver side 
also design a delta modulator for voice signal transmission. 
EC 410 ANTENNA ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	312:	Electromagnetic	Theory
Electromagnetic	 fields	 and	 its	 radiation:	Maxwell’s equations, EM Waves, Plane wave equation and its solution 
for free space and non-conducting medium. Structures of Antennas: Antenna Definition, size, supports, feeders, 
conductors & insulators. Antenna Parameters: Isotropic radiator, Radiation resistance, Antenna resistance, Bandwidth, 
Beamwidth, Radiation pattern, Radiation intensity, Gain - Power gain Directive gain, Directivity, Antenna aperture, 
Efficiency, Effective aperture, effective length, Polarization, Voltage and Current relations. Practical	Antennas:	VLF & 
LF transmitting antennas, Medium frequency and High frequency antennas, Long wire, Rhombic, V, Folded - dipole, 
Yagi, Horn and Parabolic reflector. Planar Antenna: Microstrip Antenna, Radiation Principle, Input impedance, 
Bandwidth, Feeding techniques, TL model, Cavity Model, Parameter calculation using IE3D software. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C Balanis, Antenna theory, analysis and design, 2nd. Edn., John Wiley & Sons. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. E. C. Jordan & K. G. Balmain, Electromagnetic waves and Radiating Systems. 
2. R. Chatterjee, Antenna Theory and Practice - New age Publisher, 2004. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
279
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. J. D. Kraus, Antenna- Tata McGraw Hii, 2006. 
EC 412 ANTENNA	ANALYSIS	&	SYNTHESIS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	312:	Electromagnetic	Theory
Design of short wire antenna, Calculation of field pattern for odd and even Half- wavelengths Antenna Array, Linear 
array, Phased array; Array synthesis: Prediction of antenna array from radiation pattern, Detailed theoretical analysis 
of: Yagi-Uda array; Theory of: Horn antenna, Parabolic antenna, satellite antenna; Design of Microstrip antenna 
(Rectangular & square patches); Idea about Transmission Line Model; Brief idea about Active Integrated antenna 
Essential	Reading
1. C. A. Balanis, Antenna Analysis. 
Supplementary Reading
1. Jordan & Balmain, Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems. 
2. J. D. Kraus, Antenna Theory. 
EC 413 OPTICAL	COMMUNICATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction	to	optical	communication: Characteristics of optical transmission media, optical fibres- preparation and 
transmission characteristics, loss and dispersion mechanisms; Optical	sources:	principles of operation, modulation 
characteristics and driver circuits, LED, laser diodes, light source linearity, modal, and partition and reflection noise;	
Power	Launching	and	Coupling:	Source to fibre power launching, lensing schemes for coupling improvement, fibre 
to fibre joints, couplers, multiplexers and splices; Photo detectors: principles of operation, circuits and performance, 
preamplifiers and post-detection amplifiers; Optical	 Fiber	 systems: intensity modulation/direct detection system, 
link budget using direct detection, coherent system, wavelength converters, coherent and WDM systems, Photonic 
switching. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. Keiser, Optical Fibre Communications, McGraw Hill, 2008. 
2. John M. Senior, Optical Fiber Communications: Principles and Practice, PHI, 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Jones, William B. Jones, Introduction to Optical Fiber Communications Systems, Oxford University Press (1995)
2. A. J. Rogers, Understanding Optical Fiber Communications, Artech House (2001)
3. J. C. Palais, Fiber optic communication, 5th edition, Prentice Hall, 2004
EC 414 INFORMATION	THEORY	AND	CODING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction:	Entropy and mutual information, source coding, variable length coding, discrete memory less channels, 
capacity cost functions, channel coding, linear block codes, and cyclic codes. Convolution codes, sequential and 
probabilistic decoding, majority logic decoding, burst error-correcting codes, turbo codes and low-density-parity-
check codes; rate distortion theory: rate distortion function. Cryptography: basic concepts on cryptography and 
cryptoanalysis, security issues; private-key encryption algorithms-stream ciphers, block ciphers, Shannon’s theory; 
introduction to number theory - modular arithmetic, exponentiation and discrete logarithms in Galois field; public-
key encryption algorithms-Diffie-Hellman public-key distribution scheme, RSA public-key cryptosystem; Message 
authentication, hashing functions, digital signatures. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Haykin, Communication Systems, 4th Ed, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2001. 
2. L. Hanzo, T. H. Liew and B. L. Yeap, Turbo coding, turbo equalization and space-time coding for transmission over fading 
channels, John Wiley & Sons, 2002 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Wade Trappe, Lawrence C. Washington, Introduction to Cryptography with Coding Theory, Second edition, Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
NJ, USA. 
2. R. Bose, Information Theory, Coding and Cryptography, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
3. B. P. Lathi, Modern digital and Analog communications, Third Edition, Oxford University Press. 
4. Douglas R. Stinson, Cryptography: Theory and Practice, Third Edition, Champmen & Hall/ CRC. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
280
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 415 MOBILE	COMMUNICATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Evolution, Mobile Systems around the World, Example of the mobile radio systems, recent trends, Frequency reuse, 
Channel assignment, hand off process, Interference. Path less: – Radio wave propagation, diffraction, Scattering, 
link budget; Outdoor and indoor propagation models; Principle of multi path propagation, Impulse response model 
of channels, parameters for mobile multi path channels, concept of fading, Rayleigh and Ricean fading; simulation 
of fading channels. Modulations techniques for mobile communication: - Linear Modulation techniques, constant 
envelop modulation, QPSK, MSK, GMSK, spread spectrum modulation techniques. Equalization: - Fundamentals, 
General adaptive equalizer, Linear and non-linear equalizers, diversity techniques, RAKE receivers. Basic concept of 
coding. Multiple access techniques: - Introduction, FDMA, TDMA, CDMA, Space division multiple access, capacity of 
cellular systems. Introduction to OFDM and wireless LAN. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications – Principles and Practice, Prentice Hall of India/ Pearson Education India, 2002. 
2. W C Y Lee, Mobile Communication Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, India, 2008 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. C. Y. Lee, Digital Cellular Systems, Mc Graw Hill, 2000. 
2. G. Stuber, Principles of Mobile Communication, 2001, Springer
EC 417 SATELLITE	COMMUNICATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction:	Original Satellite Communications, History, Current State, Overview of Satellite System Engineering; 
Orbital	 Aspects	 of	 Satellite	 Communication:	Orbital mechanism, look angle determination, orbit determination, 
orbit effects on Communication, System performance; Satellite	Link	Budget:	Basic transmission theory, system noise 
and G/T ratio, down link design, satellite system using small earth station, up-link design; Modulation	Multiplexing	
Techniques:	Analog telephone transmission, Television transmission, Digital transmission, Digital TV and bandwidth 
Compression, time division multiplexing; Multiple	 Access	 Techniques:	 Frequency division multiple access, time 
division multiple access, code division multiple access, practical demand access systems, random access, multiple 
access with on-board processing; Satellite	Earth	Solution	Techniques:	Earth solution design, tracking, small earth 
station antennas, Equipment for the Earth station. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. Pratt and W. Boston, Satellite Communications, John Wiley & Sons, 2004
2. William W Wu, Elements of Digital Satellite Communication, Vol. 1, Computer Science Press 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. T. T. Ha, Digital Satellite Communications, McGraw Hill, U. S. A., 2004
2. G. D. Gordon, W. L. Morgan, Principles of Communication Satellite, John Wiley & Sons, U. S. A., 2005
EC 419 COMPUTER	COMMUNICATION	NETWORKS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Communication Model, Data Communications, Computer Communication Architecture, Standard Making 
Organisations. Concepts and Terminology, Asynchronous and Synchronous Data Communications, Multiplexing 
Techniques. Communication Networking Techniques, Circuit Switching, Packet Switching, Local Area Networks. 
Protocols, Layered Approach, TCP / IP Protocol Suite, System Network Architecture. The Bridge and Routing, 
Connectionless internetworking, Connection oriented internetworking. Transport and Network Services TCP / UDP. 
Session Characteristics, OSI Session and Service Protocol. Presentation Concepts, Encryption and Authentication 
Codes, Virtual Terminal Protocols. Network Management, File Transfer and Electronic Mail. Communication Switching 
Techniques, Frame-mode Bearer Service, Frame Relay Congestion Control, Synchronous Transfer Mode. 
Essential	Reading
1. W. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, PHI, New Delhi, 2006
Supplementary Reading
1. A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 2nd Ed.; PHI, New Delhi, 2002. 
2. F. Halsall, Data Communications, Computer Networks and Open Systems, Pearson Education, 2003
EC 421 DIGITAL	VLSI	DESIGN 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to VLSI Design, Levels of abstraction and the complexity of design, Challenges of VLSI design: power, 
timing, area, noise, testability, reliability and yield; CAD tools: simulation, layout, synthesis, test; MOS modeling, MOS 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
281
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
device models, Short-channel effects and velocity saturation, Scaling of MOS circuits; VLSI fabrication technology, 
Layout design, Design rules, Stick diagrams; The CMOS inverter, VTC, Switching behavior, Noise margins and power 
dissipation; Static and dynamic CMOS combinational logic gate, Transistor sizing in static CMOS, logical effort, 
Pass-transistor logic, sizing issues, Domino logic gates, estimating load capacitance, Simple delay models (RC) for 
CMOS gates, Power consumption; Latches and clocking, Flip-flops, Set-up and hold tests, Static and dynamic latch 
and flip-flop, Clock design; Datapath units, Adders, Shifters, Multipliers; Control logic strategies, PLAs, Multi-level 
logic, Synthesis and place-and-route CAD; MOS memories, Register, SRAM, DRAM; Global interconnect modeling, 
Capacitance, resistance and inductance of interconnect; Signal and power-supply integrity issues, Electromigration, 
RC interconnect modeling Driving large capacitive load, reducing RC delays; Layout design, Standard-cell layout, 
Chip layout and floor planning, Array layout; Implementation issues, Design for testability, Packaging technology, I/O 
issues: ESD protection, boundary scan, inductance, synchronization
Essential	Reading
1. J. M. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits: A DesignPerspective, Second Edition, Pearson/PH, 
2003. (Cheap Edition)
Supplementary Reading
1. J. P. Uyemura, Introduction to VLSI Circuits and Systems, Wiley, 2001. 
2. W. Wolf, Modern VLSI Design: Systems-on-Chip Design, Third Edition, Pearson/PH, 2002. (Cheap Edition)
3. R. L. Geiger, P. E. Allen and N. R. Strader, VLSI Design Techniques for Analog and Digital Circuits, McGraw-Hill, 1990. 
Prerequisites:	Must	have	taken	EC	201,	EC	202
EC 423 HDL	AND	HIGH	LEVEL	VLSI	DESIGN 3 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	202:	Digital	Electronics
Basic concepts of hardware description languages., Hierarchy, Concurrency, logic and delay modeling, Structural, Data-
flow and Behavioral styles of hardware description, Architecture of event driven simulators, Syntax and Semantics 
of VHDL, Variable and signal types, arrays and attributes, Operators, expressions and signal assignments, Entities, 
architecture specification and configurations, Component instantiation, Concurrent and sequential constructs, Use 
of Procedures and functions, Examples of design using VHDL., Synthesis of logic from hardware description.; CMOS 
Process and Masking Steps: Concept of Lambda, Design Rules, Layer Properties and Parasitic Estimation, Sheet 
Resistance, U Cg, Capacitance Ratio for Layers, Concept of tau, Quick estimation of delays. Design of Buffers and I/O 
Pads, CMOS Logic Design Styles and their Comparison, CMOS Logic Design Styles and their Comparison (Continued), 
From Specifications to Silicon, Abstraction Levels in VLSI Design.; Adder Architectures, Multiplier Architectures, Counter 
Architectures, ALU Architectures. Latches, Flip-flops, Registers and Register Files. PLA Design, Gate Array Approach, 
Standard Cell Approach. Moore and Mealy Machines, PLA-based Implementation, Random Logic Implementation, 
Micro-programmed Implementation (ROM-based Implementation) SRAM Cell, Different DRAM Cells, Arraying of 
Cells, Address Decoding, Read / Write Circuitry, Sense Amplifier Design, ROM Design. Clock Skew, Clock, Distribution 
and Routing, Clock Buffering, Clock Domains, Gated Clock, Clock Tree. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. H. Roth, Digital Systems Design Using VHDL, Thomson Publications, Fourth Edition, 2002
2. V. A. Pedroni, Circuit Design with VHDL, MIT Press/PHI, 2004. (Cheap Edition)
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Z. Navabi, Verilog Digital System Design, Second Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
2. R. C. Cofer and B. F. Harding, Rapid System Prototyping with FPGAs: Acceleratingthe Design Process, Elsevier/Newnes, 2005. 
EC 424 EMBEDDED	COMPUTING	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-1-0]
Microcomputer-based Systems, Software Development, Interfacing Methods, Interrupt Synchronization, Threads, 
Timing Generation and Measurements Serial I/O Devices, Parallel Port Interfaces, Memory Interfacing, High Speed 
I/O Interfacing Analog Interfacing Data Acquisition Systems, Microcomputer-based Control Systems Simple Networks, 
Digital Filters.; Circuits	and	DSP	Architectures:	Circuit design basics, deep submicron issues, low architectures for 
embedded systems.; Architecture	Design:	Embedded processor architectures, Architectural techniques for low power, 
Design methods for core based ASICs.; Compiler and OS: Introduction to compiler optimizations, Power models for 
compiler optimizations, Code size vs. performance / power trade offs.; DSP	Algorithm	Design:	A/D conversion and 
finite precision analysis, Algorithms for embedded systems: source and channel processing, Portable embedded 
code.; Networking:	Networking basics (addressing and routing), Wireless vs. wire-line networking, Distributed OS for 
networked embedded systems: Case study of JINI.; 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
282
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Wolf, Computers as Components : Principles of Embedded Computer System Design, Second Edition, Elsevier/MK, 2005
2. F. Vahid and T. Givargis, Embedded System Design: A Unified Hardware/SoftwareIntroduction, Wiley, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. Marwedel, Embedded System Design, Springer, 2006. 
2. Proceedings of the IEEE (Special Issue on HW/SW Codesign), March, 1997. 
EC 431 PC	BASED	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	100:	Basic	Electronics
Introduction, Signal-conditioning and op amp circuits, Sensors and actuators, Principles of data acquisition, Hardware 
organization of IBM PC, Interfacing to IBM PC, Plug-in data acquisition and control boards, Data acquisition using 
GPIB, Data acquisition using serial interfaces, Networked data acquisition, Recent developments. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. N. Mathivanan, PC-based Instrumentation: Concepts and Practice, PHI, 2008. 
EC 432 BIOMEDICAL	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	336:	Industrial	Instrumentation
INTRODUCTION TO BIOMEDICAL INSTRUMENTATION: Biometrics, Introduction to the man-instrument system, 
Components of the man-instrument system, Problems encountered in measuring a living system; BIO-ELECTRIC 
SIGNALS AND ELECTRONICS: Origin of bio-electric signals, Bioelectric potentials, Biopotential electrodes; 
PHYSIOLOGICAL TRANSDUCERS: Pressure transducers, Transducers for body temperature measurement, Pulse sensors, 
Respiration sensors; BIOMEDICAL RECORDERS: Electrocardiograph, Phonocardiograph, Electroencephalograph, 
Electromyograph; PATIENT MONITORING SYSTEM: System concepts, Measurement of heart rate, Blood pressure 
measurement, Measurement of temperature, Measurement of respiration rate, Apnoea detectors; BLOOD FLOW 
METERS: Electromagnetic blood flow meter, Ultrasonic blood flow meter, NMR blood flow meter, Laser Doppler flow 
meter; BLOOD GAS ANALYZERS: Blood pH Measurement, Blood PCO2 measurement; BLOOD CELL COUNTERS: Method 
of cell counting, Coulter counters, Automatic recognition and differential counting of cells; RECENT DEVELOPMENTS. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. L. Cromwell, F. J. Weibell, E. A. Pfeiffer, Biomedical Instrumentation and Measurements, Pearson Education, Delhi, 2005. 
2. R. S. Khandpur, Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation, Tata Mc Graw Hill, New Delhi, 2000. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. J. G. Webster, Bioinstrumentation, Wiley Student Edition, 2004. 
2. W. J. Tompkins, Biomedical Digital Signal Processing, PHI India Pvt. Ltd., 2008. 
EC 433 PROCESS	CONTROL	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	331:	Control	System	Engineering
INTRODUCTION TO PROCESS CONTROL: A Process Control System, Important terms and the objectives of Automatic 
Process Control, Transmission Signals, Control Strategies; MATHEMATICAL TOOLS: Deviation variables, Linearization 
of functions of one variable, Linearization of functions of two or more variables; FIRST-ORDER DYNAMIC SYSTEM: 
Thermal Process, Gas process, Dead time, Level process, Response of first-order processes; HIGHER-ORDER DYNAMIC 
SYSTEMS: Tanks in series – Noninteracting systems, Interacting systems, Thermal process, Response of higher order 
systems; BASIC COMPONENTS OF CONTROL SYSTEM: Sensors and Transmitter, Control Valves, Feedback controllers 
(P, PI, PID); DESIGN OF SINGLE-LOOP FEEDBACK CONTROL SYSTEMS: Feedback control loop, Stability of the control 
loop, Tuning of feedback controllers, Synthesis of feedback controllers. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. A. Smith & A. B. Compio, Principles and Practice of Automatic Process Control, John Wiley, 2004. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. D. E. Seborg, T. F. Edgar and D. A. Mellichamp, Process Dynamics and Control, John Wiley and Sons, 2004. 
2. W. L. Luyben and M. L. Luyben, Essentials of Process Control, McGraw-Hill International Edition, 2002. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
283
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 434 ANALYTICAL	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pre-requisite:	EC	334:	Instrumentation	Devices
Statistical techniques: -Error analysis, distribution, confidence level, least square fitting, testing of hypothesis. 
Measurement of viscosity, humidity and thermal conductivity. Mass Spectroscopy. Gas Chromatography: - Principles 
and construction, detectors, Industrial gas chromatograph, Liquid chromatography. Ionising electrodes: -pH and ion 
sensitive electrodes, ISFET and chemical sensors. Absorption spectroscopy: -IR and UV spectroscopy. Non-dispersive 
technique of measurement; UV fluorescence spectroscopy. Emission Spectroscopy: Flame and atomic emission 
spectroscopy. X-ray methods of measurement: sources and detectors, X-ray absorption and florescence techniques. 
Chemical analysis of surface- Ion scattering spectroscopy, Auger Emission spectroscopy, ESCA. Nuclear Magnetic 
resonance Spectroscopy: Basic principle and its application. Environment and Pollution monitoring Instruments; 
Recent developments. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. H. W. Willard, L. L. Merritt, J. A. Dean, F. A. Settle, Instrument Method of Analysis, East West Publishers, 2002. 
2. C. Wiston, X-ray Methods, John Wiley and Sons, 2000. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. D. A. Strong, F. J. Holler, T. A. Nieman, Principles of Instrumental Analysis, Saunders, 2003. 
EC 437 RADAR	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Principle of detection and ranging, Radar frequencies and bands. Applications, Radar block diagram 
and operation.; Radar Range Equation: Range prediction, Minimum detectable signal, Receiver noise SNR, Noise 
temperature, Pattern propagation factor, Antenna gain, Loss factors, Jamming & Clutter, Accuracy of prediction. 
Integration of radar pulses, Radar cross section of targets, Transmitter Power, PRF and system losses & Propagation 
effects; Automatic Detection, Tracking and Sensor integration: Optimal detector, Target resolution, Automatic 
Tracking, Tracking while-scan system, Multi sensor integration, Maximum Likelihood Approach; CW FM Radar: Doppler 
Effect, CW Radar, Frequency-modulated CW Radar, Multiple-frequency CW Radar.; MTI and Pulse Doppler Radar: MTI 
delay lines, Delay line cancellers, Coherent and Non-Coherent MTI, Pulse Doppler Radar, Electronic Scanning Radar: 
Principle of Electronic Scanning by Phase, Frequency and switching Techniques, Linear array and beam steering, 
Planar arrays and Beam steering, Basic description of phased array Radar system, Generalized performance of a phase 
antenna system; Pulse Compression Technique: Pulse compression system, Linear FM, Non linear FM, Digital Pulse 
compression, Phase coded Waveforms, Optimal Binary Sequence. Time-frequency, Coded waveforms, Weighting & 
Equalization. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. M. I. Skolnik, Radar Hand Book, McGrawhill, 2008
2. Francois Le Chevalier, Principles of Radar and Sonar Signal Processing, Artech House, 2002
Supplementary Readings: 
1. M. I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems, McGraw Hill, 2004
2. G. Stimson, Introduction to Airborne Radar, IEE Press, 2002
EC 442 ADVANCED	TECHNIQUES	IN	DSP 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	Digital	signal	Processing
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing: Decimation by a factor D, interpolation by a factor 1, sampling rate conversion 
by a national factor I/D.; Sampling rate conversion of band pass signals.; Implementation of low pass filter and 
digital filter banks.; lattice filters, Linear prediction, forward and backward linear prediction, FIR wiener filter.; Power 
spectrum estimation, non-parametric method Barlett, Parametric method.; Yule-Walker MA and ARMA models. 
Higher order statistics and its applications.; DSP transforms: Discrete Hartely transform, Discrete consine transform, 
Discrete Wavelet transform, S-transform. DSP techniques for bioinformatics., recent topics 
Essential	Reading
1. J. G. Proakis, D. G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing, PHI, New Delhi, 1995. 
2. S. J. Orfanidis, Optimum Signal Processing, Mac Millan Publishing Co., USA, 1985. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
284
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Suggested reading 
1. C. K. Chui, An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press, USA, 1992. 
2. Guoan Bi and Yonghong Zeng, Transforms and Fast Algorithms for signal analysis and representations, Springer, NY, USA, 2003
3. Lecturer notes
EC 443 DIGITAL	IMAGE	PROCESSING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	EC	341:	Digital	signal	Processing
INTRODUCTION: Fundamental steps in digital image processing, Components of an image processing system, DIGITAL 
IMAGE FUNDAMENTALS: Image sampling and quantization, Some basic relationships between pixels, Linear and 
nonlinear operations, IMAGE ENHANCEMENT IN SPATIAL DOMAIN: Some basic gray level transformations, Histogram 
processing, Smoothing and Sharpening spatial filters, IMAGE ENHANCEMENT IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN: Smoothing 
and Sharpening frequency domain filters, Homomorphic filtering, IMAGE RESTORATION: Noise models, Restoration 
in the presence of noise only-spatial filtering, Estimating the degradation functions, Inverse filtering, COLOR IMAGE 
PROCESSING: Color models, Pseudo-color processing, IMAGE COMPRESSION: Image compression models, Loss-less 
and Lossy compression, MORPHOLOGICAL IMAGE PROCESSING: Dilation and erosion, Opening and closing, Some 
basic morphological algorithms, IMAGE SEGMENTATION: Detection of discontinuities, Edge linking and boundary 
detection, Thresholding, Region based segmentation, RECENT DEVELOPMENTS. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. C. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, Pearson Education, 2006
2. L. R. Rabiner and R. W. Schafer, Digital Processing of Speech Signals, Pearson Education, 2005 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. K. Jain, Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing, Pearson Education, 2007 
2. L. R. Rabiner and B. Gold, Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing, Pearson Education, 2004 
EC 444 SOFT	COMPUTING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Fundamental Concepts: - Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). Learning Process: - error–correction 
learning, Hebbian learning, competitive learning, Boltzmann learning, the credit-assignment problem, supervised 
learning, and other learning techniques. Single neuron/ Perceptron networks: - training methodology, typical 
application to linearly separable problems. Multilayer Perceptron: - Back propagation algorithm, virtues and limitation 
of BP algorithm, modifications to back-propagation. Radial-basis function Networks – interpolation problem, Covers 
theorem, regularization networks, applications. Recurrent Networks.; Introduction to Fuzzy systems, Membership 
function, Fuzzy relational operation, fuzzy IF THEN rules, Sugeno and Mamdani type systems, Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy 
sytems, training methods Application of ANN and Fuzzy systems to non-stationary time series prediction; pattern 
classification; control; communication engineering; system identification and pattern classification. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Haykin, Neural Networks, A Comprehensive Foundation; Pearson Education, India (The book is also published by Prentice 
Hall of India), 2008 (ISBN- 81-203-2373-4). 
2. M. T. Hagan, Howard B. Demuth, Mark H. Beale, Neural Network Design; (ISBN: 0-9717321-0-8); Thomson 2002
3. Jang, Sun and Mizutani, Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft-Computing – A computational approach to learning and machine intelligence; 
Prentice Hall of India; ISBN-81-203-2243-6
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Kumar, Neural Networks: A Classroom approach, Tata Mcgraw Hill, 2004, ISBN: 9780070482920
EC 446 ADAPTIVE	SIGNAL	PROCESSING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Prerequisites:	Digital	signal	Processing
Adaptive systems: Examples and applications. Adaptive linear combiner : the performance function, gradient and 
minimum mean square error, alternative expression of gradient, LMS, NLMS, sign-error, sign-data and FXLMS 
algorithms, transform domain LMS, Recursive least square algorithm, windowed RLS, computational complexity, 
Block adaptive filter(time and DFT domains), adaptive lattice filters, IIR adaptive filter : equation error form. Adaptive 
filtering, adaptive channel equalization, Adaptive line enhancement and adaptive system identification. Hardware 
implementation of digital adaptive filter. Applications of adaptive filter : 50Hz interference in electrocardiography, 
cancellation of donor-heart interference, cancellation of maternal ECG in electrocardiography, cancellation noise 
in speech signals, adaptive echo cancellation in long distance telephone line, self tunning filter. Adaptive control 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
285
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
systems : model inverse and model reference controls. Introduction of adaptive array and adaptive beam forming. 
Recent advances in adaptive filtering. 
Essential	readings
1. S. Haykin and T. Kailath, Adaptive Filter Theory, Pearson Education, 4th Edition, 2005. 
2. B. Widrow and S. D. Sterns, Adaptive Signal Processing, Pearson Education, 2nd Indian reprint, 2002. 
Suggested reading
1. Lecturer notes
EC 448 EVOLUTIONARY	COMPUTING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Genetic Algorithm: Basic concepts, Search space, working principle. Encoding : binary, Octal, Hexadecimal, permutation, 
Value and Tree. Decoding, fitness function, Selection : Roulette-wheel, Boltzmann, Tournament, Rank and Steady-
state. Elitism, Crossover : single-pint, two-point, multi-point, uniform, matrix and cross over rate, Mutation : mutation, 
mutation rate. Variations of GA : Adaptive GA and Real coded GA.; Ant colony optimization : Ant foraging behaviour, 
combinatorial optimization, Routing in communication network, traveling sales man problem, graph portioning, nest 
building.; Particle swarm Optimization : basic principle, algorithm, flowchart. Variations of PSO : weighted, repulsive, 
stretched, comprehensive learning, combined effect PSO and clonal PSO.; Bacterial Foraging Optimization : Forging 
theory, social foraging, foraging behaviour of E. coli bacteria, BFO algorithm, chemotatic, swarming, reproduction and 
elimination and dispersal. Variations of BFO : fuzzy BFO and Adaptive BFO.; Artificial Immune System: overview, central 
and peripheral immune systems, immune network : clonal selection and its mathematical modeling, beyond clonal 
selection, danger theory, negative selection.; Applications : function optimization, adaptive system identification, 
channel equalization and financial forecasting. 
Essential	readings
1. D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in search, Optimization and machine learning, 1989. 
2. Eric Bonabeau, M. Dorigo and G. Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence : From natural to Artificial Systems, (Santa	Fe	Institute	Studies	
in	the	Sciences	of	Complexity	Proceedings), 1999. 
Suggested Readings
1. R. C. Eberhart, Y. Sai and J. Kennedy, Swarm Intelligence, The Morgan Kaufmann Series in artificial Intelligence, 2001. 
2. K. M. Passino, Biomimicry for optimization, control and automation, 2004. 
3. D. Dasgupta, Artificial Immune Systems and their applications, 1998. 
4. Lecturer Notes
EC 471 OPTICAL	COMMUNICATION	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
End preparation of optical fiber. Core and cladding diameter measurement of Optical fiber; Investigate the 
propagation of light through an optical fiber. Calculate the light attenuation due to: Scattering and absorption; Fiber 
misalignments; Numerical aperture mismatch; Core area mismatch; To familiarize with the optical fiber Bi-directional 
couplers and wavelength division Mux-demux components and the measurements of its different parameters; 
Experimental studies on LED characteristics; Experimental studies on Photo detector characteristics; Experiment of 
coupling method between optical fiber and light source; Studies on Fiber-optic communication link design; Studies 
on adjustable optical attenuator and parameter measurement; Studies of microbend effect on signal propagation 
through an optical fiber; Fiber characterisation using OTDR. 
EC 472 IMAGE	PROCESSING	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Read, Load and Display some color and gray scale images; Perform Negative, Logarithmic and Power Law Transformation 
of different images; Find the histogram of the image. Develop histogram-equalization algorithm and display the 
histogram equalized image; Write the programs to perform filtering operation in spatial domain on noisy image 
corrupted with (i) Gaussian noise (ii) Salt and Pepper noise; Find Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) in both cases; Write 
program for Ideal Low Pass, Butterworth Low Pass and Gaussian Low Pass filter in frequency domain for removing 
Gaussian noise from images; Write programs for Ideal High Pass, Butterworth High Pass and Gaussian High Pass filter 
in frequency domain for sharpening different test images; Develop compressed image using (i) Run Length Encoding 
(ii) Huffman Coding; Display compressed image. Find the compression ratio and bits/pixel; Perform segmentation on 
bi-level images using Histogram method; Segment an image using (i) Region Growing (ii) Region Merging (iii) Region 
Splitting; Write program for Erosion and Dilation; Perform the following Geometric Transformations on different 
images (i) Scaling (ii)Translation (iii) Shearing; Mini Project
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
286
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EC 473 VHDL-LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Design a full adder using Dataflow modeling; Design a full adder using half-adder; Design a half adder; Design a 
4-bit adder cum sub tractor using: (a) 4: 1 MUX using the following: (a)dataflow (b)using when else (c) structural 
modeling using 2: 1 MUX (d) behavioral modeling using (i)case statement (ii) if else statement (e)mixed style of 
modeling(use structural, behavioral, dataflow); Design a Decoder(3 : 8) and Encoder (Gray to Binary); Design a BCD 
to 7-Segment Decoder: Interface the 2-bit adder with 7-segment display; Design 4-bit Even/Odd parity checker & 
generator; Design of Flip-Flops: (a)S-R Flip Flop (b)J-K Flip Flop (c) D Flip Flop (d) T Flip Flop; Design of counters: 4 
bit up counter(use asynchronous reset) (b)4 bit down counter(use synchronous reset) (c) 4-bit up/down counter (d)
Decade counter.; Design of Shift-Register: (a) Serial-in serial-out (b)Serial-in parallel-out; Design the following using 
Generic (a)Generic Decoder (b)Generic parity (c) detector; Generic parity generator; Microcomputer programming. 
design programs for microcontrollers in assembly language, with the use of different addressing modes, subroutines 
and stack operations, and interrupts; Examples: Hexadecimal addition of two numbers; Splitting a byte into nibbles; 
Hexadecimal multiplication of two numbers; Display letter ‘A’ on dot matrix display; Check the number for being odd 
or even. 
EC 474 DSP	PROCESSOR	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Familiarization with Texas instruments based DSP processors; Familiarization with Analog Devices based DSP 
processors; Practice on processors language; Implementation of various transforms and their inverses : DFT, FFT, DCT, 
DHT and DWT; Implementation of circular convolution and correlation in time and DFT domains; Implementation of 
overlap-save based linear convolution in time and DFT domains; Implementation of low pass and high pass FIR filter 
using windowing technique; Implementation of bilinear transformation based IIR filter; System Identification using 
LMS based tap-delay adaptive filter; Channel equalization of linear and nonlinear channels using LMS technique; 
Recovery of fundamental frequency from a mixture of signal and noise
EC 475 VLSI	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Study of PMOS & NMOS Characteristics using SPICE; Layout of Basic circuit elements NMOS, PMOS using L-Edit; 
Layout & Circuit Simulation of CMOS Inverter; Study the static behavior of CMOS inverter w. r. t. VDD and Temperature; 
Study the Dynamic behavior of CMOS inverter w. r. t. VDD,; Simulation of basic gates; Simulation of Combinational 
and Sequential circuits; Layout experiments of devices and inverter; Layout of Combinational Circuits; Layout of 
Sequential Circuits
EC 476 BIOMEDICAL	LABORATORY 2 credit [0-0-3]
Study and recording of Electrocardiograph; Study and recording of Electroencephalograph; Study and recording of 
Electromyograph; Design of pulse sensor; Design of respiration sensor; Blood pH measurement; Measurement of 
blood pCO2; Study on photoplethysmography and its use for heart beat counting. 
EC 477 MOBILE	COMMUICATION	LAB 2 credit [0-0-3]
Generation of baseband signal for GSM, CDMA, Bluetooth, WLAN and WiMAX. Estimation of the signal spectrum 
at baseband; Analyze the working of the RF section of a mobile cellular receiver; Signal generation, reception and 
analysis of Bluetooth signal using random number as information bits; Simulate the working of codec in a GSM 
receiver using MATLAB and Labview; Analyze propagation characteristics of GSM, IS95, CDMA2000 using Qualnet 
simulator; Determine the mobile channel transfer function using vector network analyzer, signal generator and 
spectrum analyzer; Test an error correction coding scheme using software defined radio system; Design equalizer for 
GSM receiver on a software defined radio system; Design a mobile CDMA receiver using software defined radio set. 
EC 479 PROCESS	CONTROL	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
To study the characteristics of P/I & I/P converter; Determination of the different types of valve characteristics & 
calculate the gain at various condition; Study and synthesis of Hydraulic & Pneumatic systems using Trainers; 
Experiments on Air velocity sensor and its associate signal conditioner circuit; Performance analysis on ON-OFF/P/
PI/PD/PID controllers on Co-Current and Counter Current Heat Exchanger Process; Phase- Plane analysis on Relay 
Control system; Study of Linear System Simulator; Study of Compensation Design Network. 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering
Detail Syllabi
287
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	ELECTRICAL	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
Sub. Code. Subject L-T-P Credits
EE 101 Basic Electrical Technology 3-1-0 4
EE 203 Electrical Machines – I 3-1-0 4
EE 204 Electro Magnetic Fields 3-1-0 4
EE 208 Electrical Technology & Applications 3-0-0 3
EE 209 Network Analysis 3-0-0 3
EE 240 Measurement and Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
EE 241 Network Theory 3-1-0 4
EE 242 Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 3-1-0 4
EE 243 Analog Electronics 3-1-0 4
EE 244 Signals & Systems 3-1-0 4
EE 270 Basic Electrical Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 271 Network Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 272 Measurement Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 274 Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 277 Electrical Machines Laboratory – I 0-0-3 2
EE 301 Electrical Machines – II 3-1-0 4
EE 306 Electromagnetic Fields 3-0-0 3
EE 308 Utilization of Electrical Energy 3-0-0 3
EE 309 Power Generation Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 311 Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power 3-1-0 4
EE 312 Switch Gear & Protective Devices 3-1-0 4
EE 322 Control System – I 3-1-0 4
EE 324 Power Electronics 3-1-0 4
EE 336 Advanced Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
EE 341 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 345 Communication Systems Principles 3-0-0 3
EE 355 Computer Organization & Operating Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 356 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3
EE 370 Power Electronics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 371 Communication System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 372 Control System Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 373 Electrical Machines Laboratory – II 0-0-3 2
EE 374 Electrical Systems Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 375 Embedded Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 376 Power Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 377 Electrical Machine Design 0-0-3 2
EE 391 Special Topic in Electrical Engineering – I 3/4
EE 392 Special Topic in Electrical Engineering – II 3/4
EE 393 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – I 0-0-3 2
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
288
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 394 Special Laboratory in Electrical Engineering – II 0-0-3 2
EE 395 Engineering Product Development Project – I 0-0-6 4
EE 396 Engineering Product Development Project – II 0-0-6 4
EE 401 Power System Operation and Control 3-1-0 4
EE 404 Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
EE 405 Utilization of Electrical Energy & Drives 3-1-0 4
EE 406 High Voltage DC Transmission 3-0-0 3
EE 407 Electric Drives 3-1-0 4
EE 408 Electromagnetics Theory and Applications 3-0-0 3
EE 416 Power System Transients 3-0-0 3
EE 417 High Voltage Engineering 3-1-0 4
EE 425 Control System – II 3-1-0 4
EE 426 Fuzzy Modeling & Control 3-0-0 3
EE 427 Soft Computing 3-1-0 4
EE 428 Electrical Drives Concepts & Applications 3-0-0 3
EE 429 Advanced Control Theory 3-1-0 4
EE 436 Adaptive Control and System Identification 3-0-0 3
EE 438 Industrial Automation & Control 3-0-0 3
EE 445 Data Communication & Networks 3-1-0 4
EE 454 Digital Communication 3-0-0 3
EE 455 Digital Signal Processing 3-1-0 4
EE 456 Robotics and Computer Vision 3-0-0 3
EE 471 Electrical Drives Laboratory 0-0-3 2
EE 472 Control & Electrical System Design 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
EE 101 BASIC	ELECTRICAL	TECHNOLOGY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Sources of energy, steam, hydro and nuclear power generation, general structure of electrical power 
systems. DC Networks: Kirchoff’s laws, node voltage and mesh current methods, delta-star and star-delta conversions, 
superposition principle, Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems. Single phase AC circuits: Single phase emf generation, 
average and effective values of sinusoids, solution of R, L, C series circuits, j operators, solution of parallel and 
series-parallel circuits. Three-phase AC circuits: Three phase emf generation, delta and star connections, line and 
phase quantities, solution of the three phase circuits with balanced voltage and balanced load conditions, phasor 
diagram, measurement of power in three phase circuits, three phase four wire circuits. Magnetic circuits: Review of 
fundamental laws of electromagnetic induction, transformer and rotational emfs, Solution of magnetic circuits. DC 
machine: Construction, emf and torque equations, DC motor starters, speed control of DC motors. Transformers: 
Construction, emf equation, phasor diagrams on lo load and full load, equivalent circuit, auto transformer. Induction 
motor: Construction, the revolving magnetic field, torque equation, slip, starters for squirrel cage and slip ring type 
induction motors. Electrical Measuring instruments: DC PMMC instruments, shunt and multipliers, moving iron 
ammeters and voltmeters, wattmeter, AC energy meter. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. Hughes, Electrical Technology, ELBS, 1997. 
Supplementary Reading: 
2. V. D. Toro, Basic Electrical Engineering, PHI, 2000. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
289
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 203 ELECTRICAL	MACHINES	–	I 4 credits [3-1-0]
DC Machines: Review of constructional features, armature winding, Lap and Wave winding. Review of EMF 
equation for a generator and Torque equation for a motor. Armature reaction, Distribution of Flux density in the 
air gap, commutation, Methods for improving commutation. DC Generator: Methods of excitation, open circuit 
characteristics, Load characteristics and voltage regulation. DC motor: Speed torque characteristics of motors, 
Regions of normal operations, Methods of speed control. Losses and Efficiency of DC machines: Swinburne’s test 
& Hopkinson’s test. Transformers: Review of emf equation and equivalent circuit, voltage regulation and efficiency, 
Determination of parameter from OC & SC tests, Back to Back test, parallel operation and load sharing, per-unit 
representation of transformer parameters & problem solving. Auto Transformer: Principle of operation, Phasor 
diagram, Equivalent circuit and comparison with two winding transformer. Three Phase Transformer: Construction of 
various types, operating characteristics of Star–Star, Star–Delta, Delta – star, Delta – Delta, Open – Delta and Zigzag 
connections, Vector Groups, Phase transformation, Three phase to Two phase, Three phase to Six phase, Three phase 
to Twelve phase transformation, Scott connection, parallel operation of Three phase transformer, Time harmonies in 
transformers – their cause and remedy, Three winding transformers equivalent circuit and applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. E. Fitzagerald, C. M. Kingsley (Jr) and S. D. Umans, Electric Machinery, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. I. L. Kosow, Electric Machinery & Transformers, PHI, 2001. 
2. C. I. Hubert, Electric Machines, Pearson Education, 2003. 
EE 204 ELECTROMAGNETIC	FIELDS 4credits [3-1-0]
Fundamentals of Field Theory, Maxwell’s equations, Boundary conditions in Electromagnetic Field, Energy Theorems 
and Pointing Vector, Electromagnetic Wave Equation in Dielectrics and Conductors, Solution of Wave equation in 
Cartesian Coordinates in homogeneous Dissipative and Non dissipative Regions, Waves at interface between 
conductors and Dielectrics. Transmission Lines: Introduction, Line Transmission Theory, Variation of Voltage and 
Current at distance x from the sending end, Primary Line Constant, Phase Velocity and Line wavelength, Characteristics 
impedance, The Propagation Coefficient, Computation of Primary constants from values of short circuit and open 
circuit impedances, Phase and Group velocities, Standing Waves, Lossless Lines at Radio Frequencies, Voltage Standing 
Wave Ratio, Reflection Coefficient, Transmission Lines as Circuit Elements, Smith Chart, Solution of problems using 
Smith Chart, Stub Matching. Wave Guides: Introduction, Physical Mechanism of Wave Guide Propagation, Phase and 
Group Velocities, Rectangular Wave Guides, Cut off in a Rectangular Wave Guide, Wave Guide dimension, Wave Guide 
Impedance. Antennas: Introduction, Antenna Equivalent Circuits, Coordinate System, Radiation Fields, Polarization, 
The Isotropic Radiator, Power Gain of an Antenna, Effective Area of an Antenna, The Hertzian Dipole, Half Wave 
Dipole, Vertical Antennas, Folded Elements, Non-Resonant Antennas, Driven Arrays, Parasitic Arrays. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. N. O. Sadiku, Elements of Electromagnetics, Oxford University Press, 2002. 
2. W. H. Hayt, Engineering Electromagnetics, TMH, 1992. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics, Pearson Education, 2003. 
EE 208 ELECTRICAL	TECHNOLOGY	&	APPLICATIONS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Transformer: Three phase transformer connections, Testing, Phase conversion, Autotransformer and Induction 
Regulator. D. C Machines: Construction, Basic EMF and torque equations, classification. Voltage builds up in D. C 
generators, performance characteristics; D. C motors torque /speed characteristics, speed control and braking, 
Testing and efficiency. Induction machines: Constructional features and rotating magnetic field. Circuit model and 
phasor diagram. Torque-slip characteristics pull-out torque, Operating performances, Circle diagram, Testing, starting 
and speed control and Braking. Single phase induction motors – classification, Universal motors, Utility. Synchronous 
machines: Constructional features, synchronous generators and motors, equivalent circuit and phasor diagram, power 
and torque characteristics, hunting, starting of synchronous motors; Salient pole synchronous machine - phasor 
diagram and determination of synchronous reactance, Voltage regulation of alternators, parallel operations, Utility. 
Essential	reading:	
1. A. E. Fitzagerald, C. M. Kingsley (Jr) and Umans, Electric Machinery, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
Supplementary reading: 
1. I. L. Kosow, Electric Machinery & Transformers, PHI, 2001. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
290
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 209 NETWORK	ANALYSIS 3 credits [3-0-0]
AC Circuits: Review of series and parallel AC circuits in the context of super node and super mesh. Series and Parallel 
Resonance in AC Circuits: Characteristics, properties of resonance circuits, Selectivity, Bandwidth and Quality Factor. 
Coupled Circuits: Coefficient of coupling, Dot convention, Analysis of coupled circuits. Opamp Circuit: Solution of 
opamp circuits under the assumption of ideal conditions using network concepts. Network Theorems: Thevenin’s, 
Norton’s and Superposition theorems applied to circuits containing dependent sources. Three-phase Circuits: 
Analysis of three phase unbalanced circuits for 3-wire and 4-wire systems. Transients in Electric circuits: DC and AC 
transients in R-L, R-C and R-L-C circuits using Laplace Transform. Complex Waves: RMS value of complex waves circuit 
response to non-sinusoidal excitations. Two-port Networks: Two-port network concept, Representation in T and PI 
Configuration, Z, Y, h and ABCD parameters, image impedances, Interconnection of Two-port networks. Network 
Functions: Natural frequency of a network variable and a network, Network functions with examples and general 
properties, concept of complex frequency, poles, zeros and frequency response. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. H. Hayt and T. E. Kimmerley, Engineering Circuit Analysis, TMH, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. E. Van Valkenberg, Network analysis, PHI, 1990. 
EE 240 MEASUREMENT	AND	ELECTRONICINSTRUMENTATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Measurement	 of	 Electrical	 Quantities	 Standards of Measurement & Errors, Voltmeter, Ammeter, Multimeter 
Wattmeter and Energy meter. Measurement of Electrical Elements : Measurement of low, medium and high 
resistances, insulation resistance measurement AC bridges for inductance and capacitance measurement. Instrument 
Transformers Current and Potential transformers, ratio and phase angle errors. Electronic Measurements: Electronic 
voltmeter, multimeter, wattmeter & energy meter. Time, Frequency and phase angle measurements using CRO; 
Spectrum & Wave analyzer.; Digital counter, frequency meter, voltmeter, multimeter and storage oscilloscope.; 
Instrumentation:	 Transducers, classification & selection of transducers, strain gauges, inductive & capacitive 
transducers, piezoelectric and Hall-effect transducers, thermisters, thermocouples, photo-diodes & photo-transistors, 
encoder type digital transducers, Signal conditioning and telemetry, basic concepts of smart sensors and applications. 
Data Acquisition Systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. K. Sawhney, Electrical and Electronics Measurements and Instrumentation, DhanpatRai, 2003. 
2. W. D. Cooper and A. P. Helpric, Modern Electronic Instrumentation & Measurement Techniques, PHI, 1990. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. P. Bentley, Principles of Measurement Systems, Longman Group Ltd. (Pearson Education), 1995. 
2. M. Tooley, PC Based Instrumentation and Control, Newnes, 1997. 
3. A. J. Bouvens, Digital Instrumentation, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
EE 241 NETWORK THEORY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Review of Series and Parallel AC circuits in the context of supernodes and supermesh. Opamp circuits; Series and 
parallel resonance in AC circuits: Properties of resonant circuits, selectivity, bandwidth and quality factor.; Coupled 
circuits: Coefficient of coupling, dot convention, analysis of coupled circuits.; Network theorems: Thevenin’s and 
Norton’s (dependent sources A. C. circuits), Maximum power transfer theorem, solving circuit problems using source 
transform techniques.; Three phase systems: Review of balanced three phase systems, 3 wire and 4 wire systems, 
phase sequence, relation between line and phase quantities of star and delta systems, active and reactive power, 
solution of balanced three phase circuits, unbalanced three phase three wire and four wire systems, measurement 
of power in three phase balanced and unbalanced systems. Introduction to the concept of symmetrical components 
and its applications.; Transients in Electric circuits: D. C. and A. C. Transients in R-L, R-C and R-L-C circuits using Laplace 
Transform. Wave form synthesis using Laplace Transform techniques.; Complex waves: R. M. S. values of complex 
waves, circuit response to non-sinusoidal inputs.; Two Port Networks: Two-Port network parameters, T and PI section 
representation, open circuit and short circuit impedance in terms of A B C D constants, Image impedances, relationship 
between the image parameters and the short circuit and open circuit impedances, Symmetrical Networks.; Network 
Functions: Natural frequency of a network variable and a network, Network functions with examples and general 
properties, concept of complex frequency, poles, zeroes, and frequency response. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
291
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. H. Hayt & J. E. Kemmerley, Engineering Circuit Analysis, TMH, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. E. V. Valkenburg, Network Analysis, PHI, 1990. 
EE 242 DIGITAL	ELECTRONICS	&	MICROPROCESSOR 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to Boolean algebra and Switching Function, Boolean minimization. Combinational Logic Design using 
MSI circuits : Full Adder / Subtractor, BCD Adder, LAC Adder, Decoder, MUX/DEMUX three structure, Combinational 
logic design using ROM array, Applications of MSI designs.; Integrated Circuits: Difference between combinational 
and sequential circuits, Flip Flops, Counters, Shift Registers and PLA.; Analysis and Synthesis of Sequential Circuits: 
Basic models of sequential M/C, Analysis of Asynchronous and Synchronous circuits, Synthesis of completely and 
incompletely specified synchronous sequential M/Cs.; Introduction to Microprocessor : Overview of architecture 
of Intel 8085 Microprocessor (Register, Stack, Interrupt) Instruction set and programming.; Introduction to 16 Bit 
Microprocessor : Architecture of 8086 CPU architecture, Internal operations, Machine Language instructions, 
Addressing mode, Instruction Format, Instruction executions, Addressing mode, Instruction Format, Instruction 
execution timing, comparison of 8088 with 8086. Assembly language programming and Instructions: Assembler 
instruction format, Data Transfer, Arithmetic, Branch, Flag manipulation, Logical, Shift and Rotate. String Manipulation 
Stack Manipulation, all and return instructions, REP Prefix, segment override prefix, and simple assembler directives 
such as real, variable, DB, DW, DD, EQU, END, Assume, pointer (byte, word, double word, Near, Short, and Far). 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. N Jain and R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006. 
2. B. B. Bray, The Intel Microprocessors- 8086/8088, 80186, 80286, 80386, and 80486-Architecture, Programming and Interfacing, 
Prentice Hall, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. V. Hall, Microprocessor and Interfacing programming & Hardware, TMH, 2001. 
2.  A. K. Ray and K. M. Bhurchandi, Advanced Microprocessors & Peripherals: Architecture, Programming & Interfacing, TMH, 
2008. 
EE 243 ANALOG	ELECTRONICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
FET: Types, Biasing of FET, MOSFET biasing, MOSFET as an amplifier, CMOS circuits, MOSFET as analog switch, Concept 
of MESFET. OPAMP: Parameters of OPAMP, open loop and closed loop configurations, Bandwidth with feedback, 
Linear OPAMP circuits and applications, Non linear OPAMP circuits and applications. Oscillators: Concept of feedback, 
Classification of oscillators, Barkhausen. s criterion, RC oscillator, Wien bridge oscillator, LC oscillator (Hartley and 
Colpitts), Crystal oscillator, Negative resistance, Device based oscillators. Wave shaping and Multivibrators circuits: 
clippers and Clamers, Astable, Monostable and BistableMultivibrators, Schmitt Trigger. Boolean algebra and Switching 
Function, Boolean minimization. Combinational Logic Design using MSI circuits : Full Adder / Subtractor, BCD Adder, 
LAC Adder, Decoder, MUX/DEMUX three structure, Combinational logic design using ROM array, Applications of 
MSI designs.; Integrated Circuits: Difference between combinational and sequential circuits, Flip Flops, Counters, 
Shift Registers and PLA.; Analysis and Synthesis of Sequential Circuits: Basic models of sequential M/C, Analysis of 
Asynchronous and Synchronous circuits, Synthesis of completely and incompletely specified synchronous sequential 
M/Cs
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. S. Sedra and K. C. Smith, Microelectronic circuits, Oxford University Press, 2005. 
2. R. R. Spencer and M. S. Ghausi, Introduction to Electronic Circuit Design, Pearson, 2003. 
3. B. N Jain and R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006. 
4. B. B. Bray, The Intel Microprocessors- 8086/8088, 80186, 80286, 80386, and 80486-Architecture, Programming and Interfacing, 
Prentice Hall, 2000
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. A. Bell, Electronic Devices and Circuits, Oxford University Press, 2008. 
2. S. Salivahanan, N. S. Kumar and A. Vallavaraj, Electronic Devices and Circuits, TMH, 2008. 
3. J. G. Graeme, G. E. Tobey and L. P. Huelsman, OPAMP: Design and applications, McGraw Hill, Digitized on Dec. 2007. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
292
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 244 SIGNALS	&	SYSTEMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mathematical Description of Signals: Continuous-Time Signal Functions, Discrete-Time Signal Functions, Signal Energy 
and Power.; Description and analysis of systems: System characteristics, Convolution sum, Convolution integral and 
their evaluation, analysis of LTI Systems based on convolution and differential equations.; Fourier series and Fourier 
Transform: Fourier series representation of Periodic Signals, Continuous and discrete time Fourier Transform, Fourier 
Transform Analysis of Signals and systems with examples.; Sampling and Discrete Fourier Transform: Representing 
a continuous-time signal by samples, Sampling Theorem, Aliasing, Sampling of Discrete time signals. Correlation, 
energy spectral density and power spectral density, Auto correlation, cross correlation, the ESD concept, and the 
PSD concept.; Transform domain considerations: The Laplace transform and its properties, Solutions of differential 
equations with initial conditions, The Z transform and its properties. Analysis and characterization of LTI systems using 
z transform. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. L. Philips, J. M. Parr and E. A. Riskin, Signals, Systems and Transforms, PHI, 2008. 
2. A. V. Oppenhem, A. S. Willsky and I. T. Young, Signals and Systems, Prentice-Hall India, 1983. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. J. Roberts, Signals and Systems, McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
EE 271 NETWORK	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
DC analysis for R-L, R-C and R-L-C circuits; AC analysis for R-L, R-C and R-L-C circuits; DC circuit simulation for multiple 
branches consisting of dependent and independent sources; AC circuit simulation for multiple branches consisting of 
dependent and independent sources; Verification of Superposition theorem; Simulation of Half wave diode bridge 
rectifier circuit; Simulation of Full wave diode bridge rectifier circuit; Transistor circuit simulation with CE, CB and CC 
configuration; FET circuit simulation with CS and CD configuration; OPAMP circuit simulation; Series resonance circuit 
simulation; Parallel resonance circuit simulation. 
EE 272 Measurement	Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3]
Verification of Thevenin’s Theorem and Superposition Theorem; Voltage Current Relationship and locus diagram of a 
series R-L Circuit; Measurement of single phase power by 3 voltmeter method; Measurement of three phase power 
by two wattmeter method; Verification of Reciprocity and Maximum Power Transfer Theorem; Testing of single phase 
energy meter at different power factors; Study of series and parallel resonance; Determination of self and mutual 
inductance of a coupled circuit; Measurement of Iron losses by Lloyd Fisher’s Square; Measurement of single phase 
power by 3 ammeter method; Localization of cable fault by Murray Loop method; Study of Schering and Anderson 
bridge
EE 274 Electronics	LabORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of Two Stage R. C. Coupled Amplifier: Single Stage Gain; Input and output Impedance; Frequency response; 
Study of Diode clipper circuit: Study of Basic OPAMP circuit; inverting; Non-Inverting; Voltage Follower; Scale changer; 
Summer; Differential Amplifier: Study of UJT static characteristic; Active filters using OP-AMP; Low pass Filter; Band 
pass filter; High pass filter; Band reject filter; Study of JFET characteristics; Study of negative feedback using Transistor; 
Study of Multi vibrator Circuit using IC555 timer; Study of Oscillator circuit: RC phase shift; Wein bridge; Parameter 
Measurement of OPAMP: Detector using OPAMP-741: Peak Detector; Zero Crossing Detector; Comparator; Window 
Detector; Study of MOSFET Characteristic; Study of basic logic gates and universal logic gates; Realization of logic 
circuits using universal logic gates; To construct and verify the operation of single digit and multi digit half adder, 
Full adder / subtracted using logic gates and IC 7483; To study the characteristics and operation of a programmable 
Shift Register using IC 7495; Verification of UP/ DOWN count using IC 74193. Study of Ring and Decade Johnson Ring 
counters using ICs and Flip- Flops. Comparison of Sequential and Combinational Logic Circuits; Study of Digital to 
Analog converter by weighted resistance method. Design and verification of A/D converter; Study of Seven Segment 
Display Technique using IC 7447/ 7446. 
EE 277 electrical	MachineS	LabORATORY	–	I 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of Electrical Motors & Starters; Measurement of armature & field resistances of a DC machine; Study of 
magnetization characteristic of separately excited DC generator; Speed control of DC motor by varying armature circuit 
and field circuit resistances; Hopkinson’s Test of DC machine; Speed control of DC motor by Ward-Leonard method; 
Open circuit and short circuit test of single phase transformer; Back to back test on Single Phase Transformer; Parallel 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
293
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
operation of single phase transformer; Determination of efficiency of DC machine by Swinburne’s Test; Measurement 
of power using CT & PT; Load test of DC shunt motor. 
EE 301 ELECTRICAL	MACHINES	-	II 4 credits [3-1-0]
Synchronous Generator: Constructional Features of Salient Pole and Non-Salient Pole Machines, Arrangement of 
Field Winding in the two types of Machines. Cylindrical Rotor Theory: Phasor Diagram, Synchronous Reactance from 
O. C. and S. C. Characteristics, Load Characteristics, Z. P. F. Characteristics, Voltage Regulation by different methods, 
Power Angle Characteristics. Salient-Pole Theory: Blondel’s Two-Reaction Concept, Direct Axis and Quadrature Axis 
Synchronous Reactance, Power Angle Characteristics, Slip Test. Parallel Operation. Synchronous Motor: Constructional 
features, Phasor Diagram, Torque and Power Relations in Non-Salient Pole and Salient Pole Motors, V-Curves, Various 
Types of Excitation, Synchronous Condenser, Methods of Starting, Applications. Three Phase Induction Motor: 
Constructional Features of Slip Ring and Squirrel Cage Type Motors, Principle of Operation, Flux and MMF Wave, No-
Load Speed and Slip, Rotor Quantities Referred to Stator, Relationship Between Input Voltage and Current, Equivalent 
Circuit, Analysis of Equivalent Circuit, Torque Speed Characteristics, Starting, Maximum and Full Load Torque, 
Condition for Maximum Torque, Regions of Stable and Unstable Operations, Effect of rotor resistance and supply 
frequency on Speed Torque Characteristics, Losses, Efficiency, Performance Characteristics, The Circle Diagram, 
Starting of Slip Ring and Squirrel Cage Motors, High Starting Torque Motors. Speed Control: Various methods. Single 
phase induction motor: ; Constructional features, various types, Rotating magnetic field theory, Equivalent circuit, 
Determination of constants, methods of starting, Applications. Single Phase Series Motor: Construction, Principle of 
Operation, Phasor Diagram, Operation with AC and DC supplies, the universal Motor, Performance Characteristics, 
Effect of Compensation, Repulsion motor, Applications. Stepper Motor: Construction and Principle of Operation 
of Variable Reluctance Type and Permanent Magnet Type, Performance and Applications, Brushless D. C. Motors: 
constructional features, principle of operation, applications. Switched-Reluctance Motor: Constructional features, 
principle of operation and applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. S. Langsdorf, Theory of A. C. Machines, TMH, 2001. 
2. I. L. Kosow, Electric Machinery & Transformers, PHI, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. E. Fitzagerald, C. M. Kingsley (Jr) and S. D. Umans, Electric Machinery, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
2. C. I. Hubert, Electric Machines, Pearson Education, 2003. 
EE 306 ELECTROMAGNETIC	FIELDS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fundamentals of Field Theory, Maxwell’s equations, Boundary conditions in Electromagnetic Field, Energy Theorems 
and Pointing Vector, Electromagnetic Wave Equation in Dielectrics and Conductors, Solution of Wave equation in 
Cartesian Coordinates in homogeneous Dissipative and Non dissipative Regions, Waves at interface between 
conductors and Dielectrics. Transmission Lines: Introduction, Line Transmission Theory, Variation of Voltage and 
Current at distance x from the sending end, Primary Line Constant, Phase Velocity and Line wavelength, Characteristics 
impedance, The Propagation Coefficient, Computation of Primary constants from values of short circuit and open 
circuit impedances, Phase and Group velocities, Standing Waves, Lossless Lines at Radio Frequencies, Voltage Standing 
Wave Ratio, Reflection Coefficient, Transmission Lines as Circuit Elements, Smith Chart, Solution of problems using 
Smith Chart, Stub Matching. Wave Guides: Introduction, Physical Mechanism of Wave Guide Propagation, Phase and 
Group Velocities, Rectangular Wave Guides, Cut off in a Rectangular Wave Guide, Wave Guide dimension, Wave Guide 
Impedance. Antennas: Introduction, Antenna Equivalent Circuits, Coordinate System, Radiation Fields, Polarization, 
The Isotropic Radiator, Power Gain of an Antenna, Effective Area of an Antenna, The Hertzian Dipole, Half Wave 
Dipole, Vertical Antennas, Folded Elements, Non-Resonant Antennas, Driven Arrays, Parasitic Arrays. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. N. O. Sadiku, Elements of Electromagnetics, Oxford University Press, 2002. 
2. W. H. Hayt, Engineering Electromagnetics, TMH, 1992. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics, Pearson Education, 2003. 
EE 308 UTILIZATION	OF	ELECTRICAL	ENERGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
 ILLUMINATION: Production of light - lighting calculations - determination of MHCP and MSCP - Polar curves of different 
types of sources - Rousseau’s construction - photometers - interior and exterior illumination systems - lighting schemes 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
294
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
- Design of lighting schemes - factory lighting - flood lighting - electric lamps - gaseous discharge lamps - high pressure 
and low pressure neon signs - high frequency, low pressure discharge tubes.; ELECTRIC FURNACES AND WELDING : 
Resistance, inductance and Arc Furnaces - Construction and fields of application - control equipment, high frequency 
dielectric heating, resistance - welding equipment - characteristics of carbon and metallic arc welding - butt welding 
- spot welding.; ELECTRO-CHEMICAL PROCESSES: Electrolysis – Electroplating – Electro deposition – Extraction of 
metals Current, Efficiency - Batteries – types – Charging Methods.; ELECTRIC TRACTION Railway electrification – 
definition and analysis of traction effort – speed – time curve – traction motors - battery driven vehicles - energy 
efficiency drives – advanced speed control measures- tractive effort calculations - electric braking - control wire - A. C. 
traction - recent trend in electric traction.; REFRIGERATION AND AIR-CONDITIONING Control of temperature - basic 
wiring diagram - simple heat load and motor calculations. Air-conditioning - function of complete air conditioning 
system - type of compressor motor and fan motor-wiring diagram for a typical air conditioning unit. 
Essential	Reading:	
2. S. C. Tripathy, Electric Energy Utilisation and Conservation, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991. 
3. W. F. Stocker and J. W. Jones, Refrigeration & Air Conditioning, McGraw Hill, 1985. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. L. Wadhwa, Generation, Distribution and Utilization of Electrical Energy, New Age, 1989. 
2. N. V. Suryanarayana, Utilisation of Electric Power, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1993. 
3. M. Prasad, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1995
EE 309 POWER GENERATION SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Generation of electrical energy by conventional methods, Comparison of different sources of power. Nonconventional 
sources of energy. Thermal Power Plant: Line diagram of the plant. Boilers: working and classification. Super-heaters, 
Reheaters, economizers, air-heaters, draft system, feed water heaters and evaporators, cooling water supply and 
cooling towers. Speed governing and governors. Station auxiliaries. Generator cooling and exciters. Hydro Electric 
Generation: Classification of hydro plant, Selection of site, Estimation of power available, Selection of turbine and 
modeling of turbine. Plant layout, Governors and Hydro plant auxiliaries. Nuclear Power Generation: Principle of 
energy production by nuclear fission, schematic of nuclear power plant, nuclear fuels and fertile materials, nuclear 
reaction construction. Chain reaction, Moderator, coolants, control of fission, Reactor operation, different types of 
reactors, Problem of nuclear power plants. Economics of Power Generation: Cost of electrical energy, Methods of 
determining depreciation, straight line, diminishing value and sinking found method. Types of Tariffs influence of load 
and power factor on tariff, economics of power factor improvement.; Commissioning and Testing of Transformers and 
Alternators: Transformer connections, arrangement of transformer, commissioning and testing of transformers and 
alternators, supply system to station auxiliaries. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. G. A. Skrotzki & W. A. Vopat, Power Station Engineering & Economy, McGraw Hill, Digitized on Dec 2007. 
Supplementary Reading
1. M. M. El-Wakil, Power Plant Technology, Mcgraw Hill, Digitized on Dec 2006. 
EE 311 TRANSMISSION	AND	DISTRIBUTION	OF	ELECTRIC	POWER 4 credits [3-1-0]
Power System Network: Basic structure of power system, Transmission voltages, Bundled conductors, Choice of 
economics voltages, Transmission of Network in India. Line Parameters: Line resistance, Inductance, Flux Linkages 
within the conductor producing the flux, Flux linkage outside the conductor producing the flux, Inductance of bundled 
conductor lines, capacitance of two wire line, Capacitance of three phase line with equilateral spacing, Capacitance 
of three phase line with Unsymmetrical spacing, Capacitance of bundled conductor of lines, Double circuit three 
phase lines. Performance of Transmission Lines : Representation of lines, Per unit method, Short transmission line, 
Medium length transmission line, Long transmission line, Evaluation of ABCD parameters, Equivalent and T circuits, 
Application of Matrix methods, Line voltage regulation and compensation, Regulating transformer. Overhead Line 
Insulators: Insulator materials, Types of insulators, voltage distribution over insulator string, Improvement of string 
efficiency, Insulator failure, testing of insulators. Mechanical Design of Overhead Lines: General consideration, Line 
supports, Span conductor configuration, spacing and clearances, sag and tension calculations, Conductor vibration. 
Corona: The phenomenon of corona, Corona loss, Factors and conditions affecting coronal loss, Coronal in bundled 
conductor lines. Interference between Power and Communication Lines: Electromagnetic Induction, Electro Static 
induction, Reduction of interference. Underground Cables: Classification of cables, Pressurized cables, Effective 
conductor register, conductor inductive reactance, parameters of single core cables, Capacitance of three core belted 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
295
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
cable. Power System Transients : Circuit closing transient, Sudden symmetrical short circuit of alternator, Recovery 
transient due to removal of short circuit, Travelling waves on transmission lines, Wave equations, Arcing grounds, 
Line design based on direct strokes, Surge arrestors Insulation coordination. Extra High Voltage Transmission: Need 
for EHV transmission, Use of bundled conductors, Radio noise from EHV lines, Shunt compensation static-var systems, 
Series compensation, EHV systems in India. Distribution: Comparison of various distribution systems, voltage drop 
in distribution, Kelvin’s Law, General design consideration, Load estimation. Design of Transmission Lines: Choice 
of voltage, Selection of conductor size, Choice of span, number of circuit, conductor, configuration. Power System 
Earthing. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. L. Wadhwa, Electrical Power Systems, New Age, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. M. Faulkenberry and W. Coffer, Electrical Power Distribution and Transmission, PHI, 1996. 
2. W. D. Stevenson, Elements of Power System analysis, McGraw Hill, 1982. 
EE 312 SWITCH	GEAR	AND	PROTECTIVE	DEVICES 4 credits [3-1-0]
Requirement of circuit breakers, characteristics of electric arc, principle of A. C. and D. C. arc interruption, recovery and 
restriking voltages and effect of current asymmetry upon them, Interruption of capacitive currents, current chopping 
circuit breaker ratings. Circuit Breakers: Types of A. C. and D. C. circuit breakers in general. Oil Circuit breakers: Plain 
break and controlled break O. C. B. Minimum oil circuit breaker, Air blast circuit breakers of different type. Vacuum and 
Sulphur hexafluoride circuit breakers. Fuses: H. R. C. Fuse, Construction, Capacity and characteristics Arrangements 
of circuit breaker, isolators, arrangement of bus bars, Limiting reactors in power system, Calculation of fault MVA 
for symmetrical short circuits and determination of C. B. capacity. Protective Devices: Philosophy of protection, 
Methods of earthing and their effect on fault conditions. Different types of relays: attracted armature type, balanced 
beam type, induction type. Static relays: Generalised theory of phase and magnitude, comparator, realization of 
different relay characteristics of static devices, Feeder protection: Time graded over current and earth fault system, 
Directional relays and their connection. Calculation of graded time settings. Distance relaying; Distance, impedance 
reactance and mho-relays, Arrangement of relay contacts. Pilot wire protection system: Circulating current system 
Balanced beam type opposed voltage system – Merz price and translay system, Protection of split core and parallel 
feeders, carrier current protection.; Power transformer protection: Differential protection and magnetic balance 
protection, restricted earth fault protection, Buchholz relay, protection of combined alternator and transformer.; 
Bus bar protection: Frame leakage scheme, Translay scheme, circulating current scheme introduction to protection 
against surges.; Testing of relays: Primary and secondary injection, Method of testing a simple overcurrent relay and 
E. F. relay. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. L. Blackburn and T. J. Domin, Protective Relaying: Principles & Applications, CRC Press, 2006. 
2. B. Ravindranath and M. Chander, Power System Protection and Switchgear, New Age, 1988. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. S. Rao, Switch gear and protection, Khanna publishers, 1997. 
2. T. S. Madhava Rao, Power system protection: Static Relays, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989
EE 322 CONTROL	SYSTEM	–	I 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to Automatic Control: Concept of control system, Definition, Open Loop/Closed-loop, Basic elements 
of a servo mechanism, Types of servomechanism, Development of Automatic Control.; Mathematical Model: 
Mathematical representation of physical system, Electrical mechanical systems, liquid level system, Transfer function 
and impulse response of linear systems, Block diagram, signal flow graphs, Application of the signal flow graphs for 
gain formula to block diagrams. Mathematical modeling of dynamical systems.; General Feedback Theory: Feedback, 
effect of feedback, Mathematical definition of feedback.; Control System Components: Potentiometer, Synchros, A. 
C. Servo motors D. C. and A. C. tacho generator, Example of closed loop systems using D. C. & A. C. Servomotors, 
Synchros, Tacho generators; Hydraulic Systems & Pneumatic Systems; Pump controlled and valve controlled Hydraulic 
motor & Actuators, Hydraulic valve, Hydraulic controllers and Pneumatic controllers.; Time Response of feedback 
control systems: Typical test signal for the transient analysis, time domain performance characteristics of feedback 
control systems, transient response, transient response of 2nd order systems, transient response of a positional 
servomechanism, effects of derivative and integral controls on the transient performance, PI, PD, PID controllers, 
Tachometer feedback, Steady state response steady state error, The generalized error analysis, Stability linear control 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
296
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
system: Routh-Hurwitz criterion. Frequency response method polar plots, Bodes plot, Magnitude versus phase shift 
plot frequency response of feedback control system, Frequency domain specifications, MP and WP for a second 
order system.; The Nyquist criterion and stability : ; Introduction, The Principle of argument the Nyquist path, Nyquist 
criterion and the GH Plot, The application of the Nyquist criterion, The effects of additional poles and zeros of G(s) 
H(s) on the shape of the Nyquist locus, Relative stability, gain margin, Phase margin, conditionally stable systems. The 
Root Locus Technique: Introduction to Root Locus, construction of the root loci, some other properties of the root 
locus, root locus of conditional stable systems.; Compensator Design: Lag/Lead/Lag-Lead Compensator Design using 
Root Locus & Bode Plot Methods; State variable analysis : ; Introduction, Concept of state, state variable and state 
model, State equations of continuous data control system, Derivation of state Model from transfer functions and Vice 
versa. Diagonalisation, Solution of state equation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, Pearson, 2003. 
2. I. J. Nagrath, and M. Gopal, Control System Engineering, New Age, 2002
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Gopal, Control Systems: Principles and Design, TMH, 2008. 
2. B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control System, Prentice Hall, Digitized Dec 5, 2007
EE 324 POWER	ELECTRONICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Power Semiconductor Devices: Control characteristics of Power Semiconductor Devices, Types of Power Electronic 
Circuits. Power Semiconductor Diodes: Types, Characteristics, Reverse Recovery Characteristics, Forward and 
Reverse Recovery Time, Series and Parallel Connection. Thyristors: Characteristics, 2-Transistor Model, Turn on 
and Turn off, dv / dt and di / dt protection, Thyristor firing circuits, UJT, Gate Turn-off Thyristors (GTO), Triac, FET 
controlled Thyristor, MOS controlled Thyristors. Series and Parallel operation of Thyristors. Line Frequency Phase 
Controlled Rectifiers and Inverters: Principle of Phase Control, Gate Trigger Controller Circuit. Single Phase Converter, 
Ideal Circuit with no source inductance and constant output d. c. current. Semi Converters and Full converter, Dual 
converter. Wave form and performance calculation, Effect of finite source inductance, Inverter Mode Operation. 
Three Phase Converter : Ideal Circuit without source inductance with constant output d. c. current, Three Phase Full 
Converters, Wave form Performance, Input Line Currents, Effect of Source Inductance and Commutation, Inverter 
mode of operation, A. C. Voltage Waveform. A. C. Voltage Controller: On-off control, Phase Control, R-Load, R-L Load, 
Cycloconverters Principles. Power Transistors: BJT Switching Characteristics and Switching limits base drive control 
Power MOSFET, Switching characteristics and gate drive, IGBT and STT, Isolation of gate base drive. DC-DC Switch 
Mode Converters (Choppers) : Principles of step-down chopper, step down chopper with R-L load, Principle of step-
up operation, control of DC-Dc converter by PWM, Switching mode regulator, Step down (Back) Converter, Step-up 
(Boost) converter in Continuous Conduction mode. Thyristor Commutation Technique: Self Commutation, Impulse 
Commutation, Complementary Commutation. The Impulse Commutated Chopper. Pulse Width Modulated Inverters 
: Single phase half bridge and full bridge inverter, 3-phase inverter-180 degree and 120 degree conduction mode, 
Pulse Width Modulated Switching scheme for voltage control, SPWM and modified SPWM of 1-phase inverters, PWM 
with unipolar and Bipolar Voltage Switching, PWM in 3-phase VSI, Square wave operation, Switching Utilisation. 
Harmonic reduction by programmed harmonic elimination switching, Forced Commutated Thyristor Inverters, 
Auxiliary Commutated (Mc-Murray) Inverter, Complementary Commutated (Mc-Murray-Bedford) inverter. Current 
Source Inverter, Single phase CSI Inverter Circuit Design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. H. Rashid, Power Electronics-Devices, Circuits and Application, Prentice Hall of India, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. N. Mohan, T. M. Undeland and W. P. Robbies, Power Electronics, Converters, Applications and Design, John Wiley and Sons, 
2003. 
EE 336 ADVANCED	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Sensors: Types of sensors, their parameters. Microelectronic and microelectromechanic systems. Primary sensing 
principles and measurement variables, Sensor performance characteristics and terminology, Instrumentation- 
Transducer measurement circuits, Signal conditioning circuits, Sensor data acquirement. Basic principles of the 
acquirement and transmission of the data; Bio-medical Instrumentation; Selection of Transducers and Electrodes, 
Transmission and reception aspects of Bio-Medical signals Intelligent Sensor Systems- Intelligent pressure, Flow, Level, 
Temperature Sensors, Intelligent sensor application in process control, Complex sensors, biometric sensors, Intelligent 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
297
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
analytical instruments, Application of intelligent sensor in biomedical engineering; Future scope of intelligent 
instruments- Structure, definitions and concepts, Smart sensors, Case study: the “electronic nose”, The future of 
intelligent sensor systems- Multimodal sensors for target recognition, subject tracking, and event understanding. 
Real World Interfacing – LCD, ADC, Sensors, Stepper motor, keyboard and DAC, USB interfacing, Memory interfacing, 
Synchronous serial communication interfacing
Essential	Reading:	
1. I. R. Sinclair, Sensors and Transducers, John Wiley & Sons, 2001
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. R. Brauer, Magnetic Actuators and Sensors, Wiley-IEEE Press, 2006. 
EE 341 EMBEDDED	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Architecture of 8086 CPU architecture, Internal operations, Machine Language instructions, Addressing modes, 
Instruction Format, Assembly language programming and Instructions, Data Transfer, Interfacing of peripherals.; 
8051 Microcontroller Architecture: Function and basic description of 8051components to include Special Function 
Registers (SFRs). Interfacing and address decoding techniques. Essential hardware for computer control, Interfacing, 
address decoding, analogue and digital input/output. Input/output control A/D and D/A conversion, Interrupts, bus 
timing, serial and parallel communications. Bus timing, Interrupts Real-time systems. Software: Program creation, 
flow charting. Algorithms for embedded control. Structured programming, Data structures and types, Program 
classification. Computer control: Components of embedded control systems to include terminology and components. 
Discrete modelling for computer control. PID control in discrete form. Classification of programs, programs for 
sequential tasks, multitasking systems, real-time systems. Real World Interfacing – LCD, ADC, Sensors, Stepper motor, 
keyboard and DAC; Real Time Operating System, System Architecture, selection of platform, booting linux, debugging. 
Interfacing- Asynchronous serial communication interfacing, parallel port interfacing, USB interfacing, Memory 
interfacing, Synchronous serial communication interfacing, System Integration. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. Mazid, J. G. Mazidi, and R. D. McKinlay, The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded System, Pearson, 2007
2. BARNETT R. H., ”The 8051 Family of Micro controller”, Prentice Hall 1995 
3. B. B. Bray, The Intel Microprocessors- 8086/8088, 80186, 80286, 80386, and 80486-Architecture, Programming and Interfacing, 
Prentice Hall, 2000. 
4. W. A. Triebel and Singh, The 8088 and 8086 Microprocessors, Pearson, 2003
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Kamal, Embedded System, TMH, 2002
2. Yeralan S AhluwaliaA, ”Programming and Interfacing the 8051 Microcontroller”-Addison-Wesley, 1995
3. D. V. Hall, Microprocessor and Interfacing programming & Hardware, TMH, 2001. 
EE 345 COMMUNICATION	SYSTEMS	PRINCIPLES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Analog communication: Band- pass signals and system representation, AM, DSBSC, SSB, VSB, signal representation, 
generation and demodulation, concepts of mixing, coherent and non-coherent detection, PM, FM and their 
interrelationship, signal representation, narrow-band and wide-band FM, Carson’s rule, generation and demodulation 
of FM; Pulse and digital communication: Sampling theorem – pulse modulation techniques – PAM, PWM and PPM 
concepts – PCM encoder and decoder – multiplexing – time division multiplexing and frequency division multiplexing.; 
Data communication techniques: Data transmission using analog carriers – MODEMS employing FSK, QPSK, QAM and 
MSK – asynchronous and synchronous transmission – error control techniques – data communication protocols – link 
oriented protocols – asynchronous protocols.; Television system: Requirement and standards – need for scanning 
– interlaced scanning – VSB modulation types of camera tubes and picture tubes – B/W and colour systems – PAL 
– CCTV – Cable TV.; Modern communication systems: Microwave links, Optical communication principles – Satellite 
communication system – Pagers – Cellular phones – EPABX. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. Taub and D. L. Schilling, Principles of communication systems, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
2. S. Haykins, An introduction to analog and digital communication systems. John Wiley, 1989. 
Supplementary Reading: 
3. B. P. Lathi, Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, Oxford university press, 1988. 
4. K. S. Shanmugam, Digital and analog communication systems, John Wiley, 1985. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
298
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 355 COMPUTER	ORGANISATION	AND	ARCHITECHTURE 3 credits [3-0-0]
Stored program concept-Basic operational concepts-Functional units-Machine language-Concept of memory locations, 
address- Addressing Modes, Instruction formats-Instruction execution-I/O programming-Stacks-Subroutines-
Processing Unit-Internal BUS structure (single bus, Two bus, Three bus)-Execution of instructions-Control step 
sequence.; Hard wired control-design methods- multiplier control unit-CPU control unit; Microprogrammed control-
microinstructions-Sequencing.; Addition and subtraction of positive and negative numbers-fast adders-multiplication 
of positive numbers-signed operand multiplication-fast multilplication-integer division-floating point numbers and 
operations-Design of arithmetic units.; Basic concepts-semiconductor RAM, ROM memories-Memory interleaving-
cache memories-virtual memories-Input-output Organisation-I/O addressing-Data transfer-syncronisation-interrupt 
handling-I/O interfaces –I/O channels.; Introduction to parallel processing-generation of computer systems-
Parallelism in uniprocessor system-parallel computer systems-architectural classification schemes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Hwang and F. A. Briggs, Computer Architecture and parallel processing, McGraw Hill, Digitized on Nov, 2007. 
2. D. Mano and M. M. Mano, Computer System Architecture, Pearson, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture, Pearson, 2005. 
EE 356 DIGITAL	SIGNAL	PROCESSING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Discrete-Time Signals and Systems: Discrete Time Signals, Analysis of Discrete Time Linear Time Invariant Systems, 
Systems described by Difference Equation, Correlation of Discrete Time Signals. Design of Digital Filters: Digital Filters 
by placement of poles and zeros in the Z-plane. Low pass, High pass and band pass Filters, Notch Filter; Comb Filter 
& All pass Filter. Realization of FIR & IIR systems, Design of FIR Filter using windows, Design of IIR filter by the Bilinear 
Transformation method. Discrete Fourier Transform : DFT and its relationship to other Transform, properties of the 
DFT, Circular convolution in time and frequency domains, Linear convolution in time and frequency domain by over 
lap save and over lap add methods. Fast Fourier Transform: Adaptive Filter, Inverse system, Deconvolution and System 
Identification. Power Spectrum Estimation: Estimation of Auto correlation and power spectrum of random signals, 
use of DFT in Power Spectrum Estimation. Parametric method - The Burg Method for the AR Model Parameters, 
Least Square Method, ARMA Model for Power Spectrum Estimation. The Adaptive Linear Combiner, Wiener Filters, 
Adaptive Transversal Filter Using Gradient Vector Estimation, LMS algorithm and its convergence analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. G. Proakais and D. G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing: Principles Algorithms and Applications, Pearson Education, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. V. Oppeinheim and R. W. Schafer, Digital Signal Processing, Pearson Education, 2004. 
2. S. K. Mitra, Digital Signal Processing: A computer based approach, TMH, 2001. 
3. L. R. Rabiner and B. Gold, Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing, Pearson Education, 2004. 
EE 370 Power	Electronics	Lab 2 credits [0-0-3]
SCR and TRIAC characteristic: To measure the Latching and Holding Current of a thyristor: To study the different 
triggering circuits for thyristor: Resistor triggering circuit; R-C triggering circuit; UJT triggering circuit: To study single 
phase firing circuit using COSINE wave scheme for triggering Thyristor in single phase bridge converter; Study of 
1-pulse converter with R and L load; Study of 2-pulse converter with R and L load; Study of three phase semi converter 
with R and R-L load; Study of three phase full converter with R and R-L load; Study of single phase dual converter; 
Study of single phase cycloconverter; To study different types of single phase Ac regulators; AC regulator using Triac; 
AC regulator using thyristor connected in antiparallel; To study different microprocessor based firing circuit and its 
application; To study the Power MOSFET/IGBT chopper with varying Frequency and duty cycle; DC Motor control by 
Impulse commutated single Quadrant chopper; Study of different PWM Schemes; Single pulse; Multiple; Sinusoidal; 
Trapezoidal; To study a Transistorized Single phase PWM inverter; To study the IGBT based Single phase PWM inverter; 
DC motor speed control by single phase semi converter and full converter; Speed control of DC motor using three 
phase half controlled converter; To study the closed loop control of DC motor; To study the operation of four quadrant 
chopper with DC motor drive; Speed control of three phase induction motor by using three phase IGBT PWM inverter; 
To study the closed loop control of three phase AC motor; V/f speed control of three phase Induction motor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
299
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 371 COMMUNICATION	SYSTEM	LAB.	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Amplitude modulation; DSB AM Modulator, Calculation of the modulation index, Observation of the linearity curve 
of modulator, DSB AM reception using Envelop Decoder, Operation of AM with Suppressed carrier; Study of SSB 
Signal Generator, SSB Signal Demodulation, Calculate the sensitivity and Selectivity of a AM Receiver; Frequency 
modulation; Modulation Characteristic of Varactor Modulator, Measurement of frequency; Deviation and calculation 
of modulation index, Demodulation characteristic of the FM Demodulator (Foster- Seeley Demodulator), Observation 
of the waveforms of the Foster- Seeley Demodulated signal; Frequency modulation; FM demodulation using Ratio 
Demodulator, Phase locked loop Detector and Quadrature detector, FM super Heterodyne Receiver; Phase Modulation 
: Phase Modulation, Phase Demodulation; Analog Signal Sampling and its reconstruction; Natural Sampling and its 
reconstruction, Sample and Hold and its reconstruction, Flat loop Sampling and its reconstruction, Effect of different 
sampling frequencies, Effect of varying the sampling frequency duty cycle; Study of TDM Pulse Amplitude Modulation 
/ Demodulation with Transmitter lock and Channel identification information linked directly to the receiver; Sampling 
and Pulse Code Modulation and Demodulation; Amplitude shift keying modulation Technique, Frequency shift keying 
modulation Technique and Phase shift keying modulation technique; Delta Modulation and Demodulation / Adaptive 
Modulation and Demodulation Slope overload and increased integrator gain; Pulse amplitude Modulation, Pulse 
width Modulation, Pulse position Modulation; Framing in Time Division Multiplexing, Marker in TDM, and PCM voice 
coding and frequency response of CODEC. 
EE 372 CONTROL	SYSTEM	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of a DC motor driven closed loop position control system; Study of a Position Control System using Synchro; 
Obtain speed-torque characteristics of a two-phase servomotor; Determine the transfer function of a system 
(network) using a transfer function analyzer; Position and Speed Control of a DC motor using PD and PID Controller 
via Ziegler Nicholos tuning method; Identification of a DC Motor transfer function; To study the discrete-time version 
of the PID controller, and to implement classical tuning rules for the digital control system; PID Control with Derivative 
Filtering and Integral Antiwindup for a DC Servo; Controlling a process using dSPACE / Simulink and LABVIEW; To study 
and validate the controller type for a temperature control system; To study on the interface of PLC with PC for data 
acquisition applications; Experimentation of Control loops for Inverted Pendulum. 
EE 373 electrical	MachineS	Lab	–	II 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of regulation of alternator by Synchronous Impedance method; Determination of regulation 
of alternator by zero power factor method; ‘V’ and ‘Λ’ curves of Synchronous Motor; Measurement of Xd & Xq of 
synchronous machine; Parallel Operation of 3 Phase Alternator with infinite Bus Bar; No load and Blocked rotor test of 
single phase induction motor; No load and Blocked rotor test of three phase induction motor; Separation of different 
losses in squirrel-cage Induction Motor; Separation of losses in slip ring Induction motor by Richter’s method; Three 
phase transformer connection; Scott connection of transformer; Determination of sequence impedance of alternator. 
EE 374 ELECTRICAL	SYSTEMS	SIMULATION	LAB.	 2 Credits [0-0-3]
Basics of Programming in MATLAB (programming structure, Script files, Functions, Debugging programs, Creating 
functions using m-files, Loops, branches and control flow, Relational and logical operations); MATLAB graphics (Two 
and three dimensional graphics, Multiple plots, Axis scaling, Printing graphics); Numerical analysis (Non-linear 
equations and optimization, Differential equations); Introduction to SIMULINK (What can SIMULINK be used for?, 
Multiple plots creating models, blocks, Systems and sub-systems, Simulating Dynamic System, Solving a model, 
solvers, MATLAB SIMULINK integration, S-function); MATLAB Toolboxes training (Signal Processing, Neural Network, 
FUZZY logic, Control System, Communication, Power System toolboxes); LabVIEW(Introduction to LabVIEW, Sources of 
Information, VirtualInstrumentation, Wiring and Programming Basics, Controls, Indicators and constants, Debugging, 
Preferences, Chatting, Graphs, Attributenodes, Do & while loops, Forloops, Introduction to data acquisition)
EE 375 EMBEDDED	SYSTEM	LAB 2 credits [0-0-3]
Write a 8086 based assembly language programme to add the following vectors and Store the result in another 
vector.; 
C = A + B  D = A + B + C
The length of the vector should be 10, 15. 
Make provision for result to be more than 16 bit. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
300
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Determine the average value of the given sample of waveform; 
Y (k) = A sin sin3For N = 16, 32, 64
Determine the mean square value of a given data set; Write an ALP for adding and multiplying two 3×3, 4×4, 5×5 
matrices; Evaluate the following recursion; 
Interface 8086 microprocessor to the given traffic light module and  develop the traffic Light system in accordance 
with a given sequence; Interface the elevator module with the 8086 microprocessors and realize the given condition; 
Using the given A/D converter sample a sinusoidal, triangular and square waves of different frequency; Using the given 
A/D and D/A converter and 8086 microprocessor sample and reconstruct a given signal and hence verify the sampling 
theorem; Interface the given keyboard module using 8051 microcontroller; Interface the given stepper motor and 
control the steps using 8051 microcontroller; Using the display interface module and microcontroller 8051, show 
the 7 segment LED display; Using the given PLC interface board and 8086 microprocessor, design a Combinational 
controller and Sequential controller; Speed Control of DC Motor using 8051 microcontroller; Path tracing controlling 
using microcontroller; Design of an Adaptive FIR Filter using 8051 microcontroller. 
EE 377 ELECTRICAL	MACHINE	DESIGN 2 credits [0-0-3]
Solving problems from ‘Problems in Electrical Engineering’ by Parker Smith; Design of single phase / three phase, 
core type / shell type transformers; Drawing of the designed transformer using AUTOCAD; Design of DC machine; 
Drawing of the designed DC machine using AUTOCAD; Design and Drawing of the armature winding of DC machine. 
EE 401 POWER	SYSTEM	OPERATION	&	CONTROL 4 credits [3-1-0]
Fundamentals of Power System : Concepts of real and reactive powers, complex power, per-unit representation of 
power system, Transmission capacity, load characteristics, real power balance and its effect on system frequency, 
load frequency mechanism, reactive power, balance and its effect, on-load tap changing transformer and regulating 
transformer.; Power Circle diagram: Receiving and sending end power circle diagram, universal power circle diagram, 
use of power circle diagram.; Load flow analysis: Static load flow equation for a low-bus system, characteristics of a 
load flow equation, generalization to n-bus system, Gauss-Seidel and Newton-Raphson method of solution of load 
flow equations for 2 bus and 3 bus system.; Load frequency control : Automatic voltage, regulator, exciter modelling, 
generator modelling and static performances of AVR loop, automatic load frequency, control of single area systems, 
speed governing system, hydraulic valve actuator, turbine generator response, static performance of speed governor, 
closing the ALFC loop, Concept of control area static response of primary ALFC loop, dynamic response of ALFC loop, 
ALFC for multicontrol area system, the two area system, modelling of the tie-line block diagram representation of 
two are system, static response of two area system, dynamic response of two area system, dynamic response of two 
area system tie-line bias control, tie-line bias control of two area system, static response, steady state instabilities.; 
Economic Operation of power system : Distribution of load between units within a plant, transmission loss as function 
of plant generation, calculation of loss-coefficient, distribution of loads between plants with special reference to 
steam and hydel plants, automatic load dispatching.; Power system stability: Steady state stability, transient stability, 
swing equation, equal area criteria for stability methods of improvement of transient stability. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Stevenson, Elements of Power system analysis, Mcgraw Hill, Digitized on Dec., 2007. 
2. A. Chakrabarti and S. Halder, Power System Analysis: Operation and Control, PHI, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. T. K. Nagsarkar and M. S. Sukhija, Power System Analysis, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
2. I. J. Nagrath and D. P. Kothari, Modern Power System Analysis, TMH, 2003. 
EE 404 RENEWABLE	ENERGY	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Energy Sources: Energy sources and their availability, Non-renewable reserves and resources; 
renewable resources, Transformation of Energy, Solar Power: Solar processes and spectral composition of solar 
radiation; Radiation flux at the Earth’s surface. Solar collectors. Types and performance characteristics. Applications : 
Wind Energy: Wind energy conversion; efficiency limit for wind energy conversion, types of converters, aerodynamics 
of wind rotors, power ~ speed and torque ~ speed characteristics of wind turbines, wind turbine control systems; 
conversion to electrical power: induction and synchronous generators, grid connected and self excited induction 
generator operation, constant voltage and constant frequency generation with power electronic control, single 
and double output systems, reactive power compensation; Characteristics of wind power plant. Applications: Tidal 
Energy: Wave characteristics. Conversion systems and their performance features. Application, Geothermal energy: 
Biological conversion of Energy. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
301
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. P. Kothari, K. C. Singal, R. Ranjan, Renewable Energy Sources and Emerging Technologies, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 
2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. N. Bhadra, D. Kastha, S. Banerjee, Wind Electrical Systems, Oxford Univ. Press, New Delhi, 2005. 
2. S. A. Abbasi, N. Abbasi, Renewable Energy Sources and Their Environmental Impact, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 2006. 
EE 405 UTILIZATION	OF	ELECTRICAL	ENERGY	&	ELECTRICAL	DRIVES 4credits [3-1-0]
Single phase fully controlled rectifier, Control of separately excited D. C. Motor, Single phase half controlled rectifier, 
Three phase fully controlled and half controlled rectifier, control of separately excited D. C. Motor, Dual converter 
control of separately excited D. C. Motor Chopper controlled D. C. Drives. Closed loop control of D. C. Drives PLL 
Control of D. C. Drives.; Stator speed control methods of Induction Motor, Stator voltage control, Slip power recovery 
scheme, Variable voltage and frequency control, ( V/1) control, C. S. I feed Induction Motor drives, Closed loop control 
of Induction Motor, Cycloconverters and Synchronous Motor drives.; Classification of Electrical drives, Types of load, 
Quadrant diagram of Speed-Torque characteristics, Dynamics of motor load combination, Steady state stability 
of Electrical drives starting and braking D. C. Motors and Induction Motors. Calculation of time and energy loss in 
transient operation.; Illumination, Electrical heating, Furnaces, Arc welding, Industrial application of motors in steel 
mills, Textile mills, Cement mill and paper mills.; Electric Traction services, Nature of traction load, Main line and 
sub-urban train configuration, Braking, Power factor and harmonics, Calculation of traction drive rating and energy 
consumption, Traction motor, Conventional D. C. and A. C. traction drives, Diesel Electric traction . 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. K. Dubey, Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, Narosha Publishing House, 2001. 
2. H. Partab, Modern Electric Traction, DhanpatRai, 1992. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. K. Sen, Electric Drives, PHI, 2001. 
2. S. K. Pillai, A first course in electrical drives, New Age international, 1989. 
EE 406 HIGH	VOLTAGE	DC	TRANSMISSION 3 credits [3-0-0]
D. C. Power Transmission Technology: Introduction, Comparison of AC and DC Transmission, Application of DC 
Transmission, Description of DC Transmission System, Planning for HVDC transmission. Modern Trends in DC 
transmission. Thyristor Valve; Introduction, Thyristor devices, Thyristor valve, Valve test, recent trends. Analysis of 
HVDC Converters; Pulse Number, Choice of converter configuration, Simplified analysis of graetz circuit, Convertor 
bridge characteristics, Characteristics of a twelve pulse converters, Detailed analysis of converters.; Converter and 
HVDC system Control: General, Principles of DC Link control, Converter control characteristics, System control 
hierarchy Firing angle control, current and extinction angle control, Starting and stopping of DC link, Power Control, 
Higher level controllers, Telecommunication requirements.; Converter Faults and Protection: Introduction, Converter 
Faults, Protection against over currents over voltages in a converter station, Surge arrests, Protection against over 
voltages. Smoothing Reactor and DC Line; Introduction, Smoothing reactors, DC Line, transient over voltages in DC 
Line, Protection of DC line, DC breakers, Monopolar operation, Effects of proximity of AC and DC Transmission lines. 
Reactive Power Control; Introduction, Reactive power requirements in steady state, Sources of reactive power, Static 
var systems, Reactive power control during transients. Harmonics and Filters; Introduction, Generation of Harmonics, 
Design of AC Filters, DC Filters, Carrier frequency and RI noise. Multiterminal DC systems; Introduction, Potential 
applications of MTDC systems, Types of MTDC systems, control and protection of MTDC systems, Control and 
protection of MTDC Systems study of MTDC systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. R. Padiyar, HVDC Power transmission System, New age International, 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. Arrillaga, HVDC transmission, IET, 1998. 
EE 407 POWER	ELECTRONIC	DRIVES 4 credits [3-1-0]
Factors affecting selection of drives, speed-torque characteristics of motors and loads, condition of steady-
state stability, transient stability: equal area criterion, dynamics of motor load combination, DC shunt motor and 
series motor braking methods and speed-torque characteristics in four quadrants, Induction motor: steady-state 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
302
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
performance analysis, braking methods, four quadrant speed-torque characteristics, dc and ac dynamic braking, 
Methods of starting, energy relations during starting and braking, Transients in dc and ac drives; Motor and converter 
performance parameters, 1-phase full- and semi- converter fed dc shunt and dc series motor, Mathematical analysis 
of 1-phase converter fed dc motors, 1-phase Dual converter: waveforms, operations with and without circulating 
current, 3-phase full converter, semi converter and dual converter fed dc drives, Power factor considerations of 
semi- and full converters, Power factor improvement of phase controlled converters, Sequence control of converters, 
Chopper controlled dc drives; Static speed control of induction motor: stator voltage control, Static control of rotor 
resistance, Static slip power recovery scheme, VSI and cyclo-converter fed drives, V/f control, constant torque and 
constant power operations, closed loop V/f control, CSI fed drives; Induction motor behavior with non-sinusoidal 
supply and unbalanced supply, PWM inverters and reduction of harmonics, Synchronous motor drives: true and 
self synchronous modes, hunting; Brushless dc motor drive, Reluctance motor, SRM, stepper motors; Illumination, 
electrical heating, furnaces, arc welding, industrial application of motors in steel mills, textile mills, cement mill and 
paper mills; Electric traction services, nature of traction load, main line and sub-urban train configuration, traction 
mechanics, traction drives, braking, power factor and harmonics, traction motor. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. K. Dubey, Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, Narosha Publishing House, 2001. 
2. S. K. Pillai, A first course in electrical drives, New Age International, 1989. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. Partab, Modern Electric Traction, DhanpatRai, 1992. 
EE 416 POWER SYSTEM TRANSIENTS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Theory of traveling waves and standing waves: Travelling waves and standing waves at power frequency, differential 
equations and solutions for general case, standing waves and natural frequencies, open ended line- double 
exponential response, open ended line – response to sinusoidal excitation, line energization with trapped charge 
voltage, reflection and refraction of traveling waves, transient response of systems with series and shunt lumped 
parameters and distributed lines, principle of traveling wave protection.; Lightning and lightning protection: 
Lightning stroke to lines, lightning stroke mechanism, general principles of lightning protection problem, tower 
footing resistance, insulator flashover and withstand voltage, probability of occurrence of lightning-stroke currents, 
lightning arresters and protective characteristics, dynamic voltage rise and arrester rating, operating characteristics 
of lightning arresters, insulation coordination based on lightning.; Over voltages in EHV systems caused by switching 
operations: Origin of overvoltages and their types, overvoltages caused by interruption of low inductive currents, 
ferro-resonance overvoltages, calculation of switching surges – single phase equivalents, distributed parameter line 
energized by source, generalize equations for three phase systems, reduction of switching surges on EHV systems.; 
Frequency of occurrence of lightning flashes and shielding of transmission lines: Interaction between conductors, 
electrostatic field due to the leader stroke, calculation of shielding angle, frequency of occurrence of lightning flashes 
to transmission line, the electrostatic field at earth as a function of leader stroke charge, Approximate calculation 
of area of attraction, Frequency of occurrence of lightning flashes.; Transient studies of FACTS and custom power 
equipment: Electromagnetic transient analysis, electromagnetic transient simulator, static compensator, dynamic 
voltage restorer, solid state transfer switch. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. D. Bagamudre, Extra high voltage AC transmission engineering, Wiley Eastern Ltd., 1990. 
2. C. S. Indulkar & D. P. Kothari, Power System Transients, PHI, 1996. 
Supplementary Reading
1. E Acha, V. G. Agelidis, O Anaya-Lara & T. J. E. Miller, Power Electronic control in electrical systems, Newnes, 2002. 
EE 417 HIGH	VOLTAGE	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Conduction and breakdown in Gaseous Dielectrics: Townsend’s current growth equation, current growth in the 
presence of secondary processes, Townsend’s criterion for breakdown, experimental determination of coefficients 
and breakdown in electronegative gases, time lags for breakdown, streamer theory of breakdown in gases, Paschen’s 
law, penning effect. Breakdown in non-uniform fields and corona: post-breakdown phenomena and applications, 
practical considerations in using gases for insulation purposes. Conduction and Breakdown in Liquid dielectrics: Pure 
liquids and commercial liquids, conduction and breakdown in commercial liquids. Breakdown in solid Dielectrics: 
Intrinsic breakdown, electromechanical breakdown, thermal breakdown, breakdown of solid dielectrics in practice. 
Use of insulating materials in power transformers, rotating machines, cables, power capacitors, electronics 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
303
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
equipment. Generation of High voltages: Generation of high D. C. voltage, high a. c. voltage, impulse voltage, impulse 
current, tripping and control of impulse generators. Measurement of high voltages and current: Measurement of 
high d. c. high a. c. and impulse. Non-Destructive Testing of Materials and Electrical Apparatus: Measurement of 
d. c resistivity, dielectric constant and loss factor, partial discharge. H. V. Testing of Electrical Apparatus: Testing of 
insulators, bushings, isolators, circuit breakers, cables, transformers, surge diverters. Design, planning and layout of 
H. V. laboratories: Layout of high voltage laboratories, grounding of impulse testing laboratories. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. S. Naidu and V. Kamaraju, High voltage Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 1995. 
2. J. Kuffel and W. S. Zaengl, High Voltage Engineering: Fundamentals, Newnes, 2000. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. 1. C. L. Wadhwa, High Voltage Engineering, New Age, 2007. 
EE 425 CONTROL	SYSTEM	–	II 4 credits [3-1-0]
State Space Analysis: Review of State space representation of Control system Diagonalisation, Controlability and 
Observability, State feedback control, pole placement trough State feedback, Observer Design, Linear Quadratic 
Regulator; Digital Control System: Introduction to discrete-time systems, Signal Processing in Digital Control, Models 
of Digital Control Devices and Systems, Design of Digital Control Algorithms Controls, State-variable analysis of Digital 
Control Systems. Microcontroller/Microprocessor based Digital Control Implementation. PLC; Lyapunov Stability 
Analysis: Stability Definitions, Stability Theorems, Examples Non Linear Control System: Characteristics of Nonlinear 
Systems, Common non-linearities. Phase plane, describing function techniques. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, Pearson, 2003
2. N. S. Nise, Control Systems Engineering, 4th Edition, 2004
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Gopal, Control Systems: Principles and Design, TMH, 2008 
2. R. C. Dorf and R. H. Bishop, Modern Control Systems, Prentice-Hall, 2007
EE 426 FUZZY MODELLING AND CONTROL 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fuzzy Representation of uncertainty, classical sets and fuzzy sets, properties of fuzzy sets, fuzzy set operations, Fuzzy 
Relations, fuzzy inference and defuzzification techniques, Mamdani and Sugeno fuzzy systems, fuzzy logic control 
design, different types of fuzzy control (PI/PD/PID), Tuning of fuzzy system parameters(Scale factor/Membership 
Function/Rule Base).; Stability Analysis of fuzzy control systems, Fuzzy System as Universal Approximators, fuzzy 
modeling and identification, Adaptive Fuzzy Control; Neuro-fuzzy system, evolutionary fuzzy systems.; Application of 
fuzzy system to electric drives. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. J. Ross, Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Application, John Wiley and Sons, 2004. 
2. R. R. Yager and D. P. Filev, Essentials of Fuzzy Modelling & Control, John Wiley & Sons, 2002
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. Driankov, H. Hellendoorn, M. Reinfrank, An Introduction to Fuzzy Control, Springer-Verlag, 2001
2. Li-Xin Wang, Adaptive Fuzzy Systems and Control: Design and Stability Analysis, 2007
EE 427 SOFT	COMPUTING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to Neorofuzzy and Soft Computing, Fuzzy set theory, Fuzzy Rules, Fuzzy Reasoning, Fuzzy inference 
System, Neural Networks; Radial basis and recurrent neural networks, Hopfield Networks, Comparision of RBF and 
MLP Network, Running Algorithms, NeuroFuzzy Modeling, Applications of Soft Computing to Signal Processing, 
Image Processing, Forecasting, XOR Problem-traveling salesman problem, Image compression suing MLPs-character 
retrieval using hopfield networks, Introduction to Genetic Algorithm hybrid Systemsetc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Kecman, Learning and Soft Computing, Pearson, 1st Ed, 2001. 
2. D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search Optimization and Machine Learning, Addison Wesley, 3rd Ed. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Kosko, Neural Network and fuzzy systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2006. 
2. S. Goonatilake & S. Khebbal, Intelligent Hybrid Systems, Wiley, 1995. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
304
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
EE 428 ELECTRICAL	DRIVES	CONCEPTS	&	APPLICATIONS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Classification of Electrical drives, Types of load, Quadrant diagram of Speed-Torque characteristics, Dynamics of 
motor load combination, Steady state stability of Electrical drives, starting and braking D. C. and Induction Motors, 
Calculation of time and energy loss. Industrial application of motors in steel mills, Textile mills, Cement mill and paper 
mills. Electric Traction services: Nature of traction load, Main line and sub-urban train configuration, Braking, Power 
factor and harmonics, Calculation of traction drive rating and energy consumption, Traction motor, Conventional D. 
C. and A. C. traction drives. Recent trend in electric drives. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. K. Pillai, A first course in electrical drives: Wiley Eastern, 1994. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. K. Dubey, Fundamentals of Electrical Drive, Narosa Publishing House, 2001. 
2. V. Subrahmanyam, Electric Drives: Concepts and Applications, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2005. 
EE 429 ADVANCED	CONTROL	THEORY 3 credits [3-0-0]
State-space approach to linear system theory. Mathematical background in linear algebra (vector space, fields, linear 
independence, inner product, etc. ), solutions of state equations (time varying and time invariant systems), Jordan 
form, controllability, eigenvalue assignment using state feedback, observability, designing observers, separation 
principle, Kalman filters.; Data conversion effects, Loop performance and sampling rate selection; Difference 
equations; Discrete PID: Positional and incremental form; PID algorithm including integral windup and derivative 
kick solution; Discrete PID controller; Design of optimal control systems, linear quadratic regulators, linear quadratic 
Gaussian optimal control, Ricatti equation, suboptimal control, dynamic programming, calculus of variations, and 
Pontryagin’s minimum principle. Nonlinear control design techniques; Feedback linearization, input-state and input-
output linearization, design issues for MIMO nonlinear systems. Variable structure control, sliding surface design, 
approximation of switching laws.; Neural networks and fuzzy logic systems for feedback control. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. Gopal, Digital Control and State Variable Methods, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2003
2. G. F. Franklin, J. G. Powell and M. L. Workman, Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems, Pearson Higher Education, 2002 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. Friedland, Control System Design - An Introduction to State-Space Methods, McGraw-Hill, Digitized Dec 5, 2007
2. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, Prentice Hall, 2002. 
3. R. C. Dorf and R. H. Bishop, Modern Control Systems, Prentice Hall, 2004. 
EE 436 ADAPTIVE	CONTROL	AND	SYSTEM	IDENTIFICATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction and overview of Systems Identification, Adaptive Control and applications. Parameter Estimation: Least 
Square, Generalized and Recursive Least Square, Estimator properties including error bounds and convergence, 
MES, ML and MAP estimators, Nonlinear Least Squares. Model Structures and Predictors. Recursive Identification of 
Linear dynamic systems: RLS, ELS, IV, RML, Stochastic Approximation, Extended Kalman Filter, generalized prediction 
error framework and its application to ARMA and state models, convergence analysis, Time varying parameters.; 
Adaptive schemes. Adaptive control theory. Applications.; Situations when constant Gain feedback is insufficient.; 
Robust control. The adaptive control problem.; The model following problem. MRAS based on stability theory. Model 
following when the full state is measurable. Direct MRAS for general linear systems. Prior knowledge in MRAS. 
MRAS for partially known systems. Use of robust estimation methods in MRAS.; The basic idea. Indirect self-tuning 
regulators. Direct Self-tuning regulators. Linear Quadratic STR. Adaptive Predictive control. Prior knowledge in STR. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. K. J. Astrom and B. Wittenmark, Adaptive Control, Addison - Pearson, 2006. 
2. L. Ljung, System Identificaiton: Theory for the user, Prentice -Hall, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Landau and Zito, 
EE 438 INDUSTRIAL	AUTOMATION	&	CONTROL 3 credits[3-0-0]
Prerequisite:	 Control	 System	 Engineering-I;	 Introduction to Industrial Automation Systems; Measurement of 
physical quantities, e.g., temperature, pressure, force, displacement, speed, liquid flow, liquid level humidity. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
305
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Signal conditioning and calibration.; Actuators, Control Valves, Hydraulic Actuation, Switches and Gauges, Industrial 
Hydraulic Circuits, Pneumatic Control Systems.; Introduction to Process Control, PID control, Auto-tuning, Predictive 
control.; Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), Modelling of Sequence Control Specifications and Programming.; 
Electrical Machine Drives, Energy Savings with Variable Speed Drives, Stepper Motors, DC Motor Drives, Induction 
Motor Drives, BLDC Motor Drives.; Industrial Real Time Embedded Systems, Process Management, Control Networks. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Smith Carlos and Corripio, “Principles and Practice of Automatic Process Control”, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
2. Jon Stenerson, “Industrial Automation and Process Control”, Prentice Hall, 2003. 
3. M. Gopal, “Digital cControl and State Variable Methods” Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
Suggested Reading: 
1. G. F. Franklin, J. D. Powell, M. L. Workman: Digital Control of Dynamic Systems, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Ma-USA (1990)
EE 445 DATA	COMMUNICATION	AND	NETWORKS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Data Communications, Data Encoding, Data Communication Interface, Data Link Control, Wide Area Networks: Circuit 
Switching; Packet Switching, Routing, Congestion Control, Frame Relay; Asynchronous Transfer Mode, Local Area 
Networks, Communications Architecture and Protocols: OSI, TCP/IP Protocol, Internetworking, ISDN and Broad Band 
ISDN. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1997. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. S. Tannenbam, Computer Networks, Prentice Hall of India, 1997. 
EE 454 DIGITAL	COMMUNICATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fundamental Limits on Performance : Uncertainly, Information and Entropy, Source coding theorem, Huffmann 
coding, Discrete memory less channels, Mutual information, Channel capacity, channel coding theorem, Differential 
Entropy and mutual information for continuous ensembles, Channel Capacity Theorem.; Detection and Estimation: 
Model of Digital communication system, Gram-Schmidt Orthogonalization Procedure, Geometry Interpretation of 
Signals, Response of Bank of correlators to Noisy Input, Detection of known signals in Noise, Probability of Error, 
Correlation receiver, Matched Filter Receiver, Detection of signals with unknown phase in Noise, Estimation : 
Concepts and criteria, Maximum Likelihood Estimation : Wiener Filter for Ware form Estimation, Linear Prediction : 
Linear Predictive Vocoders, Adaptive Filters.; Waveform coding Techniques: Robust quantization, Differential Pulse-
code Modulation, Delta Modulation, Coding speech at Low Bit Rates.; Digital Modulation Techniques : Comparison of 
Binary and Quarternary modulation techniques, Modulation Techniques, power Spectra, Bandwidth Efficiency, Mary, 
Modulation Formats Viewed in the Eight of Channel capacity theorem, Effect of Inster symbol Interference, Bit Versus 
symbol error probabilities Synchronization, Applications, Voice-grade Modems, Digital Radio, Digital communications 
by Satellite.; Error Control Coding : Rationale for coding and types of codes, Discrete memory less channels, Linear 
block codes, Cyclic codes, Convolutional codes, Maximum likelihood decoding of convolutional codes, Distance 
properties of convolutional codes, Sequential decoding of convolutional codes, Trollis codes.; Applications: Coding for 
white Gaussian Noise Channels, Coding for compound error channels, Block codes for error control in Date storage.; 
Spread Spectrum Communication : Pseudo noise sequences, A notion of spread spectrum, Direct sequence spread 
acoherent binary phase-shift keying, Signal space Dimensionality and processing gain, Probability of Error, Frequency 
Hop spread spectra. Applications: Code division multiple access, Multi path Suppressio
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Haykin, Digital Communications, John Wiley, 1988. 
2. J. Proakis, Digital Communication, Mcgraw Hill, 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Bose, Information Theory Coding and Cryptography, TMH, 2002. 
EE 456 ROBOTICS	AND	COMPUTER	VISION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Robots and automation-classification-specifications-notation-Direct Kinematics-Co-ordinate frames-rotations-
Homogeneous coordinates-The Arm equation-Kinematic analysis of a typical Robot-examples-Inverse Kinematics 
problem-Tool configuration-Inverse kinematics of a typical Robot-examples-Workspace analysis and trajectory 
planning-Work envelope of different robots-The pick and place operation –Continuous path motion-interpolated 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
306
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
motion-Straight line motion-Tool configuration Jacobian matrix and manipulator Jacobian-Manipulator Dynamics-
Dynamic model of a robot using Lagrange’s Equation R-The control problem-state equations-Single axis PID control-
PD gravity control-Computed torque control-Variable Structure control-Impedance control; Discrete geometry and 
quantization, length estimations, automated visual inspection, object recognition and matching, depth perception 
problems, stereo geometry and correspondence, motion analysis, optical flow, multi-resolution processing of images, 
applications of Computer Vision, remote sensing, biomedical imaging, document processing, target tracking. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. Sciavicco and B. Siciliano, Modeling and Control of Robot Manipulators. Springer, 2007
2. F. L. Lewis, D. M. Dawson, and C. T. Abdallah, Robot Manipulator Control: Theory and Practice, Revised and Expanded, Marcel 
Dekker, New York, 2004. 
3. K. S. Fu, R. C. Gonzalez and C. S. G Lee, Robotics: Control, Sensing, Vision, and Intelligence, McGraw Hill, NY, 1987. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. J. Craig, Introduction to Robotics, Mechanics and Control, Addison Wesley, MA. Digitized Dec 4, 2007
2. R. J. Schilling, Fundamentals of Robotics Analysis and Control, Prentice Hall, NJ, Digitized Dec 5, 2007
EE 471 ELECTRIC	DRIVES	LAB 2 credits [0-0-3]
Speed control of DC motor by single phase fully controlled converter; Speed control of DC motor using 3-Phase full 
converter 3-Phase semi converter; Closed loop control of DC motor; Four quadrant chopper controlled DC motor 
drive; Speed control of 3-Phase induction motor using 3-Phase IGBT based PWM inverter; Speed control of DC & AC 
motor using ASIPM based power module; Stepper motor speed control; Closed loop control of 3-Phase induction 
motor. 
EE 472 CONTROL	&	ELECTRICAL	SYSTEM	DESIGN	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Designing an electronic scale for measuring weight; Objective: Explore the specifications of weigh scale; Design a 
electronic weigh-scale system. Focus Area: Filtering; A/D converter dynamic range; Peak to peak noise resolution. 
Controller design for dc-dc converter: Objective: Explore the specifications of dc-dc converter; Design the controller 
to regulate the output voltage. Focus Area: Steady state modeling for power stage design, Dynamic modeling for 
controller design, Controller design. Load frequency control for power system: Objective: To study and design load-
frequency controller, Focus Area: Modeling from specifications; Performance determination; Controller design; Design 
of controllers for robotic manipulator; Objective: To study and design robotic manipulator; Focus Area: Modeling; 
Various controller designs. 
Department of Electrical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
307
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	INDUSTRIAL	DESIGN
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
Sub. Code Subject L-T-P Credits
ID 200 Design and Society 3-0-0 3
ID 220 Fundamentals of Computer Graphics and Solid Modeling 3-0-0 3
ID 221 Mechanisms and Machines 3-1-0 4
ID 222 Geometric and Solid Modeling 3-1-0 4
ID 230 Environmental and Experimental Design 3-0-0 3
ID 232 Art and Aesthetic Design 3-1-0 4
ID 272 Design workshop - II 0-0-3 2
ID 310 Value Engineering 3-0-0 3
ID 311 ProductDesign - I 3-1-0 4
ID 312 ProductDesign - II 3-1-0 4
ID 321 Thermal Considerations in Design 3-0-0 3
ID 333 Interaction Design and Usability Engineering 3-0-0 3
ID 341 Manufacturing Processes 3-1-0 4
ID 344 Design of Production Tooling 3-1-0 4
ID 350 Robotics and Automation 3-0-0 3
ID 351 Industrial Mechatronics 3-0-0 3
ID 352 Industrial Robotics 3-1-0 4
ID 354 InstrumentationandControl 3-0-0 3
ID 371 Art, Design and Aesthetic Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ID 372 Designworkshop-II 0-0-3 2
ID 373 ProductDesignLaboratory – I 0-0-3 2
ID 374 ProductDesignLaboratory – II 0-0-3 2
ID 376 Creative Automation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ID 381 Industria Design Project - I 0-0-3 2
ID 382 Industria Design Project - II 0-0-3 2
ID 391 Special Topic in Industrial Design - I 3/4
ID 392 Special Topic in Industria lDesign - II 3/4
ID 393 Special Laboratory in industrial Design - I 0-0-6 4
ID 394 Special Laboratory in industrial Design - II 0-0-6 4
ID 410 Project Management 3-0-0 3
ID 431 Ergonomics in Design 3-1-0 4
ID 432 System Design for Sustainability 3-0-0 3
ID 433 Visual Design 3-0-0 3
ID 434 Photo Communication 3-0-0 3
ID 440 Rapid Prototyping 3-0-0 3
ID 441 Computer Aided Manufacturing 3-1-0 4
ID 442 Rapid Product Development Technologies 3-1-0 4
ID 444 Design for Manufacture and Assembly 3-1-0 4
ID 451 Industrial Automation 3-0-0 3
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
308
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ID 471 Ergonomics Simulation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ID 491 ResearchProject–I 0-0-6 4
ID 492 ResearchProject–II 0-0-9 6
ID 493 Seminar & TechnicalWriting–I 0-0-3 2
ID 494 Seminar & TechnicalWriting–II 0-0-3 2
ID 495 Short Term Industrial/ResearchExperience 0-0-0 2
ID 496 Comprehensive Viva - Voce 0-0-3 2
For B. Tech Courses (3 or 4 level) please refer to the B. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi, for M. Tech Courses (6 level) please 
refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
ID210 FUNDAMENTALS	OF	COMPUTER	GRAPHICS	AND	SOLID	MODELING 3Credits[3-0-0]
Introduction	to	Computer	Graphics:	Overview of Computer Graphics, Computer Graphics Application and Software, 
Description of some graphics devices, Input Devices for Operator Interaction, Active and Passive Graphics Devices, 
Display Technologies, Raster Refresh (Raster-Scan) Graphics Displays, Cathode Ray Tube Basics, Color CRT Raster Scan 
Basics, Video Basics, The Video Controller, Random-Scan Display Processor, LCD displays, Rasterization, Algorithm 
for Rasterization of straight lines and circles, Scan conversion – lines, circles; Two-Dimensional	 Transformations:	
Transformation Conventions, 2D Transformations, Homogeneous Coordinates and Matrix Representation of 
2D Transformations, Translations and Homogeneous Coordinates, Rotation, Reflection, Scaling, Combined 
Transformation, Solid Body Transformations, Rotation About an Arbitrary Point, Reflection through an Arbitrary Line; 
Three-Dimensional	Transformations:	Introduction, Three-Dimensional Scaling, Three-Dimensional Shearing, Three-
Dimensional Rotation, Three-Dimensional Reflection, Three-Dimensional Translation, Multiple Transformation, 
Rotation about an Arbitrary Axis in Space, Reflection through an Arbitrary Plane, Matrix Representation of 3D 
Transformations, Composition of 3D Transformations, Affine and Perspective Geometry, Perspective Transformations, 
Vanishing Points, Orthographic Projections, Axonometric Projections, Oblique Projections; Curves	 and	 Surfaces:	
Curve Representation, Parametric Curves, Parametric Representation of a Circle, Parametric Representation of an 
Ellipse, Parametric Representation of a Parabola, Parametric Representation of a Hyperbola, Representation of Space 
Curves, Cubic Splines,, Bezier Curves, B-spline Curves, Parametric Cubic Curves, Bezier Surfaces, B-spline Surfaces. 
Solid Modeling: Representation Schemes, Fundamentals of Solid Modeling, Data Representation Schemes, B-Reps, 
Constructive Solid Geometry, Graphics Programming using OpenGL. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. J. D. Foley, A. Van Dam, S. K. Feiner and J. F. Hughes, Computer Graphics - Principles and Practice, Second Edition in C, Pearson 
Education, 2003. 
2. D. Hearn and M. Pauline Baker, Computer Graphics (C Version), Pearson Education, 2nd Edition, 2004. 
3. D. F. Rogers and J. A. Adams, Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill International Edition, 
1990. 
4. F. S. Hill Jr., Computer Graphics using OpenGL, Pearson Education, 2003. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. D. F. Rogers, Procedural Elements for Computer Graphics, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition, New Delhi, 2001. 
2. Saxena and V. Sahay, Computer-Aided Engineering Design, Springer, 2005. 
ID	212 COMPUTER	GRAPHICS	AND	SOLID	MODELING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction	to	Computer	Graphics:	Overview of Computer Graphics, Computer Graphics Application and Software, 
Description of graphics devices, Input Devices for Operator Interaction, Display Technologies, Raster Refresh 
(Raster-Scan) Graphics Displays, Cathode Ray Tube Basics, Color CRT Raster Scan Basics, Video Basics, The Video 
Controller, Random-Scan Display Processor, LCD displays, Rasterization, Scan conversion – lines, circles, Line-
Drawing Algorithms, Circles-Generating Algorithms, Ellipse-Generating Algorithms, Graphics pipeline, Clipping; Two-
Dimensional	 Transformations:	 Transformation Conventions, 2D Transformations, Homogeneous Coordinates and 
Matrix Representation of 2D Transformations, Translations and Homogeneous Coordinates, Rotation, Reflection, 
Scaling, Combined Transformation, Solid Body Transformations, Rotation about an Arbitrary Point, Reflection 
through an Arbitrary Line; Three-Dimensional	 Transformations:	 Introduction, Three-Dimensional Scaling, Three-
Dimensional Shearing, Three-Dimensional Rotation, Three-Dimensional Reflection, Three-Dimensional Translation, 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
309
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Multiple Transformation, Rotation about an Arbitrary Axis in Space, Reflection through an Arbitrary Plane, Matrix 
Representation of 3D Transformations, Composition of 3D Transformations, Affine and Perspective Geometry, 
Perspective Transformations, Vanishing Points, Orthographic Projections, Axonometric Projections, Oblique 
Projections; Curves	and	Surfaces:	Curve Representation, Parametric Curves, Parametric Representation of a Circle, 
Parametric Representation of an Ellipse, Parametric Representation of a Parabola, Parametric Representation of a 
Hyperbola, Representation of Space Curves, Parametric Cubic Curves, Cubic Splines,, Bezier Curves, B-spline Curves, 
Rational B-spline curves, Bezier Surfaces, B-spline Surfaces, Rational Parametric Surfaces; Solid Modeling: Solid 
Modeling-Introduction, Properties of Geometric Solid, Solid Representation, Representation Schemes, Fundamentals 
of Solid Modeling, Data Representation Schemes, Pure Primitive Instancing, Half spaces, Spatial Occupancy 
Enumeration, Cell Decomposition, Octree Encoding, Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG), Boundary Representation 
(B-Rep), Sweep Representation, Analytical Solid Modeling; Graphics Standards for CADGraphics and Computing 
standards - GKS - Bitmaps - Open GL - Data Exchange standards - IGES - STEP - CALS - DXF. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. J. D. Foley, A. Van Dam, S. K. Feiner and J. F. Hughes, Computer Graphics - Principles and Practice, Second Edition in C, Pearson 
Education, 2003. 
2. D. Hearn and M. Pauline Baker, Computer Graphics (C Version), Pearson Education, 2nd Edition, 2004. 
3. D. F. Rogers and J. A. Adams, Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill International Edition, 
1990. 
4. D. F. Rogers, Procedural Elements for Computer Graphics, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition, New Delhi, 2001. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Saxena and V. Sahay, Computer-Aided Engineering Design, Springer, 2005. 
2. F. S. Hill Jr., Computer Graphics using OpenGL, Pearson Education, 2003. 
ID	230 PRODUCTION	MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction:	Definition, scope and objectives of Production Management, Relationship of production with other 
management functions, Interdepartmental relationship, Production operation strategies; New	Product	Design:	Need, 
characteristics of phases of product life cycle, Product characteristics analysis, Market, functional, operational, quality, 
reliability, ergonomics, Economic consideration, FMECA, QFD; Production	 Function:	 Process design frame work, 
Work station, Line balancing, Different techniques, Batch Production, Minimum cost, Maximum profit, Production 
range, Process planning - Factors, steps, Selection of technology, Selection of equipment, Flow design. Applications:	
Application of Quantitative techniques for production decision Simulation, Sequencing, Queuing; Capacity Planning: 
Definition and basic concepts, Long term and short term capacity strategies, Aggregate planning - strategies and 
guidelines, LP approach to aggregate planning, MPS; Plant Maintenance: Principles, need, policies and objectives, 
Types of maintenance, Reliability and life testing, TPM; Capital	Investment	Decisions:	Concept, Types, Concept of 
time value of money, Evaluation techniques, Replacement Analysis – Concept, Types, Evaluation Techniques. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Adam E E, RJ Ebert, Production and Operation Management, Prentice Hall. 
2. Englewood Cliff, N J Riggs. J L, Production System, Planning, Analysis and Control, John Weily and sons, New York. 
3. Martand Telsang, Industrial Engineering and Production Management, S Chand & Co, New Delhi. 
4. Buffa. E S, Modern Production and Operation Management, Willey, New Delhi. 
5. Barry Shore, Operation Management, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York. 
6. Samuel Eilon, Production Planning and Control. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Joseph Monks, Operation Management Theory and Problems, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York. 
2. James Dilworth, Production and Operation Management, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York. 
3. Prasanna Chandra, Project Appraisal. 
ID	232 ENGINEERING	MATERIALS	&	HEAT	TREATMENT	PROCESSES 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Material	classification:	Classes of engineering materials, engineering requirement of materials, selection of materials, 
Mechanical, Thermal & Electrical properties of Materials and their measurement; Structure	 And	 Imperfections	
in Crystals: BSS, FCC and HCP structure, unit cell, crystallographic planes and directions, miler indices, crystal 
imperfections, point, line, planar and volume defects – Grain size, ASTM grain size number; Constitution	of	Alloys	and	
Phase	Diagrams:	Constitution of alloys, solid solutions, substitutional and interstistial, phase diagrams, Isomorphous, 
eutectic, peritectic, eutectoid and peritectroid reactions, Iron carbide equilibrium diagram, Classification of steel 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
310
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and cast iron microstructure, properties and applications; Heat Treatment: Definition – Full annealing, stress relief, 
recrystallization and spheroidizing – normalizing, hardening and tempering of steel, Isothermal transformation 
diagrams – cooling curves superimposed on I. T. diagram CCR – Hardenability, Jominy end quench test – Austempering, 
martempering – case hardening, carburizing, nitriding, cyaniding, carbonitriding – Flame and Induction hardening; 
Composites	and	Advanced	Materials:	Ferrous material – Classification of steel and cast iron microstructure, properties 
and applications. Effect of alloying additions on steel (Mn, Sl, Cr, Mo, V TI & W) – stainless and tool steels – HSLA – 
maraging steels – Gray, White, malleable, spheroidal – Graphite – alloy cast irons. Non-ferrous materials – Copper, 
Aluminium, Nickel, Magnesium, Titanium, Lead, Tin alloys. Their composition, properties and applications. Non-
metallic materials – Introduction to polymers, Composites and Ceramics; Elemental and compound semiconductors. 
Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors – properties; Nanophase materials – Shape Memory Alloys, Superconductivity, 
Metallic glasses. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. S. K. Hazra Choudhury, Material Science & Processes
2. O. P. Khanna, A Textbook of Material Science and Metallurgy
3. William D Callister Jr, Material Science and Engineering, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2007. 
4. Raghavan V, Material Science and Engineering – A First Course, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 2001. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Vamblack, Material Science
ID	311 MECHANISMS,	DESIGN	&	ANALYSIS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Mechanisms: Lower & Higher Pairs, Degrees Of Freedom, Types Of Mechanisms, Their Inversions & Applications, 
Spatial Linkages, Determination Of Velocities & Accelerations Using Graphical & Analytical Techniques, Corioli’s 
Components Of Accelerations, Cam Follower Systems, Cam Profiles, Cam Dynamics, Types Of Gearing & Gear 
Trains, Design Of Gears, Analytical Procedure For Synthesis Of Four Bar Mechanisms, Dynamic Force Analysis Of 
Mechanisms, Analytical & Graphical Techniques, Dynamic Motion Analysis, Flywheels, Balancing Of Rotors & Multi 
Cylinder Reciprocating Machines. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. S S Rattan, Theory Of Machines, TMH, 3rd edition, ISBN-10: 0-07-017477-X, 2009 
2. Ghosh & Mallik, Theory Of Mechanisms & Machines, Publisher: Affiliated East-west Press Pvt Ltd., ISBN: 8185938938, 
ID	313 PRODUCT	DESIGN	-	I 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Definition Of Product Design, Design By Evolution & Design By Innovation, Essential Factors, 
Morphology Of Design, Primary Design Phases And Flow Charting, Product Strategies & Analysis, Standardization, 
Industrial Design Oranisation, Role Of Aesthetics In Product Design, Functional Design Practice, Strength, Stiffeners 
And Rigidity Considerations In Product Design, Review Of Production Processes, Primary, Machining & Nontraditional 
Machining Processes, Manufacturing Requirements In Design Of Machine Components, Design For Forging, Pressed 
Components, Casting & Machining, Designing With Plastics, Rubber, Ceramics & Wood, Economic Factor Effecting 
Design, Product Value, Design For Safety, Reliability And Environmental Considerations, Economic Analysis, Human 
Considerations In Product Design, Anthropometry, Design Of Control And Displays, Value Analysis & Engineering, Job 
Plans & Value Analysis Tests, Modern Approaches To Product Design, Concurrent Design. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Chitale & Gupta, Product Design & Manufacturing, PHI, 3rd edition, ISBN-10: 8120326369, 2005. 
2. Ulrich & Epinger, Product Design And Development; T M H, ISBN-10: 007229647X, 2005. 
ID	314 COMPUTER-AIDED	DESIGN	&	MANUFACTURING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction - Definition of CAD/CAM, product cycle, automation, CPU, types of memory, input/output devices, data 
presentation, data and file structures, data base design, design work station, graphics terminal, operating devices, 
plotters and other output devices, CPU secondary storage, Turnkey CAD system, selection criteria, evaluation 
of alternative systems; Geometric Modeling Techniques - wireframe, surface and solid modeling, Geometric 
transformations, Graphics standards; CAM - Introduction to Numerical Control (NC) technology, current status of 
NC, Influence of NC in design & manufacturing, Computer aided NC programming in APT language, elements of APT 
language, APT vocabulary, symbols, numbers and scalars, punctuation, definition, statement labels, notations for 
APT statement format, statements defining point, line, circle, vector, planes and curves, point to point motion, cutter 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
311
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
contouring motion, starting, terminating, roughing, finishing, problems. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Groover & Zimmers, CAD-CAM – Pearson, ISBN: 978-81-758-465, 2008
2. PN Rao, CAD/CAM- Mc Graw Hill, ISBN: 007-068-19-37, 2010
3. K. Lalit Narayan et al, Computer Aided Design & Manufacturing PHI, ISBN: 978-81203-3342-0, 2008
4. Ibrahim Zeid, Mastering CAD/CAM, Special Indian Edition 2007, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi. 
ID	330 MATERIALS	MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction : scope of materials management – primary and secondary, objectives – integrated materials 
management – relation with other functional areas of organization.; Organizing for materials management – basis 
for forming organizations – conventional and modern approaches to organizing materials management. Materials 
identification – classifying of materials – codification of materials – standardization – simplification and variety 
reduction of materials.; Inventory control – techniques – FSN, VED, ABC – working capital management with reference 
to inventory; Management of stores – location – different types of stores – methods of storing – safety and security 
of materials – stores equipment – materials handling equipment – factors affecting materials handling; Stores issues 
and receipts – procedures – forms and policies in stores transactions – stores accounting – stores organization – 
materials safety and security; Management of surplus obsolete and scrap materials – reasons for accumulation of 
surplus obsolete and scrap materials – methods of disposal – regulations and procedures; Purchasing – planning 
purchasing materials – norms of vendor rating – CEI; methodology, Japanese industry – selection and development 
– purchasing; procedures and methods – legal aspects – insurance of materials – supply; management – sources of 
supply – out sourcing; Sub contracting – reasons for subcontracting – criteria for selecting sub contractors – rating – 
factors affecting subcontract rate fixing – internal and; external subcontract. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. A. K. Datta, Integrated materials management, PHI. 
2. Dobbler, Burt D. N, Purchasing and Supply Management, TMI, 7/e, 2004
Supplementary Readings: 
1. P Gopalakrishnan – Materials Management –PHI, 2002
2. Leenders Fearon – Purchasing And Materials Management –Universal Book Stall
3. K S Menon – Purchasing And Inventory Control –Wheeler Publishers
4. Varma M M – Materials Management –Sultan Chand And Sons
ID	332 VALUE	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
An	Overview: Definition, principle of value engineering, VE recommendations, programmes advantages. The role 
of value value engineer; Approach	of	Function: Evaluation of function, determining function, classifying function, 
evaluation of costs, evaluation of worth, determining worth, evaluation of value; VE Job Plan: Introduction, 
orientation, information phase, speculation phase, analysis phase, development phase, implementation phase, and 
follow up phase; Selection	and	Evaluation	of	VE	Projects: Projects selection, methods, value standards, application 
of VE methodology; Staffing	For	VE: General, functional concept, centralization, decentralization of VE staff, training: 
Industrial training - conduct of training, continuous training and cost of training; Fast	Diagramming: Value decision, 
decision process, queuing theory and Monte Carlo Method, cost models, life cycle costs; VE	Level	of	Effort: VE team, 
co-ordinator, designer, different services, definitions, construction management contracts, value engineering case 
studies; Case Study: Case studies related to human resource, manufacturing and marketing field. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Tufty Herald G, Compendium on Value Engineering, The Indo American Society, First Edition, 1983. 
2. J. H Janson, Value Engineering in Manufacturing, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1967. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Miles L D, Techniques of Value Engineering and Analysis, McGraw Hill, Second Edition, New York, 1972. 
2. Khanna O P, Industrial Engineering and Management, Dhanpat Rai and Sons, New Delhi, 1993. 
3. Kumar S, Singh R K and Jha J K (Ed), Value Engineering, Narosa Publishing House, 2005. 
ID	337 MANUFACTURING	SCIENCE 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	Work	Shop	Practice	I	&	II	
Role of manufacturing process in product design, classification of processes; Casting process, pattern and mould, 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
312
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
melting and pouring, solidification and cooling, removal and finishing, sand casting, comparisons of casting processes.; 
Metal forming, cold and hot working, rolling, forging, extrusion, drawing, deep drawing, punching and blanking, 
comparison of forming process.; Machining process, metal cutting, grinding and finishing operations, comparison. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. G K Lal & Vijay Gupta, Fundamentals of design & manufacturing, Narosa Publishers 
2. Ulrich & Epinger, Product design & development, TMH Publishers
3. Ghosh & Malik, Manufacturing Science, New Age Publishers. 
ID	338 PRODUCT	DEVELOPMENT	AND	MANUFACTURING	 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	Work	Shop	Practice	I	&	II	
Unconventional machining, ultrasonic, electrochemical, laser beam, electro discharge machining, comparison, 
numerical examples.; Selection of manufacturing processes, manufacturing cost, production volume, manufacturing 
characteristics, material properties, shapes, sizes, dimensional accuracy and surface finish.; Product development, from 
concept to product designing for function, production, handling, use and maintenance; Design for manufacturability, 
designing for economical production, design considerations in sand casting, forging, machining, grinding and welding.; 
Integrated manufacturing. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. G K Lal & Vijay Gupta, Fundamentals of design & manufacturing, Narosa Publishers 
2. Ulrich & Epinger, Product design & development, TMH Publishers
3. Ghosh & Malik, Manufacturing Science, New Age Publishers. 
ID	339 GROUP	TECHNOLOGY	AND	FMS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
GROUP TECHNOLOGY : Introduction, need of G. T. Part families, Methods for developing part families; Basic type of 
Codes – hierarchical codes, Attribute code, Hybrid code, selecting a coding system, Developing a coding system in an 
industry, examples of coding systems, MICLASS, OPITZ, CODE systems; Facility Design using, GT, Economic modeling 
in GT environment – production planning cost model, Economics of GT, Application of GT for design retrieval, CAPP, 
NIC, MR and FMS; INTRODUCTION : Manufacturing Automation, Definition and types of FMS, Architecture of FMS, 
Workpiece flow in FMS, Performance measures of FMS; WORK STATION : CNC Machines, Machine Centres, Inspection 
Stations; AUTOMATED MATERIAL HANDLING : Function of MHS, Types of Material handling equipment, Conveyor 
systems, AGVs, Industrial Robots; AUTOMATED STORAGE SYSTEMS: Characteristics of Storage Systems; COMPUTER 
CONTROL SYSTEM OF FMS : Functions of Computer, Control system architecture, Factory level, Cell level control 
systems, Equipment control systems, Factory communications, Local area networks, Data files and system reports; 
Concept of CIM – historical background –- CIM hardware – CIM software – CIM wheel - introduction to intelligent 
manufacturing system – virtual machining. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Mikell P. Groover, Automation, Production Systems, and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 2nd Edition, Reprint 2002, 
Pearson Education Asia. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. N. Viswanadham, Y. Narahari, Performance Modeling of Automated Manufacturing Systems. 
2. B. Henderson, Wolfe, Computer Integrated Design and Manufacturing. 
3. Groover and Zimmers, CAD/CAM. 
4. Y. Koren, Computer Control of Manufacturing Systems, International Edition 1983, McGraw Hill Book Co. 
ID	352 INDUSTRIAL	MECHATRONICS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction	 :	 Introduction to Mechatronics, need and applications, elements of mechatronic systems, role of 
mechatronics in automation, manufacturing and product development; Sensors	and	Feedback	Devices	:	Importance 
of sensors in Mechatronics, Static and Dynamic characteristics of sensors, errors and output impedance of sensors, 
transducers for measurement of displacement, strain, position, velocity, noise, flow, pressure, temperature, humidity, 
vibration, liquid level, vision sensors; Control Elements and Actuators : On/off push buttons, control relays, thermal 
over load relays, contactors, selector switches, solid state switches. Mechanical actuators – types of motion, gear 
trains, belt and chain drives, screw rods. Electrical actuators, solenoids, DC drives and AC variable frequency drives, 
AC and DC motors, servomotors, stepper motors, linear motors. Hydraulic and Pneumatic controls, functional diagram 
- control valves, cylinders and hydro motors; Computational	Elements	and	Controllers	:	Basic concepts of control 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
313
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
systems – open loop, closed loop, semi closed loop control system, block and functional diagrams controllers for 
robotics and CNC, linear and rotary encoders, timers, counters, microprocessors and microcontrollers: introduction, 
programming and applications, introduction to PLC, simple programs for process control application based on 
relay ladder logic-Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Systems (SCADA) and Human Machine Interface (HMI); 
Interfacing Systems : Introduction to interfacing of different hard wares in industry, need for networks in industrial 
plants, hierarchy and structure of networking, RS 232 based network, Ethernet, TCP/IP, MAP/TOP; Application	of	
Mechatronic Systems : Introduction to factory automation and integration, design of simple Mechatronics systems, 
Case studies based on the application of mechatronics in manufacturing, autotronics, bionics and avionics. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. S Cetinkunt, Mechatronics, John wiley, 2007. 
2. J Stenersons, Fundamentals of Programmable Logic Controllers Sensors and Communications, Prentice Hall, 2004. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. A. Kuttan K K, Introduction to Mechatronics, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
2. D. G. Alciatore and M. B. Histand, Introduction to Mechatronics and Measurement systems, McGraw Hill, NY, 2007. 
3. Bolton W, Mechatronics, Pearson Education Asia, New Delhi, 2004. 
4. HMT, Mechatronics, Tata McGraw Hill Publishers, New Delhi, 1998. 
5. S. Soloman, Computer Control of Manufacturing Systems, McGraw Hill, New York, 1983. 
6. K. J Ayala, 8051 Microcontroller, Architecture, Programming and Applications, Penram International, India, 1996. 
ID	357 INDUSTRIAL	AUTOMATION 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Architecture of Industrial Automation Systems, Measurement Systems Characteristics, Motion Sensing, Signal 
Conditioning, Flow Measurement, PID Control Tuning, Time Delay Systems and Inverse Response Systems, Hydraulic 
Control Systems, DC Motor Drives, Step Motor Drives BLDC Drives. 
Essential	Readings:	
Supplementary Readings: 
ID	359 INSTRUMENTATION	AND	CONTROL 3 Credits [3-0-0]
MEASUREMENT OF FORCE, TORQUE AND VELOCITY : Electric balance – Different types of load cells – Magnets – Elastic 
load cells - Strain gauge load cell – Different methods of torque measurement – Strain gauge, relative regular twist – 
Speed measurement – Revolution counter – Capacitive tacho-drag cup type tacho – D. C and A. C tacho generators 
– Stroboscope; MEASUREMENT OF ACCELERATION, VIBRATION, DENSITY AND VISCOSITY: Accelerometers – LVDT, 
piezoelectric, strain gauge and variable reluctance type accelerometers – Mechanical type vibration instruments – 
Seismic instrument as an accelerometer and vibrometer – Calibration of vibration pick-ups – Units of density, specific 
gravity and viscosity used in industries – Baume scale, API scale – Pressure head type densitometer – Float type 
densitometer – Ultrasonic densitometer – Bridge type gas densitometer – Viscosity terms – Saybolt viscometer – 
Rotameter type; PRESSURE MEASUREMENT: Units of pressure - Manometers – Different types – Elastic type pressure 
gauges – Bourdon type bellows – Diaphragms – Electrical methods – Elastic elements with LVDT and strain gauges 
– Capacitive type pressure gauge – Piezo resistive pressure sensor – Resonator pressure sensor – Measurement of 
vacuum – McLeod gauge – Thermal conductivity gauges – Ionization gauge, cold cathode and hot cathode types – 
Testing and calibration of pressure gauges – Dead weight tester; TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT: Definitions and 
standards – Primary and secondary fixed points – Calibration of thermometer, different types of filled in system 
thermometer – Sources of errors in filled in systems and their compensation – Bimetallic thermometers – Electrical 
methods of temperature measurement – Signal conditioning of industrial RTDs and their characteristics – Three lead 
and four lead RTDs; THERMOCOUPLES AND PYROMETERS: Thermocouples – Laws of thermocouple – Fabrication 
of industrial thermocouples – Signal conditioning of thermocouples output – Thermal block reference functions – 
Commercial circuits for cold junction compensation – Response of thermocouple – Special techniques for measuring 
high temperature using thermocouples – Radiation methods of temperature measurement – Radiation fundamentals 
– Total radiation & selective radiation pyrometers – Optical pyrometer – Two colour radiation pyrometers. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. E. O. Doebelin, Measurement Systems – Application and Design, Tata McGraw Hill publishing company, 2003. 
2. R. K. Jain, Mechanical and Industrial Measurements, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 1999. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. D. Patranabis, Principles of Industrial Instrumentation, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd, 1996. 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
314
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. A. K. Sawhney and P. Sawhney, A Course on Mechanical Measurements, Instrumentation and Control, Dhanpath Rai and Co, 
2004. 
3. B. C. Nakra & K. K. Chaudary, Instrumentation Measurement & Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Ltd, 2004. 
4. S. K. Singh, Industrial Instrumentation and Control, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
5. D. P. Eckman, Industrial Instrumentation, Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
ID	411 PRODUCT	DESIGN	–	II 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Product Characteristics, Product Classification, Qualities Of Product Designers And Developers, The Purpose And 
Process Of Product Design, Design Requirements and Factors, The Structure Of Design Process, Identification And 
Analysis of need, Raw Data, Customers, Standardization, Documenting and Interpretation.; Origination of Design 
Concepts, Creative Attitude, Creative Process, Creativity By Analogy, Search For Design Concepts, Morphological 
Analysis, Decision Making In Designing.; Physical Reliability, Economic And Financial Feasibility, Design Quality. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Ulrich & Epinger, Product Design And Development; T M H, ISBN-10: 007229647X, 2005. 
2. Otto, Product Design, fourth impression 2009,, Pearson, ISBN: 8177588214
3. Roozenburg & J. Eekels, Product Design, Fundamentals and Methods, Willey publications, 2008. 
ID	414 ERGONOMIC	AND	AESTHETIC	DESIGN 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to man machine systems and ergonomics, Human factors in design and engineering, Needs of ergonomics 
and aesthetic design, Physiological aspects of work, Work measurement through physiological tests, Work physiology, 
Paced and unpaced work performance, Data logging, data collection, data reduction and analysis techniques, Gross 
human anatomy, Anthropometry, Bio mechanics, muscle strength and exertion potential of different limbs, Work 
capacity, Environmental effects, exercises for evaluation of pastural form and work spaces, Environmental conditions 
including temperature, illumination, noise and vibration. Perception and information processing, design of displays, 
hand control, typography, and readability, layout and composition, Exercises in evaluation of human response to 
product interface, product safety and product liability, Design consideration for appearance, colour, texture and 
forms. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. D. C. Alexander, Applied Ergonomics, Taylor & Francis, 2005, ISBN- O-203-30259-1
2. Jan Dul, Ergonomics for Beginners, Taylor & Francis, 2008
3. David Pye, The Nature & Aesthetics of Design, Cambium Press, 1999. 
ID	416 THERMAL	CONSIDERATIONS	IN	DESIGN 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Prerequisites:	ME	250
Introduction to computational methods in thermal engineering & fluid mechanics, Thermal Stresses: formulation 
of thermo elastic problems, basic equations, displacement and stress formulation in rectangular plate and free 
plate with temperature variation through thickness, thermal stresses in thick cylinders, circular discs, spheres and 
beams with arbitrary cross section.; Thermal Design objectives, principles of thermal design, system simulation and 
optimization, Modelling of static and dynamic systems, Steady state and dynamic behaviour of the thermal systems, 
Design considerations of instruments, heat exchangers and refrigeration systems. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. L S Srinath, Advanced mechanics of solids- TMH, ISBN: 0070139881, 2009
2. Kakac, Heat exchangers: Thermal and Hydraulic Fundamentals and Design- ISBN: 0070332843 / 0-07-033284-3
3. Barron & Randall, Design for Thermal Stresses, ISBN-10: 0-470-62769-7 John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
ID	418 RAPID	PRODUCT	DEVELOPMENT	&	TECHNIQUES 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Overview of Rapid Product Development: Product Developing Cycle, Components of RPD, Classification of 
manufacturing processes; Preprocessing: Solid Modeling, Data exchange formats, STL file format, RP Preprocessing; 
Rapid Prototyping (RP): Introduction to RP, Need of RP; Basic Principles of RP, Steps in RP, Process chain in RP in 
integrated CAD-CAM environment, Advantages of RP, Classifications of different RP techniques, Selection of RP 
processes, Issues in RP, Emerging trends; RP Techniques: Solid RP, liquid RP techniques and Powder RP Techniques 
– Process Technology and Comparative study of Selective laser sintering, Selective powder binding, etc; Rapid 
Tooling (RT): Introduction to RT, Indirect RT processes – silicon rubber molding, epoxy tooling, spray metal tooling 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
315
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and investment casting. Direct RT processes – laminated tooling, powder metallurgy based technologies, welding 
based technologies, direct pattern making, emerging trends in RT; Reverse Engineering: Geometric data acquisition, 
3D reconstruction. Applications and case studies: Engineering applications, Medical applications; Special Topic on 
RP, Programming in RP, Modelling, Slicing, Internal Hatching, Surface Skin Fills, Support Structure. Overview of the 
algorithms for RP & T and Reverse Engineering. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Kai, C. C. and Fai L. H., Rapid Prototyping: Principles and Applications in Manufacturing, John Wiley and sons, 1997. 
2. Jacobs, P. F., Rapid Prototyping and Manufacturing, SME/ASME, 1996
3. Zeid, I., CAD/CAM – Theory and Practice, TMH, 2006. 
4. Faux, D. and Pratt, M. J., Computational Geometry for Design and Manufacture, John Wiley and Sons, 1979. 
ID	430 PROJECT MANAGEMENT 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Project Management Concepts: Concept and characteristics of a project, importance of project management, 
types of project, project organizational structure, projectlifecycle, Statement of Work, Work Breakdown Structure; 
Project Planning: Project Planning and Scheduling techniques: developing the project network USING CPM/PERT, 
constructing network diagram, AON basics, Forward Pass and backward pass, Limitations of CPM/PERT, Precedence 
Diagramming Method, constructing diagram and computations using precedence diagramming method, PERT/CPM 
simulation, reducingprojectduration; Resource Scheduling: Resource allocation method, splitting and multitasking, 
Multi project resources scheduling; Critical ChainScheduling: Concept of critical chain scheduling; critical chain 
scheduling method, application of Critical chain scheduling and limitations; ProjectQuality Management : Concept 
of project quality, responsibility for quality in projects, quality management at different stages of project, tools 
and techniques, Quality Management Systems, TQM in projects; ProjectperformanceMeasurement and Control: 
Monitor and assess project performance, schedule, and cost. EarnedvalueManagement, performance measurement. 
methods to monitor, evaluate, and control planned cost and scheduleperformance; Project Closure/ Termination: 
Meaning of closure/ termination, project audit process, termination steps, final closure; ManagingProjectTeams: 
Team development process, team building process, stages in developing a high performance project team, project 
team pitfalls; IT in Projects: Overview of types of softwares for projects, major features of softwares like MS Project, 
criterion for software selection. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. C. F Gray, E. W Larson, Project Management-The Managerial Process, Tata Mcgraw-Hill Publishing Co Ltd. 
2. J. Meredith, S. J. Mantel Jr., Project Management- A Managerial Approach, John Wiley and Sons. 
3. J. M Nicholas, Project Management For Business And Technology, Prentice Hall of India Pvt Ltd. 
4. J. P Lewis, Project Planning, Scheduling And Control, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co Ltd. 
ID	435 MEMS	AND	NEMS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Module 01: Historical Background: Silicon Pressure sensors, Micromachining, Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. 
Microfabrication and Micromachining: Integrated Circuit Processes. Potential of MEMS in industry; Module 02 : Bulk 
Micromachining : Isotropic Etching and Anisotropic Etching, Wafer Bonding, High Aspect-Ratio Processes (LIGA); 
Module 03 : Physical Microsensors: Classification of physical sensors, Integrated, Intelligent, or Smart sensors, 
Sensor Principles and Examples: Thermal sensors, Electrical Sensors, Mechanical Sensors, Chemical and Biosensors. 
Microactuators: Electromagnetic and Thermal microactuation, Mechanical design of microactuators, Microactuator 
examples, microvalves, micropumps, micromotors Microactuator systems: Success Stories, Ink-Jet printer heads, 
Micro-mirror TV Projector; Module 04 : Microstereolithography (MSL) for 3D fabrication, Two photon MSL, Dynamic 
mask MSL, scanning systems, Optomechatronics system for MSL. Ceramic and Metal Microstereolithography; Module 
05 : Ceramic and Metal Microstereolithography. Scattering of light by small particles. Effect of particle properties on 
accuracy and resolution of component in Ceramic and Metal MSL. Monte carlo ray tracing method. Nanolithography; 
Module 06 : Surface Micromaching: One or two sacrificial layer processes, Surface micromachining requirements, 
Polysilicon surface micromachining, Other compatible materials, Silicon Dioxide, Silicon, Micromotors, Gear trains, 
Mechanisms. Characterisation of MEMS devices. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Vijay Vardan, MEMS, Wiley Publication. 
2. Tai- Ran Hsu, MEMS and Microsytems Design and Manufacture, Tata McGraw Hill. 
3. Nitaigour Mahalik, MEMS, Tata McGraw Hill. 
4. Rai Chaoudhary, MEMS and MOEMS Technology and Applications, PHI Learning. 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
316
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Stephen D. Senturia, Microsystem Design, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
2. Marc Madou, Fundamentals of Microfabrication, CRC Press
3. Kovacs, Micromachine Transducers Sourcebook, WCB McGraw-Hill, Boston
4. M-H. Bao, Elsevier, Micromechanical Transducers: Pressure sensors, accelerometers, and gyroscopes, New York, 2000. 
ID	437 INDUSTRIAL	ENGINEERING	&	OPERATION	RESEARCH 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction	:	Evolution of industrial engineering – fields and functions; industrial productivity – types, measurement; 
work systems engineering – recording tools and techniques, motion study, PMTS, therbligs, work sampling, work 
measurement, rating systems, ergonomics; Plant	Design	 :	Plant location – decision analysis; plant layout –types, 
characteristics, design techniques-systematic layout planning (SLP), computerized relative allocation of facilities 
technique (CRAFT); material handling principles – equipments; introduction to line balancing; Production	Planning	
and Control : Functions - demand management – forecasting techniqyes, forecast errors – sources; scheduling – basics 
– single machine scheduling; flow shop scheduling; job shop scheduling, heuristic procedures; priority dispatching 
rules; Operations	Research	:	Origin, scope, areas of application; mathematical modeling and solving a problem; linear 
programming – problem formulation, deriving the solution – graphical, simplex methods; Transportational	Model	:	
Formulation, solution – northwest corner, Vogel’s, stepping stone, MODI methods; degeneracy; Assignment models – 
Hungarian algorithm; Sequencing models – processing ‘n’ jobs through two machines and three machines, processing 
two job through ‘n’ machines; Inventory	Models	:	Classification of fixed order quantity models, deterministic demand 
models – types, inventory models with probabilistic demand, price breaks, quantity discount, safety stocks, selective 
inventory control techniques; Queuing	Models	:	Elements, operating characteristics; single channel queuing theory 
– models for arrival and service times; models for multichannel queuing theory. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. F. S Hillier and G. J Liberman, Introduction to Operations Research, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi, 2006. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. P K Gupta and D S Hira, Operations Research, S Chand & Co., New Delhi, 2008. 
2. R Paneerselvam, Production and Operations Management, Prentice Hall of India (P) Ltd., 2007. 
3. H. A Taha, Operations Research : An Introduction, Prentice Hall of India, 2002. 
4. E. S Buffa, Modern Production / Operations Management, Wiley Eastern, 1991. 
5. M. Telsang, Industrial Engineering and Production Management, S. Chand and Co Ltd. 
6. O. P. Khanna, Industrial Engineering and Management, Dhanpat Rai Pub. 
ID	439 DESIGN	OF	PRODUCTION	TOOLING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Tool	Design	:	Tool design objectives - tool design in manufacturing, planning the design, challenges to the tool designer, 
production devices - Inspection devices; Principles	of	Supporting	and	Locating	Elements	:	Referencing, basic rules of 
locating, planes of movement, locating from a flat surface, locating from a internal diameter, locating from a external 
diameter, locating from extemal profile, ejectors; principles of clamping and work holding - principles of work holders, 
basic rules of clamping, types of clamps, chucks and vises, non mechanical clamping, clamping accessories. Materials 
used in Jigs and Fixtures; Design	of	Jigs	:	Drill bushes - different types of jigs-plate latch, channel, box, post, angle 
plate, angular post, turnover, pot jigs-Automatic drill jigs-Rack and pinion operated, air operated jigs components, 
design and development of jigs for given components, cost estimation; Design	of	Fixtures	 :	General principles of 
boring, lathe, milling and broaching fixtures- Grinding fixtures, assembly, Inspection and welding fixtures- Modular 
fixtures. Design and development of fixtures for given component. Fixtures for CNC Machining centres; chucks for 
CNC lathes - power operated 3 jaw chucks, closed centre, open centre, centrifugal force compensated, indexing, 
diaphragm, face driving, face clamping, pull back! ball lock; Power	Presses	 :	Press working terminology, different 
types of presses, press brakes, shearing machines, CNC Turret punch and bending, press accessories, computation 
of capacities and tonnage requirements; Design	of	Progressive	and	Compound	Dies:	Design and development of 
progressive and compound dies for blanking and piercing operations. Die block-die shoe. Bolster plate-punch plate-
punch holder-guide pins and bushes, strippers, knockouts, stops, pilots, selection of standard die sets strip layout-
strip layout calculations; Manufacturing	of	 Punches	 and	Dies:	CNC WIRE CUT, EDM; Forming	Dies:	Drawing die, 
stamping die, forging die; Design	of	Plastic	Injection	Molding	Dies:	Introduction to plastics, various plastic processing 
process and machines, two plate injection mold assembly design, design of gates, runners, ejectors, under cut molds, 
finger cam design, three plate injection mold, hot / runner less mold, mold materials, mold manufacturing, polishing. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Donaldson C, Tool Design, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2003. 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
317
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. R G W PYE, Injection Mold Design, Longman, 1991. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Edward G Hoffman, Jigs and Fixture Design, Thomson - Delmar Learning, Singapore 2004. 
2. Joshi P H, Jigs and Fixtures, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi 2004. 
3. Hiram E Grant, Jigs and Fixture, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2003. 
4. Tool Design, SME, 2003. 
5. Kempster, Jigs and Fixtures Design, The English Language Book Society, 1998. 
6. ASTME, Fundamentals of Tool Design, Prentice Hall, 1987. 
ID	446 QUALITY	CONTROL	TECHNIQUES	AND	RELIABILITY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction	and	Process	Control	For	Variables	:	Introduction, definition of quality, basic concept of quality, definition 
of SQC, benefits and limitation of SQC, Quality assurance, Quality cost-Variation in process- factors – process capability 
– process capability studies and simple problems – Theory of control chart- uses of control chart – Control chart for 
variables – X chart, R chart and ? chart; Process	Control	For	Attributes:	Control chart for attributes –control chart for 
proportion or fraction defectives – p chart and np chart – control chart for defects – C and U charts, State of control 
and process out of control identification in charts; Acceptance Sampling: Lot by lot sampling – types – probability 
of acceptance in single, double, multiple sampling techniques – O. C. curves – producer’s Risk and consumer’s Risk. 
AQL, LTPD, AOQL concepts-standard sampling plans for AQL and LTPD- uses of standard sampling plans. Life	Testing	–	
Reliability: Life testing – Objective – failure data analysis, Mean failure rate, mean time to failure, mean time between 
failure, hazard rate, system reliability, series, parallel and mixed configuration – simple problems. Maintainability and 
availability – simple problems. Acceptance sampling based on reliability test – O. C Curves. Quality	and	Reliablity:	
Reliability improvements – techniques- use of Pareto analysis – design for reliability – redundancy unit and standby 
redundancy – Optimization in reliability – Product design – Product analysis – Product development – Product life 
cycles. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Grant, Eugene. L Statistical Quality Control, McGraw-Hill, 1996. 
2. L. S. Srinath, Reliability Engineering, Affiliated East west press, 1991. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Monohar Mahajan, Statistical Quality Control, Dhanpat Rai & Sons, 2001. 
2. R. C. Gupta, Statistical Quality Control, Khanna Publishers, 1997. 
3. Besterfield D. H., Quality Control, Prentice Hall, 1993. 
4. Sharma S. C., Inspection Quality Control and Reliability, Khanna Publishers, 1998. 
5. Connor, P. D. T. O., Practical Reliability Engineering, John Wiley, 1993. 
ID	456 INDUSTRIAL	ROBOTICS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
INTRODUCTION: Fundamental concepts of robotics, history, present status and future trends, robotics and 
automation, laws of robotics, robot definition, robotics systems and robot anatomy, specification of robots, resolution, 
repeatability and accuracy of a manipulator; MANIPULATORS: Robot drive mechanisms, hydraulic, electric, pneumatic 
drives, mechanical transmission method, rotary-to-rotary motion conversion, rotary-to-linear motion conversion, 
robot drives, power transmission systems and control, control of actuators in robotic mechanisms; END EFFECTORS: 
Unilateral grippers, bilateral grippers, multi-lateral grippers, mechanical grippers, types of gripper mechanism, remote 
centered compliance devices; TRANSFORMATION AND KINEMATICS: Homogeneous coordinates, homogeneous 
transformation and manipulator, forward solution, inverse solution, motion generation, Jacobian control; SENSORS: 
Internal state sensors, external state sensors, sensory devices, non-optical position sensors, optical. Position sensors, 
velocity sensors, proximity sensors, contact and non-contact type, touch and slip sensors, force and torque sensors; 
MACHINE VISION: Robot vision systems, imaging components, image representation, hardware aspects, picture 
coding, object recognition and categorization, visual inspection, software considerations, applications, commercial 
robotic vision systems; PROGRAMMING AND APPLICATIONS: Computational elements in robotic applications, robot 
programming - sample programs, path planning, robot’s computer system, capabilities of robots, robotic applications, 
obstacle avoidance, AI and robotics, robotics in India, the future of robotics. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Richaerd D Klafter, Thomas Achmielewski and Mickael Negin, Robotic Engineering - An Integrated Approach, Prentice Hall 
Department of Industrial Design
Detail Syllabi
318
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
India, New Delhi, 2001. 
2. Mikell P Groover, Industrial Robotics - Technology, Programming and Applications, McGraw Hill, 1986. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. James A Rehg, Introduction to Robotics in CIM Systems, Prentice Hall of India, 2002. 
2. Deb S R, Robotics Technology and Flexible Automation, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1994. 
3. Janaki Raman P A, Robotics and Image Processing, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991. 
ID	458 DESIGN	OF	MANUFACTURE	AND	ASSEMBLY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
DFM	Approach,	Selection	and	Substitution	of	Materials:	DFM approach, DFM guidelines, standardisation, group 
technology, value engineering, comparison of materials on cost basis, design for assembly, DFA index, Poka - Yoke 
principle; 60’ concept; Geometric	Dimensioning	and	Tolerancing	:	Introduction to GD & T, ASME Y 14. 5 standard. 
Examples for application of geometric tolerances. True Position Theory - Comparison between co-ordinate and 
convention method of feature location, tolerancing and true position tolerancing, virtual size concept, floating and 
fixed fasteners, projected tolerance zone, zero true position tolerance, functional gauges, paper layout gauging, 
compound assembly, examples; Tolerance Analysis: Process capability, process capability metrics, Cp, Cpk, cost 
aspects, feature tolerances, surface finish, review of relationship between attainable tolerance grades and different 
machining process, cumulative effect of tolerances, sure fit law, normal law and truncated normal law, obtainable 
tolerances in axial dimensions for various machining operations; Selective	Assembly:	Interchangeable and selective 
assembly, deciding the number of groups-model-I: group tolerances of mating parts equal; model-II: total and group 
tolerances of shaft, control of axial play-introducing secondary machining operations, laminated shims, examples; 
Datum	Systems:	Degrees of freedom, grouped datum systems-different types, two and three mutually perpendicular 
grouped datum planes, grouped datum system with spigot and recess, pin and hole, grouped datum system with 
spigot and recess pair and tongue-slot pair-computation of translational and rotational accuracy, geometric analysis 
and applications; Form	Design	of	Castings	and	Weldments:	Redesign of castings based on parting line considerations, 
minimising core requirements, redesigning cast members using weldments, use of welding symbols, design of 
weldments; Tolerance	Charting	Technique:	Operation sequence for typical shaft type of components, preparation of 
process drawings for different operations, tolerance worksheets and centrality analysis, examples, design features to 
facilitate machining, datum features - functional and manufacturing, component design-machining considerations, 
redesign for manufacture, examples. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. Harry Peck, Designing for Manufacture, Pitman Publications, London, 1983. 
2. Matousek R, Engineering Design - A Systematic Approach, Blackie and Son Ltd., London, 1974. 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Creveling C M, Tolerance Design - A Hand Book for Developing Optimal Specifications, Addison Wesley Longman Inc., USA, 
1997. 
2. Mamboed M Farag, Material Selection for Engineering Design, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1997. 
3. Pahl G and Beitz W, Engineering Design-Systematic Approach, Springer Verlag Pub., New York, 1996. 
4. Poka-Yoke Improving Product Quality by Preventing Defects, Productivity Press, New York, 1992. 
5. Trucks HE, Design for Economic Production, Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Michigan, 1987. 
6. Spotts M F, Dimensioning and Tolerance for Quantity Production, Prentice Hall Inc., New Jersey, 1983. 
7. James G Bralla, Hand Book of Product Design for Manufacturing, McGraw Hill Publications, New York, 1983. 
8. Oliver R Wade, Tolerance Control in Design and Manufacturing, Industrial Press Inc., New York, 1967. 
Department of Industrial Design
9 
 
DETAILED COURSE SYLLABUS 
B. TECH. (FOOD PROCESS ENGINEERING) 
 
A. CORE COURSES 
FP 201 Food Microbiology 4 credits [3-1-0] 
 
Objectives: To get in-depth knowledge of food borne microorganisms, their growth, and detection, con-
trol and food preservation 
Syllabus:  
Introduction: scope of food microbiology; Microorganisms important in food industry; Types of microor-
ganisms, their importance in foods, classification of food borne bacteria, their  morphology and distin-
guishing features with examples; Growth of microorganisms in foods; Intrinsic (pH, moisture content, 
redox potential, nutrient content, antimicrobial constituents and biological structures ) and extrinsic fac-
tors (temp., RH, presence and concentration of gases) governing growth of microorganisms in food; 
Food spoilage: Chemical changes caused by microorganisms in foods (breakdown of proteins, carbohy-
drates, fats and other constituents during spoilage), specific microorganisms causing spoilage of milk 
and milk products, meat, fish, egg, cereals, fruits, vegetables and their processed products, quality de-
fects in canned foods, sugar and confectionary products; Food fermentations: General description of 
fermenters, parts and their functions, different types of fermentations (static, submerged, agitated, 
batch, continuous). Microbial culture selection by screening methods and strain improvement. Starter 
cultures - definition, types, Fermentation - definition, types (acid, alcohol). Fermented foods - types, 
methods of manufacture for vinegar, ethyl alcohol, cheese, yoghurt, baker’s yeast and  traditional Indian 
foods; Microbial Foodborne Diseases: Introduction, types of microbial foodborne diseases (foodborne 
intoxications and foodborne infections), symptoms and prevention of some commonly occurring food 
borne diseases; Food Preservation: Principles of preservation, methods of food preservation – high tem-
perature, low temperature, drying, radiation, chemical preservatives, bio-preservatives, hurdle technol-
ogy, active packaging, novel processing technologies. 
Recommended Books: 
1.  Food Microbiology, TMH, New Delhi by W C Frazier & D C  Westhoff 
2.  Modern Food Microbiology, CBS Publication, New Delhi by J M Jay 
3.  Essentials of Food Microbiology, Arnold, London by John  Garbutt 
4.  Microbiology,5
th Ed., TMH, New Delhi by M J Pelczar, E C S Chan and Noel R Krieg  
5.  Microbiology of Safe Food, Blackwell Science, Oxford by S J Forsythe   
6.  Fundamentals of Food Microbiology AVI Publishing Co. Inc., Connecticut, USA by M L Fields 
7.  Microbiology of foods by J C Ayres, J O Mundt, W E Sandine, W H Freeman  
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 201 Food Microbiology             
10 
 
FP 271 Engineering Properties of Biological Materials Laboratory 2 credits [1-0-2] 
Objectives: To learn various engineering properties of biological materials. 
Syllabus: 
Determination of physical dimension and average particle size of food grains, Determination of bulk 
density, true density and porosity of  grains, Determination of volume and specific gravity of fruits De-
termination of roundness and roundness ratio of biological materials, Determination of sphericity of bio-
logical materials, Determination of angle of repose of food grain samples, Determination of frictional 
properties of biological material, Determination of aerodynamic properties of biomaterial, To study the 
separating behaviour of a grain sample in a vertical wind tunnel (aspirator column), Determination of 
moisture content of sample by direct and in-direct methods, Measurement of (grain, fruit) hardness 
(Moh’s hardness test), compressive strength, Determine flow parameters of Newtonian, Non Newtonian 
food products by: Capillary tube, viscometer, Hakke’s viscometer, Rotational viscometer and Falling ball 
viscometer. Viscosity measurement using (RVA, Brookfield viscometer), Texture Profile Analysis of dif-
ferent food samples, Optical properties measurement using hunter Lab/CIE colour system, Optical prop-
erties measurement using Spectrophotometer, Optical properties measurement using Tintometer, To 
determine specific heat of some food grains, To find the thermal conductivity of different grains. To find 
the electrical impendence of the grain 
 
Recommended Books / Manuals 
1 Physical Properties of Plant and Animal Materials, 2nd Ed, Gordon & Breach Science Publisher 
by N.N. Mohsenin 
2 Thermal properties of food and agricultural materials, Gordon & Breach Science Publisher by 
N.N. Mohsenin 
3 Electromagnetic radiation properties of food and agricultural materials, Gordon & Breach Sci-
ence Publisher by N.N. Mohsenin 
4 Engineering Properties of Foods,3rd Ed, CRC Press by Rao, Rizvi & Dutta 
5 Practical Manual on Post Harvest Technology, Published by Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 
by R. C. Pradhan and P. P. Said. 
 
 
FP 273 Food Microbiology Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
 
Objectives: To learn basics of microbiology in food processing 
Syllabus:  
Basic food microbiology laboratory procedures and culture techniques. Enumeration of microorganisms 
in foods by most probable technique. Microbiological examination of raw and pasteurized milk. Evalua-
tion of microbial quality of milk by dye reduction test. Estimation of total bacterial count, coliform count 
and mold of fruit juices. Enumeration of pychrotrophic, thermoduric and thermophilic bacteria in food 
sample. Enumeration of anaerobic spore forming bacteria in canned foods. Isolation of pure culture. 
Isolation and enumeration of microorganisms in food. Procedures of quality assurance in food microbi-
ology laboratory. Maintenance of food microbiology lab equipment and instrument. Microbiological 
standards of food and lab auditing. 
11 
 
Recommended Books: 
1. Food Microbiology Laboratory by McLandsborough. CRC Press 
2. Laboratory Methods in Food Microbiology by Harrigan. Gulf Professional Publishing 
3. Practical Food Microbiology by Diane Roberts, Melody Greenwood, Wiley 
4. Laboratory Manual of Food Microbiology by Garg, Garg, Mukerji.  
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 273 Food Microbiology laboratory             
 
FP 210 Food Chemistry 4 credits [3-1-0] 
Objective: To learn fundamentals of food chemistry. 
Syllabus:  
Food chemistry and its role in food processing. Water: Importance of water in foods, Structure of water 
& ice, Concept of bound and free water and their implications. Proteins: Nomenclature, classification, 
structure, chemistry and properties of amino acids, peptides, proteins; Essential and non-essential ami-
no acids, Qualitative and quantitative analysis of amino acids and proteins, Changes during food pro-
cessing. Carbohydrates: Nomenclature and classification, structure, physical and chemical properties of 
polysaccharides and their functions; Qualitative and quantitative analysis of carbohydrates; changes in 
carbohydrates during food processing. Lipids: Structure, classification, physical and chemical properties, 
utilization of fats and oils, margarine, shortenings, salad and cooking oils, importance of fats and oils in 
diet, introduction to hydrogenation and its importance. Browning reactions: Enzymatic and non-
enzymatic browning, advantages and disadvantages, factors affecting their reaction and control. Vita-
mins and minerals: Types of vitamins and minerals, chemistry and functions, sources and deficiency dis-
eases. Plant pigment: Importance, structure and properties of plant pigments, chemical changes of in 
pigments during food processing. Flavour and aroma of foods: Importance, structure and properties of 
flavouring and aromatic components of foods.  
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Food Chemistry by Meyer 
2. Food Chemistry by Fennema 
3. Food Chemistry by Belitz 
4. Basic Food Chemistry by Lee 
5. Principles of Biochemistry by Lehnninger 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 210 Food Chemistry             
 
 
12 
 
 
FP 212 Processing of Food Grains and Horticultural Products 4 credits [3-1-0] 
 
Objective: To learn various processes and methods of Food Grain and Horticultural Processing 
Syllabus: 
Production, Economics, and processing scenario of Food grains. Classification, structure and physico-
chemical properties and thermal properties of Food grains; Unit operations and equipment for Food 
Grain Processing , Processing and storage of cereals, pulses and oil seeds. Commercial processing of 
Paddy, wheat, Corns, Barley, Millets, Pulses and Oil seeds. 
Production and processing scenario of horticultural products; basics of ripening, maturity, harvesting, 
handling, packaging, transport, storage and Quality of fruits and vegetables. Principles, unit operations 
and Equipment for processing and preservation of fruits and vegetables. Processing technology for jam, 
jelly, marmalade, preserve, pickles, chutneys, ketchups, sauces, beverages, powder and canned prod-
ucts.   
Recommended Books 
1. Post harvest technology of Cereals, Pulses and Oil Seeds by A Chakravarti 
2. Unit Operations in Agricultural Processing by Sahay and Singh 
3. Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables, by Lal, Siddappa and Tandon 
4. Fruit and Vegetable Preservation: Principles and Practices by Srivastava and Kumar 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 212 
Processing of Food Grains and Horti-
cultural Products 
            
 
 
FP 224 Unit Operations in Food Processing 4 credits [3-1-0] 
Objective: To learn various unit operations involved in food processing 
Syllabus: 
Cleaning, Sorting, Grading, Size reduction: Grinding, Cutting, Emulsification, homogenization, energy 
concept in size reduction, Kick's law, Rittinger's law, Bond’s law. Grinding and milling equipment. Me-
chanical separations: Sedimentation and filtration, Sieving / Screening, Sieve analysis. Basics of various 
Unit Operations: Evaporation, Drying, Dehydration, Pasteurization, Sterilization, Blanching, Chilling, 
Freezing, Parboiling, Extrusion, Frying, Baking, Roasting, Puffing, Agitation and mixing, Irradiation and 
non-thermal processing operations. Utilities and Sanitation in Food Processing. 
Recommended Books: 
13 
 
1. Post harvest technology of Cereals, Pulses and Oil Seeds by Chakravarti 
2. Unit Operations of Chemical Engg by McCabe and Smith 
3. Unit operations in Agril processing by Sahay  and Singh 
4. Unit Operations in Food Processing by Earle 
5. Food Processing Technology: Principles and Practice by Fellows 
6. Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering by Toledo 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 224 Unit Operations in Food Processing             
 
 
FP 272 Food Chemistry Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
Objective: To learn basic chemistry of Food 
Syllabus: 
Estimation of moisture content in a given food sample, Estimation of reducing sugars by Lane and Eynon 
method, Estimation of crude fibre content in food samples, Determination of protein by Kjeldahl’s 
method, Estimation of total ash, acid soluble and water soluble ash, Extraction of fat from given food 
sample by Soxhlet apparatus, Determination of smoke point and percent fat absorption for different fats 
and oils, Determination of percent free fatty acids in given food sample, Estimation of peroxide value in 
fats and oils, Estimation of iodine value in oils, Estimation of saponification value in oils, Determination 
of refractive index of fats and oils, Determination of specific gravity of fats and oils, Estimation of antinu-
tritional factors (Trypsin inhibitor) in foods, Determination of carotenoids with respect to flour pigments, 
Estimation of water activity in a given sample of food 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 272 Food Chemistry Laboratory             
 
   
FP 274 Food Grains Processing Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
Objective: To learn various processes and methods of Food Grain and Horticultural Processing 
Syllabus: 
Physical properties of cereals, pulses and oil seeds, Milling Characteristics of Food Grains, Size reduction 
and sieve analysis. Study of temperature and time on parboiling of rice, Effect of parboiling on nutrient 
content of paddy. Determination of cooking quality of rice, Determination of gelatinization temperature 
of rice, Study on cooking quality of pulses. Determination of Oil Content. Methods for Oil expressions.   
 
Course Outcomes POs 
14 
 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 274 Food Grains Processing Laboratory             
 
FP 331 Heat and Mass Transfer   4 credits [3-1-0] 
Objective: To learn the basic concept of heat and mass transfer in food processing 
Syllabus:  
Introductory concepts, modes of heat transfer, thermal conductivity of materials, measurement. Gen-
eral differential equation of conduction. One dimensional steady state conduction through plane and 
composite walls, tubes and spheres with and without heat generation. Electrical analogy. Insulation ma-
terials, critical thickness of insulation. Fins, Free and forced convection. Newton’s law of cooling, heat 
transfer coefficient in convection. Dimensional analysis of free and forced convection. Useful non di-
mensional numbers and empirical relationships for free and forced convection. Equation of laminar 
boundary layer on flat plate and in a tube. Laminar forced convection on  a flat plate and in a tube. 
Combined free and forced convection. Introduction. Absorptivity, reflectivity and transmissivity of radia-
tion. Black body and monochromatic radiation, Planck’s law, Stefan-Boltzman law, Kirchoff’s law, grey 
bodies and emissive power, solid angle, intensity of radiation. Radiation exchange between black sur-
faces, geometric configuration factor. Heat transfer analysis involving conduction, convection and radia-
tion by networks. Types of heat exchangers, fouling factor, log mean temperature difference, heat ex-
changer performance, transfer units. Heat exchanger analysis restricted to parallel and counter flow 
heat exchangers. Steady state molecular diffusion in fluids at rest and in laminar flow, Flick’s law, mass 
transfer coefficients. Reynold’s analogy. 
 
Recommended Books: 
1. Biological and Bioenvironmental Heat and Mass Transfer  by Datta 
2. Heat And Mass Transfer By Nag  
3. Heat And Mass Transfer , Second Edition by Sawhney 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 331 Heat and Mass Transfer             
 
 
FP 333 Dairy Process Engineering   4 credits [3-1-0] 
 
Objective: To understand the principles of Dairy processing and milk products processing 
Syllabus: 
Milk reception and principals of milk processing: milk storage, bulk cooling, stirring and mixing, pasteuri-
zation, sterilization, centrifugation, homogenization, evaporation and condensation. Spray drying of 
15 
 
milk, principle and equipment: spray dryer, cyclone separator. Manufacturing of milk products and prin-
ciples of processing of cheese, ice-cream, butter, special milk products, casein, whey, curd, butter milk 
etc. Equipment for indigenous milk products manufacturing.  Milk ultra-filtration and reverse osmosis. 
Filling Operations: Principles and working of different types of bottle filters and capping machine, pouch 
filling machine, pre-pack and aseptic filling.  Filling and Packaging machines for milk and milk products, 
aseptic packaging. Bulk milk handling system, care and maintenance.  Hygienic design concepts, sanitary 
pipes and fittings, CIP system.  Preventive maintenance program for Dairy Plant. Maintenance organiza-
tion, development of optimum organization planned overhaul and PERT planning, Utilities and sanita-
tion in processing plant.  
Recommended Books: 
1. Engineering for dairy and food products by A W Farrall. John Wiley and Sons 
2. Outlines of dairy technology by Sukumar De. Oxford University Press  
3. Dairy Plant System and Layout by Tufail Ahmed, Kitab Mahal, Allahabad 
 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Indian dairy products by K S Rangappa Asia Publishing House 
2. Cheese and Butter by V. Cheke and A. Sheeprd,  Agrobios (India) 
3. Dairy chemistry and biochemistry by P F Fox and PLH McSweeney, Blackie Academic and Profes-
sional, An Imprint of Chapman & Hall, London. 
4. Milk and Milk Products by Eckles and Eckles 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 333 Dairy Process Engineering             
 
 
FP 335 Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineering 4credits [3-1-0] 
Objective: To study the principles of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration systems and 
enable students to achieve effective and efficient design solutions.  
Syllabus: 
Fundamentals of refrigeration and air conditioning. Refrigerating Machine: The second law interpreta-
tion, heat engine, heat pump and refrigerating machine. Carnot Cycle. Methods of Producing Low Tem-
peratures. Types of Refrigeration Systems: Air cycle refrigeration systems, vapour compression refrigera-
tion systems, vapour absorption refrigeration systems. Vapour Compression System: Components of 
vapour compression refrigeration system, coefficient of performance. Cycle Diagrams and Simple Satu-
rated Cycles: Different types of refrigerants, desirable properties of refrigerants, safety and economical 
aspects. Air Conditioning: Mixing process, basic processes in conditioning of air, psychrometric processes 
in air conditioning. Air conditioning system, state and mass rate of supply air. Applications of Refrigera-
tion in Food Processing and Preservation: cold store, automated cold stores, security of operations, cold 
storage for fruits and vegetables. Principles of refrigeration of boned, boxed and processed meats, pork 
and bacon, poultry, fish and seafood. Refrigeration of milk and milk products, ice-cream, ice lollies, 
16 
 
brewing, wines and spirits, soft drinks. Cooling of bakery products, cook/chill process, chocolate enrob-
ing. Refrigerated transport, handling and distribution, cold chain, refrigerated product handling, order 
picking, refrigerated vans and refrigerated display. Refrigeration load estimation. 
 
Recommended Books: 
1. Principles of Refrigeration by Dossat R.J. Published by John Wiley 
3. Advances in food refrigeration by Da Wen Sun. Published by Woodhead Publishing Limited, UK 
Supplementary Reading:  
1. Refrigeration and Air-conditioning by CP Arora. Published by Tata McGraw Hill 
2. Refrigeration and Air-conditioning by Manohar Prasad. Published by New Age publications. 
3. Commercial Cooling of Fruits and Vegetables by Thompson. Published by Univ. of California 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 335 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 
Engineering 
            
 
FP 337 Food Packaging and Storage Engineering 4 credits [3-1-0] 
 
Objective: Understanding of food packaging development, packaging systems and analyze complex sys-
tems of food packaging and logistics with simulation models.  
Syllabus: 
Function of packaging, marketing consideration for a package and types of packaging. Barrier properties 
of packaging material, gas permeation rates- oxygen transmission rate (OTR), water vapour transmission 
rate (WVTR), bursting strength, tensile strength, tearing strength, drop test, puncture test, etc. Packag-
ing materials for foods.  Selection criteria of packaging materials for raw and processed food products. 
Machinery for Packaging: Form fill and seal machines, vacuum packaging machine, shrink wrap packag-
ing machine and multilayer packaging system. Package labelling: functions, nutrition labelling, ingredient 
characterization handling instruction, and regulations; Shelf life of packaged food: water activity and 
prediction of shelf life. Packaging logistics. Food Storage: Importance of scientific storage systems, post-
harvest physiology of semi-perishables and perishables, climacteric and non-climacteric fruits, respira-
tion, ripening, changes during ripening, ethylene biosynthesis.  Product damages during storage. Storage 
structures: Traditional, improved and modern storage structures; farm silos. Stored grain management 
and aeration:  moisture and temperature changes in stored grains; conditioning of environment inside 
storage, purposes of aeration, aeration theory and aeration system operation. Storage pests and con-
trol: Damage due to storage insects, pests, rodents and its control. Storage of perishables: cold storage, 
controlled and modified atmospheric storage, hypoboric storage, evaporative cooling storage, condi-
tions for storage of perishable products, control of temperature and relative humidity inside perishable 
storage 
Recommended Books: 
1. Food Packaging: Principles and Practice, Second Edition, by Gordon L. Robertson, CRC Press 
17 
 
2. Handbook of Postharvest Technology: Cereals, Fruits, Vegetables, Tea, and Spices, by A. Chakraverty, 
A. S. Mujumdar, G.S.V. Raghavan, H.S. Ramaswamy. Marcel Dekker, Inc., NY Grain Storage Engineer-
ing and Technology, Batra Book Services by Vijayaraghavan, S.   
3. Food Packaging and Preservation by M. Mathlouthi. Blackie Academic & Professional 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Hermeticity of Electronic Packages by Hal Greenhouse, William Andrew Publishing, LLC, Norwich, 
New York, U.S.A. 
2. Storage of Cereal Grains and Their Products, 4th Edition, AACC by David B. Saucer. 
3. Principles of Agricultural Engineering, Volume – II, Jain Brothers by A. M. Michael and T. P. Ojha. 
4. Handling and Storage of Food Grains in Tropical and Subtropical Area  by FAO Pub. 
5. Silos, Theory and Practice: Vertical Silos, Horizontal Silos (retaining Walls), 2nd Ed, Lavoisier Pub. by 
André M. Reimbert 
6. Fruit and Vegetables: Harvesting, Handling and Storage, 2nd Ed, Iowa State Press by Keith Thompson 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 337 
Food Packaging and Storage Engi-
neering 
            
 
FP 371 Heat and Mass Transfer  Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
 
Objective: To learn the basic concept of heat and mass transfer in food processing 
Syllabus:  
Introductory concepts, modes of heat transfer, thermal conductivity of materials, measurement. Gen-
eral differential equation of conduction. One dimensional steady state conduction through plane and 
composite walls, tubes and spheres with and without heat generation. Electrical analogy. Insulation ma-
terials, critical thickness of insulation. Fins, Free and forced convection. Newton’s law of cooling, heat 
transfer coefficient in convection. Dimensional analysis of free and forced convection. Useful non di-
mensional numbers and empirical relationships for free and forced convection. Equation of laminar 
boundary layer on flat plate and in a tube. Laminar forced convection on  a flat plate and in a tube. 
Combined free and forced convection. Introduction. Absorptivity, reflectivity and transmissivity of radia-
tion. Black body and monochromatic radiation, Planck’s law, Stefan-Boltzman law, Kirchoff’s law, grey 
bodies and emissive power, solid angle, intensity of radiation. Radiation exchange between black sur-
faces, geometric configuration factor. Heat transfer analysis involving conduction, convection and radia-
tion by networks. Types of heat exchangers, fouling factor, log mean temperature difference, heat ex-
changer performance, transfer units. Heat exchanger analysis restricted to parallel and counter flow 
heat exchangers. Steady state molecular diffusion in fluids at rest and in laminar flow, Flick’s law, mass 
transfer coefficients. Reynold’s analogy. 
 
Recommended Books: 
18 
 
1. Biological and Bioenvironmental Heat and Mass Transfer  by Datta 
2. Heat And Mass Transfer By Nag  
3. Heat And Mass Transfer , Second Edition by Sawhney 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 371 Heat and Mass Transfer             
 
FP 373 Unit Operations in Food Processing Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
Objective: To learn various unit operations involved in food processing 
Syllabus: 
Cleaning, Sorting, Grading, Size reduction: Grinding, Cutting, Emulsification, homogenization, energy 
concept in size reduction, Kick's law, Rittinger's law, Bond’s law. Grinding and milling equipment. Me-
chanical separations: Sedimentation and filtration, Sieving / Screening, Sieve analysis. Basics of various 
Unit Operations: Evaporation, Drying, Dehydration, Pasteurization, Sterilization, Blanching, Chilling, 
Freezing, Parboiling, Extrusion, Frying, Baking, Roasting, Puffing, Agitation and mixing, Irradiation and 
non-thermal processing operations. 
Recommended Books: 
1. Post harvest technology of Cereals, Pulses and Oil Seeds by Chakravarti 
2. Unit Operations of Chemical Engg by McCabe and Smith 
3. Unit operations in Agril processing by Sahay  and Singh 
4. Unit Operations in Food Processing by Earle 
5. Food Processing Technology: Principles and Practice by Fellows 
6. Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering by Toledo 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 224 Unit Operations in Food Processing Lab             
 
FP 375 Horticultural Processing Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
Objective: To learn various processes and methods of Food Grain and Horticultural Processing 
Syllabus: 
Preparation of fruit jam from Fruits, Preparation of fruit jelly from Fruits, Preparation of Jelly, Squash, 
Qualitative determination of pectin content by alcohol test / jelmeter test in fruit extract, Preparation of 
ready to serve (RTS) from mango/ litchi/ lemon, Preparation of fruit leather -mango leather , Prepara-
tion and preservation of tomato puree and ketchup 
 
Course Outcomes POs 
19 
 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 375 Horticultural Processing Laboratory             
 
 
 
FP 377 Dairy Process Engineering Laboratory 2 credits (0-0-3) 
 
Objectives: To understand the hygienic characteristics of dairy plant and various dairy processes. 
Syllabus: 
Identification of hygienic characteristics of pipes and fittings in dairy plant; To study CIP system for dairy 
plant; description of technical specifications of milking and storage equipment; description of technical 
specifications of equipment for chilling & pasteurization; description of features of centrifuges and op-
eration; working principle  of ice-cream freezers & packing machine; design and principle of working of 
cheese vat; working principle  of milking machine; working principle  of press & packing machine; de-
scription of butter manufacturing equipment; description of different types of evaporators used in dairy 
industry; description of different types of dryers used in dairy industry; description of operation of spray 
dryers used in dairy industry;  operation of drum an vacuum dryers used in dairy industry; design of milk 
collecting and chilling unit; Visit to dairy industry 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 377 Dairy Process Engineering Laboratory             
 
 
FP 372 Food Process Equipment and Plant Design Laboratory 2 credits [0-0-3] 
 
Objective: To acquire basic understanding of design parameters, design procedures for food process 
equipment and their attachments in food processing plant.  
  
Syllabus: 
Study of materials for fabrication, mechanical properties, ductility, hardness, corrosion, protective coat-
ings, corrosion prevention linings equipment, choice of materials, material codes. Design Considera-
tions: Stresses created due to static and dynamic loads, combined stresses, design stresses and theories 
of failure, safety factor, temperature effects, radiation effects, effects of fabrication method, economic 
considerations. Design of Pressure and Storage Vessels. Design of Heat Exchangers. Design of Evapora-
tors and Crystallizers. Design of Agitators Separators for liquid foods. Design of Equipment Components. 
Design of Freezing Equipment, Dryer, Conveyors, Elevators, Extruders. Study of hazards and safety con-
siderations in designing process equipment. Food processing plant design: Feasibility Study, Plant Loca-
tion, Plant Size, Procedures for estimation of economic plant size (breakeven analysis and optimization), 
20 
 
estimation of volume of production for each product. Utilities and Sanitation in Processing Plant. Prod-
uct and Process Design. Plant Layout design, Planning and Design of Service Facilities and Plant Sur-
roundings, Design and installation of piping system. Selection of Equipment. Workers Safety and Health 
Aspects. Building and Building Materials selection for food plants.  
 
Recommended Books: 
1. Process equipment design by Joshi MV and Mahajan VV. Published by Macmillan India Ltd  
2. Process equipment design by Brownell and Young. Published by John Willey  
3. Chemical Engineering Plant Design by Villbrandt F.C. and Dryden C.E. McGraw-Hill 
4. Plant Layout and Design by J.M. Moore. The Mcmillan company 
  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Process equipment design by Bhattacharya BC. Macmillan India Ltd 
2. Strength and elasticity of materials by Brooks WH. Asia Publishing House 
3. Process Plant Design by Backhusrt J.R. and J.H. Barker. Heimann Educational Books, London 
4. Computer Aided Process Plant Design by Leesley M.E. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston 
5. Project Management for Engineers by M.D. Rosenau. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 372 
Food Process Equipment and Plant 
Design Laboratory 
            
 
 
 
FP 374 Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineering Laboratory  2 credits [0-0-3] 
 
Objectives: To understand refrigeration cycle principles as it applies to installing, working and trouble-
shooting of equipment. 
Syllabus: 
Study of vapour compression refrigeration system and determination of COP of vapour compression 
refrigeration system. Study of various types of compressors, condensers, expansion valves and evapora-
tive coils used in refrigeration systems. Study of refrigerants, their properties and charts. Study of direct 
and indirect contact freezing equipment for foods. Spray freezing of foods. Estimation of refrigeration 
load for cold storage. Estimation of refrigeration load for meat and poultry products. To calculate refrig-
eration load of a dairy plant. Estimation of refrigeration load for ice-cream manufacturing. To study cool-
ing system for bakery and estimation of refrigeration loads. To estimate refrigeration load during choco-
late enrobing process.  Study of refrigerated van and calculation of cooling load during transport in dif-
ferent weather conditions. Deep freezing and thawing of fish. To study refrigerated display of foods and 
estimation of cooling load. 
 
21 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 374 
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 
Engineering Laboratory 
            
 
 
FP 376 Food Packaging and Storage Design Laboratory 2 credits (0-0-3) 
 
Objectives: To gain knowledge about different kind of packaging and storage of Food. 
Syllabus: 
Classification of various packages based on material and rigidity; Measurement of thickness of paper, 
film, paper boards; Determination of wax weight in paper packaging; Measurement of grammage and 
water absorption of paper of paper boards; Measurement of bursting strength of paper of paper boards; 
Measurement of tear resistance of packaging material; Measurement of puncture resistance of packag-
ing material; Measurement of tensile strength of packaging material; Measurement of grease resistance 
of papers; Determination of gas transmission rate of package films; Determination of coating on package 
materials; Identification of plastic films; Study of packaging film for their labelling characteristics and 
specifications; Pre-packaging practices followed for packing fruits, vegetables; Demonstration of can-
seaming operation; Determination of shelf life of food product 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 376 
Food Packaging and Storage Design 
Laboratory 
            
 
FP 378 Food Analysis and Quality Control Laboratory 2 credits (0-0-3) 
Objectives: To gain knowledge of various methods for food quality analysis and control.  
Syllabus: 
Training of sensory panel for flavor perception; sensitivity tests for four basic tastes; difference tests, 
triangle test, paired comparison test, duo trio test; Sensory evaluation of milk and detection  of flavour 
defects in milk; Sensory evaluation of food samples for textural properties; detection of common adul-
terants- formaldehyde, starch, cane sugar, hydrogen peroxide, sodium bicarbonate in milk; Test for the 
presence of sesame oil in given oil sample; Colour estimation of food samples by tintometer;  Examina-
tion of fruit jams for FPO specifications; Examination of Butter / oil  samples for AGMARK specifications; 
Examination of food  / milk products for BIS specifications; determination of  BAR (Brix acid ratio) in 
beverages; Visit to units with ISO 22000:2005 certified company; Evaluation of food labels of products 
for PFA standards; Determination of total residual chlorine in water sample; Cut out analysis of Canned 
Product samples. 
22 
 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 378 
Food Analysis and Quality Control La-
boratory 
            
 
 
FP 471 Livestock, Fish and Marine Products Processing Laboratory 2 credits [1-0-2] 
  
Objectives:  To understand the principles of food product development and processing of products orig-
inating from animal, fish and marine sources. 
 
Syllabus:  
Pre-slaughter operations of meat and poultry. Visit to abbatoir. Meat cutting and handling. Evaluation of 
animal carcasses. Evaluation of meat and study of post rigor changes. Preparation of smoked meat and 
preservation of meat. Preparation and evaluation of dehydrated meat products. To study the effect of 
preservatives/antibiotics on shelf life of meat. Preparation and evaluation of pickled meat. Preparation 
and evaluation of meat sausages. Preparation and evaluation of meat/ chicken patties. Evaluation of 
quality and grading of eggs. Evaluation of quality of fish (in terms of freshness). Preparation of egg/fish 
pickle. Chilling operation of fish. Processing and product development from important marine products. 
Visit to meat processing industry. Experiments on by-products utilization of meat. 
 
Essential Readings: 
1.Meat Science by R.A. Lawrie, 2nd Edition, Pergamon Press, Oxford UK. 
2.Egg Science and Technology by W.J. Stadelmen, and O. J. Cotterill, 1977. 2nd Edition. AVI, Westport. 
3.Muscle as Food by PJ Bechtel, Orlando, FL, Academic Press. 
 4.Marine and Freshwater Products Handbook by R.E. Martin, E.P. Carter, G.J. Flick and L.M. Davis,     
Technomic Publications 
 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. Meat Handbook by A. Lavie, 4th Edition, AVI, Westport. 
2. HACCP in Meat, Poultry and Fish processing 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 471 
Livestock, Fish and Marine Products 
Processing Laboratory 
            
 
 
 
 
23 
 
FP 473 Food Process Modeling and Simulation Laboratory 2 credits (1-0-2) 
 
Objectives: To understand and formulation experiments, analyse the dependent and independent vari-
ables and their effect on response, construct predictive models and Perform various statistical analyses. 
 
Syllabus: 
Introduction to basic mathematical modelling, empirical models, ODE and PDE and their solve, Identifi-
cation of design, Factorial, fractional factorial and rotatable central composite experimental design. De-
veloping empirical equations using experimental data. operating and performance parameters in me-
chanical, thermal and mass transfer operations carried out in food processing such as; particulate size 
reduction, homogenization, centrifugation, packaging, mixing, conveying, extrusion, storage, heating, 
cooling, freezing, puffing, frying, distillation, extraction, concentration and drying. Developing mathe-
matical relationship between the independent and dependent variables affecting the food processing 
operations by using physical and chemical principles governing the processes. Developing predictive 
model using Neural network. Optimization of processing parameters using Genetic algorithms. Applica-
tion of Fuzzy logic to sensory evaluation and ranking of foods. Finite difference and finite element meth-
od, Principle component analysis. 
Recommended Books 
1. Food Processing Operations Analysis by H. Das. Asian Books Private Limited 
2. Handbook of Food Process Modeling and Statistical Quality Control by Mustafa    Ozilgen, CRC 
Press 
Suggested Readings 
1. Food Processing Operations Modeling: Design and Analysis, Second Edition (Google eBook) 
Soojin Jun, Joseph M. Irudayaraj, CRC Press 
2. Handbook of Food and Bioprocess Modeling Techniques Editor(s): Shyam S. Sablani, Ashim   K. 
Datta, M. Shafiur Rahman, Arun S. Mujumdar,  CRC Press 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 473 
Food Process Modeling and Simulation 
Laboratory 
            
 
 
FP 472 Experimental Design and Statistical Methods Laboratory 2 credits (1-0-2) 
 
Objectives: To learn about various methods experimental design and statistical methods 
 
Syllabus: 
Descriptive statistics, Mean, Variance, Probability, Probability distribution. Data and its nature, data rep-
resentation, diagrams and graphs using MS Excel, Measure of central tendency, Dispersion, Swekness 
and Kurtosis. Basic statistical concepts, concepts Strategy of experiments, basic principles, guidelines for 
designing experiments and importance of designed experiments in research. Full factorial design, 2K 
24 
 
design, completely randomized design, randomized block design, central composite design, factorial de-
sign, Box Behenken design, Analysis of variance. Introduction to theory of estimation and confidence-
intervals, Correlation and Regression, Simple and multiple linear regression model, Partial correlation 
coefficient, test of significant of correlation coefficient and regression coefficient, Coefficient of deter-
mination, Testing of heterogeneity. Multivariate relationships, multiple linear regression, multiple and 
partial correlation, significance of testing in multiple correlation, variable selection in multiple regres-
sion. Multiple regression analysis, variable selection. 
  
Recommended Books 
1 Statistical Methods by W. G. Cocharan 
2 Statistical Methods S Chand & Sons, by S P Gupta  
3 Computer aided techniques in Food Technology by Israel Saguy 
4 Basic Statistics, New Age Publishers, by B L Aggarwal 
Reference books 
1 Response surface methodology by R. H. Myers 
2 Response surfaces design and analysis  by A. I. Khuri & J. A. Cornell 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 472 
Experimental Design and Statistical 
Methods Laboratory 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
B. PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVE COURSES 
 
FP 312 Processing of Spices, Condiments and Plantation crops 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To gain knowledge about processing of Spices, Condiments and Plantation crops 
Syllabus: 
Classification, composition, structure and characteristics. production status of spices in India: major 
spice producing area in India and world wide, export potential of processed and raw spice product. Pro-
cessing of major and minor spices: Preservation and processing of major and minor spices of India; Pro-
cessing of whole spice, spice powder, paste and extracts; production and processing of spice mixtures; 
spice oils and oleoresins, functional role of spices, quality specification for spices. Tea Processing: Com-
position and production of tea leaves; processing of tea leaves; CTC tea, black tea, green tea and Oolong 
tea, grading and packaging; processing of instant tea. Coffee Processing: Production and processing of 
coffee cherries by wet and dry method; processing technology for coffee; preparation of brew; pro-
cessing technology for instant coffee and decaffeinated coffee. Cocoa processing: Cocoa bean- introduc-
tion, history and composition; processing of cocoa bean; processed products of cocoa. 
 
Recommended Books 
1. Major spices of India-Crop Management – Post Harvest Technology by J S Pruthi, Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. 
2. Coffee processing technology By M Sivetz and H. E. Foote, AVI Publishing, Co. 
3. Chemistry and Applications of Green Tea by T Yamamoto, L R Juneja, D-chi Chu ad M. Kim, CRC 
Press 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 312 
Processing of Spices, Condiments and 
Plantation crops 
            
 
FP 332 Food Process Equipment and Plant Design  3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To conceptualize and design equipment needed for various food processing operations. 
Syllabus: 
Materials and Properties, Design Considerations, Design of Pressure and Storage Vessels, Design of shell 
and its component, Design of Heat Exchangers, Design of Evaporators and Crystallizers, Design of crystal-
liser and entrainment separator. Design of Agitators Separators, Design of centrifuge separator. Design 
of Equipment Components: Design of Freezing Equipment: Design of tray dryer, tunnel dryer, fluidized 
dryer, spray dryer, vacuum dryer, freeze dryer and microwave dryer. Design of Conveyors and Elevators, 
Design of Extruders, Design of Fermenters, Hazards and Safety Considerations. food plant design con-
26 
 
cepts, Feasibility Study: Design of product, product specifications, process design, process selection con-
sidering technical, economic and social aspects. Process planning and scheduling, flow sheeting, flow 
diagrams and process flow charts and computer aided development of flow charts;  Selection of Process 
equipments, material handling equipment, service equipment, instruments and controls, considerations 
involved in equipment selection, economic analysis of equipment. Types of layouts, preparation and de-
velopment of layout, equipment symbols, flow sheet symbols, electric symbols, graphic symbols for pip-
ing systems, standards for space requirement and dimensions. Requirements of the steam, refrigeration, 
water, electricity, waste disposal, lighting, ventilation, drainage, CIP system, dust removal, fire protec-
tion etc. Workers Safety and Health Aspects, Building and Building Materials. 
Text books 
1. Process equipment design by Joshi MV and Mahajan VV. Published by Macmillan India Ltd  
2. Process equipment design by Brownell and Young. Published by John Willey  
3. Food Plant Economics by Z.B. Maroulis and G.D. Sarvacos. Published by CRC press 
4. Chemical Engineering Plant Design by Villbrandt F.C. and Dryden C.E. Published by McGraw-Hill 
5. Plant Layout and Design by J.M. Moore Published by The Mcmillan company  
6. Chemical Engineering Handbook by Perry R.H. Published by McGraw-Hill 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 332 
Food Process Equipment and Plant 
Design 
            
 
 
FP 334 Biochemistry and  Human Nutrition 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To learn biochemistry and nutritional aspect of foods 
Syllabus: 
Nutrition, malnutrition, functions of food, basic food groups, nutritional needs, requirements and rec-
ommended allowances of foods; Mechanism of enzyme action, coenzymes, enzyme kinetics, Derivation 
of Michaelis-Menten Equation. Sources, functions, digestion, absorption, assimilation and transport of 
carbohydrates, proteins and fats in human beings. Metabolism of carbohydrates: Respiration (TCA cy-
cle), Metabolism of lipids, Metabolism of proteins. Functions, sources, factors affecting absorption of 
minerals, absorption promoters and inhibitors, effect of deficiency of Calcium, phosphorus, iron, zinc, 
iodine, fluorine and copper. Vitamins and hormones: Classification, functions, sources, effects of defi-
ciency. Changes during food processing operations, restoration, enrichment, fortification and supple-
mentation of foods. 
Recommended books 
1 Principles of Biochemistry by A L Lehninger 
2 Text book of Biochemistry by E S West, W R Todd, H S  Mason and J T Van Bruggen 
3 Nutrition and Dietetics, Tata McGraw-ill Co. Ltd by Shubhangini A  Joshi 
27 
 
Reference books 
1 General Biochemistry by J H Weil 
2 Biochemistry of Foods, Academic Press by A M Eskin 
3 Food Chemistry, Marcel Dekkar Inc by O R Fennema 
4 Essentials of Nutrition, Ganesh and Co by M Swaminathan 
5 Outlines of biochemistry by Eric E Conn and P K Stumpf 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 334 Biochemistry and  Human Nutrition             
 
FP 352 Emerging Technology in Food Processing 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To learn about various emerging technologies in Food Processing Sector 
 
Syllabus: 
Introduction, scope and applications of High pressure processing of foods, Pulse electric fields pro-
cessing (PEF), Osmotic dehydration, High intensity pulsed light Technology, Food Processing by Radio 
frequency Electric fields and electromagnetic radiations, Ultrasound in food processing, Food Irradiation. 
Recent Development in Microwave heating; Radio-Frequency processing; Ohmic heating; Combine Mi-
crowave Vacuum drying; New Hybrid Drying technologies; Vacuum cooling of foods; Concept of Minimal 
processing of Fruits and Vegetables products; Modified and Controlled Atmospheric Packaging for Min-
imally processed foods. Any other latest technologies for food processing. 
 
Recommended Books 
1 Thermal Food Processing – New technologies and Quality Issues by Da-Wen Sun 
2 Advances in Thermal and Non-Thermal Food Preservation by Tewari and Juneja 
3 Innovation in Food Engineering – New Techniques and Products by Passos and Ribeiro 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 352 
Emerging technologies in Food 
Processing 
            
 
 
FP 336 Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To understand concepts of functional and nutraceutical food and their role in different dis-
ease control 
Syllabus: Functional foods- concept and definition; nutraceutical-concept and definition. Probiotics and 
prebiotics food. Functional foods for treatment of gastrointestinal disorders. Functional Food and 
Nutraceuticals for the treatment of Coronary Heart Disease, Role of Functional Food and Nutraceuticals 
28 
 
in Tumor, Functional Fats and Spreads, modified fats and oils. Functional Confectionery. Dietary Fibre 
Functional Products. Functional Food Health Claims: Functional claims; packaging and labeling; nutrient 
modification and specific nutrient claims; disease-specific claims; Dietary Supplement Health and Educa-
tion Act (DSHEA). Market for Functional Food Products: Functional foods and consumers; the role of 
health in food choice; functional foods market; Regulations and laws for functional food. 
Text books 
1. Functional foods: Principles and technology by M Guo, Woodhead Publishing Limited, Abington Hall, 
Abington, Cambridge 
2. Functional Foods Concept to Product by Glenn R. Gibson and Christine M. Williams, Woodhead Pub-
lishing Limited and CRC Press LLC 
Reference books 
1. Functional Dairy Products by T Mattila-Sandholm and M. Saarela, Woodhead Publishing Limited and 
CRC Press LLC 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 336 Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals             
 
 
FP 338 Processing of Livestock, Fish and Marine Products 3 credits [3-0-0] 
Objective: To learn various processes and methods for Processing of Livestock, Fish and Marine Product 
Syllabus: 
Production, Economics, and processing scenario of meat, fish and poultry. Preservation of meat- dehy-
dration, freezing, pickling, curing, cooking and smoking; dehydration; curing; preservation of meat using 
ionizing radiation; preservation of meats using- antibiotics and chemical preservatives. Eating quality of 
meat and discoloration; water-holding capacity and juiciness in cooked and uncooked meat; texture and 
tenderness- definition and measurement, factors affecting texture and tenderness, artificial tenderizing. 
Abattoir design and layout, meat plant sanitation and safety, by-products utilization. Processing and 
preservation of eggs, production of egg yolk and egg yellow powder. Poultry processing: Unit operations 
for various poultry products; Fish processing: Unit operations for various fish products;  
Recommended Books: 
1. Meat Science by Lawrie 
2. Meat Handbook by Lavie. 
3. Egg Science and Technology by Stadelmen and Cotterill 
4. Muscle as Food by Bechtel 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 338 
Processing of Livestock, Fish and Ma-
rine Products 
            
29 
 
 
 
FP 323 Beverage Technology 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To describe the characteristics and production methods of both alcoholic and non‐ alcoholic 
beverage types.   
Syllabus: 
Types of beverages and their importance; status of beverage industry in India; Manufacturing technolo-
gy for juice-based beverages; synthetic beverages; technology of still, carbonated, low-calorie and dry 
beverages; isotonic and sports drinks; role of various ingredients of soft drinks, carbonation of soft 
drinks. Specialty beverages based on tea, coffee, cocoa, spices, plant extracts,  herbs, nuts, dairy and 
imitation dairy-based beverages. Alcoholic beverages- types, manufacture and quality evaluation; the 
role of yeast in beer and other alcoholic beverages, ale type beer, lager type beer, technology of brew-
ing process, equipment used for brewing and distillation, wine and related beverages, distilled spirits. 
Packaged drinking water- definition, types, manufacturing processes, quality evaluation and raw and 
processed water, methods of water treatment, BIS quality standards of bottled water; mineral water, 
natural spring water, flavoured water, carbonated water. 
Recommended Books 
1. Handbook of Brewing by Hardwick WA.  
2. Handbook of Food and Beverage Fermentation Technology by Hui.  
3. Handbook of Brewing by Priest and Stewart.  
4. Commercial Wine Making - Processing and Controls by Vine.  
5. Beverages: Technology, Chemistry and Microbiology by Varnam and Sutherland  
6. Beverages: Carbonated and Non-Carbonated by Woodroof and Phillips. 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 323 Beverage Technology             
 
 
FP 325 Food Analysis and Quality Control 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To provide a basic understanding of Food analysis and concepts of quality control in food 
processing. 
 
Syllabus: 
Quality Control and its importance, Methods of colour determination and their applications. Food fla-
vours, factors affecting food product flavours, measurement of food flavours, theory of taste and smell. 
Food Rheology and viscosity: Shear stress, shear rate, torque, Newtonian and Non-Newtonian flow and 
their further classification, Factors affecting consistency and viscosity, measurement of viscosity and 
30 
 
consistency. Food texture, Physical characteristics of food, working of texture measuring instruments, 
Fruit pressure tester, puncture tester, succulometer, tenderometer, texturometer, maturometer, fi-
brometer, Texture Profile Analysis (TPA). Non Destructive Methods for food analysis, Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy (NIR), Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) and its application, Ultrasonic equipments, 
conductivity and resistivity meters. Principle and working of Gas chromatography (GC), High pressure 
liquid chromatography (HPLC), types of detectors used in GC and HPLC, Thin layer chromatography 
(TLC), Column Chromatography, chromatographic methods applied as quality control. Sensory evalua-
tion: Objectives, panel selection, Different test methods and their groups such as difference tests, rating 
tests, sensitivity tests, Sensory scores, Food Safety and Regulations: Food Safety and Standards Act, Co-
dex Alimentarius, ISO series, Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Hygienic Practices (GHP), Good 
Agricultural Practices (GAP), Genetically Modified Foods (GMF). 
 
Recommended books 
1 Pearson‘s Composition and Analysis of foods, by S Ronald, Addison & Wesley Publisher 
Quality Control for Food Industry. Vol I and II AVI Publications by A  Krammer 
2 Food Quality Control by Manoranjan Kalia 
3 Handbook of Analysis and Quality Control of fruits & Vegetables Products Tata Mc Grow 
Hill Publications. by  S Ranganna 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 325 Food Analysis and Quality Control             
 
 
FP 326 Food Product Development 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objective: To learn various methods and techniques for food product development 
Syllabus: 
Need, importance  and  objectives  of  formulation  for  new  product  development.  Ideas, business phi-
losophy and strategy of new product. Formulation based on sources availability and cost competitive-
ness for concept developments of new products. Standardization of various formulation and product 
design. Adaptable technology and sustainable technology for standardized formulation for process de-
velopment. Process control parameters and scale-up, production trials for new product development at 
lab and pilot scale. Quality assessment of new developed products. Market testing and marketing plan. 
Costing and economic evaluation. Commercialization / product launch. 
 
Recommended Books and Reading: 
1. Food Product Development: Maximizing Success by Earle and Anderson 
2. New Food Product Development: From Concept to Marketplace by Fuller 
3. Food Product Development: From Concept to the Marketplace by Graf and Saguy 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
31 
 
FP 326 Food Product Development             
 
 
 
FP 328 Food Industry by-product and waste Management 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objective: To learn various methods and techniques for Food Industry by-product and waste Manage-
ment 
Syllabus: 
Various byproducts from Food Processing Industry: By products of cereals, legumes, oil seeds, dairy, 
fruit and vegetables processing industries and their uses. By products of meat and fish processing units 
and their uses. Uses of byproducts of agro based industries in various sector. Various laws and regula-
tions for waste management in food processing industries, Food industry wastes, Waste treatment 
methods for Cereals, Fruits, vegetables, Meat, Fish, Dairy processing and Brewery Industries. Waste wa-
ter treatment, zero-discharge and zero-emission system. 
 
Recommended Books:  
1. Utilization of By-Products and Treatment of Waste in the Food Industry by Oreopoulou and Russ 
2. Handbook of Waste Management and Co-Product Recovery in Food Processing by Waldron 
3. Waste Management for the Food Industries by Arvanitoyannis 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 328 
Food Industry by-product and waste 
Management 
            
 
FP 412 Food Laws, Regulations & Certifications    3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objective: To learn various Laws, Regulations & Certifications for Food Processing   
Syllabus: 
Food Adulteration, Food Safety Management System. Mandatory and voluntary food laws. Various laws, 
regulations and Certifications for food processing. Essential Commodity Act, Prevention of Food Adul-
teration Act (PFA), Fruit Products Order (FPO), Meat Food Products Order (MFPO), Vegetable Oil Control 
Order,  Agricultural Marketing and Grading Standards (AGMARK), Bureau of Indian Standards(BIS) and 
their certifications, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI),  Food Safety and Standards Act 
and Regulations of India. Food Codex laws, Food and Drug Administration (FDA), International Organiza-
tion for Standardization (ISO), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP), Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP). 
 
Recommended Books and Reading 
1. Food Regulation: Law, Science, Policy, and Practice by Fortin 
32 
 
2. Food Safety and Standards Act and Regulations by FSSAI 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 412 
Food Laws, Regulations & Certifica-
tions    
            
 
 
FP 414 Food Ingredients and Additives 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To understand the fundamentals of food ingredients and food additives and their role. 
Syllabus: 
Food ingredients and additives- definitions, classification and functions, need for food ingredients  and 
additives, food preservatives, classifications, antimicrobial agents (types, mode of action and their appli-
cation); Nutrient supplements & thickeners, polysaccharides, bulking agents, antifoaming agents, syner-
gists, antagonists. Antioxidants (synthetic and natural, mechanism of oxidation inhibition), chelating 
agents: types, uses and mode of action Coloring agents: color retention agents, applications and levels 
of use, natural colorants, sources of natural color (plant, microbial, animal and insects), misbranded col-
ors, color extraction techniques, color stabilization.Flavoring agents: flavors (natural and synthetic fla-
vors), flavor enhancers, flavor stabilization, flavor encapsulation; Flour improvers: leavening agents, hu-
mectants and sequesterants, hydrocolloids, acidulants, pH control agents buffering salts, anticaking 
agents, etc. Sweeteners: natural and artificial sweeteners, nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners, prop-
erties and uses of various sweeteners in food products; Emulsifiers: Types, selection of emulsifiers, 
emulsion stability, functions and mechanism of action. Additives, food uses and functions in formula-
tions; permitted dosages. 
 
Recommended Books 
1 Natural food additives, ingredients and flavourings by D. Baines. 
2 Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients by Gerorge 
3 Food Antioxidants: Technological,Toxicological and Health Perspective by Madhavi, Deshpande 
and Salunkhe 
4 Food Flavours, Part A, B & C by Morton and Macleod  
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 414 Food ingredients and food additives             
 
 
FP 421 Bakery and Confectionary Technology 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To learn various aspects of Bakery and Confectionary technology. 
33 
 
Syllabus: 
Historical development and status of bakery industry in India; introduction and definition of bakery 
products-bread, biscuit, cake, pastries, rusk, crackers. PFA specifications of bakery products. Bread- 
types; role of major and minor ingredients; processes of bread making; problems associated with bread; 
equipment for bread manufacturing; processing steps for biscuit, cookies, cracker, cakes and their major 
and minor ingredients. Nutritional aspect of bakery products; quality evaluation of baked products. Con-
fectionary- historical development; classification of confectionary products; basic technical considera-
tions for confectionary products- TS, TSS, pH, acidity, ERH, RH etc. raw materials and their role in confec-
tionary product; traditional confectionary products. Cocoa bean- introduction, history and composition; 
processing of cocoa bean; processed product of cocoa; historical development in chocolate processing; 
ingredients and their role in chocolate; processing steps of chocolate processing- mixing, refining, 
conching, tempering, molding, cooling, coating, enrobing etc. High boiled sweets/candy - composition, 
production and preparation of high boiled sweets- traditional, batch and continuous method; toffee- 
composition, types, ingredient and their role, batch and continuous method of toffee manufacturing; 
 
Recommended Books 
1 Biscuit, cracker and cookie recipes for the food industry,  Woodhead Publishing Ltd and CRC Press 
LLC by Duncan Manley 
2 Baking problems solved  Woodhead Publishing Ltd and CRC Press LLC by S Cauvain and L Young 
3 Bakery Science & Technology, 3rd Ed. Vol-I, II, Sosland Publishers by E. J. Pyler 
4 Flat Bread Technology, Chapman & Hall by J. Qarooni 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 421 Bakery and Confectionary Technology             
 
 
FP 424 IT Applications in Food Industry 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives:  To learn various applications of information technologies in food processing industry 
Syllabus: 
Importance of computerization and IT in food industry, operating environments and information sys-
tems for various types of food industries, principles of communication. Role of computer in Optimiza-
tion. Introduction to Toolboxes useful to Food Industry; Curve fitting toolbox, Fuzzy logic toolbox, Neural 
Network toolbox, Image processing toolbox, statistical toolbox. Applications of CFD in Food and bever-
age industry. Introduction to CFD softwares. Introduction to Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA); SCADA systems hardware and firmware SCADA systems software and protocols Landlines, 
Online food process control from centralized server system in processing plant. Introduction to MATLAB; 
MATLAB interactive sessions, computing with MATLAB; MATLAB help system, problem solving method-
ologies; Functions and Files in MATLAB, Programming using MATLAB, Program design and development, 
debugging MATLAB programs; Plotting and Model Building in MATLAB.  
34 
 
 
Recommended Books 
1 Computer Applications in Food Technology: Use of Spreadsheets in Graphical, Statistical and Pro-
cess Analysis by R. Paul Singh, AP. Published by Academic Press 
2 Practical SCADA for Industry by David Bailey and Edwin Wright. Published by Elsevier 
3 Introduction to MATLAB 7 for engineers by William J. Palm. Published by McGraw Hill Professional 
4 Computation Fluid Dynamics in Food Processing by Da Wen Sun. Published by CRC press 
5 Web Design: A Complete Introduction by Jenny Chapman. Published by John Wiley & Sons   
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 424 IT Applications in Food Industry             
 
FP 427 Food Business Management & Entrepreneurship Development 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To learn various aspects of Business management and entrepreneurship development in 
food processing 
Syllabus: 
Introduction and definitions related with project management and entrepreneurship; Fundamentals of 
project management and entrepreneurship development; Project formulation: market survey tech-
niques, project identification, project selection, project proposal, work breakdown structure; Network 
scheduling: activity, networks, use of CPM, PERT in project scheduling. Resource planning, resource allo-
cation, project scheduling with limited resources. Estimation of project costs, earned value analysis, pro-
ject techno-economic viability, break-even analysis. Identification of business opportunity in food pro-
cessing sector, Government policies for promotion of entrepreneurship in food processing. Launching 
and organizing an enterprise, enterprise selection, market assessment, feasibility study, SWOT analysis, 
resource mobilization. Financial institution in promoting entrepreneurship; Supply chain management. 
 
Recommended Books 
1. Management and Engineering by Gail Freeman Bell and James Balkwill. Printice Hall International 
2. Entrepreneurship and Management inputs for entrepreneurs in Food Processing Sector by Dinesh 
Awasthi and Rama Jaggi 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 427 
Food Business Management & Entrepre-
neurship Development 
            
 
 
FP 430 Separation Techniques in Food Engineering 3 credits (3-0-0) 
Objectives: To learn the fundamentals of various separation technologies applicable in Food Processing 
35 
 
Syllabus: 
Introduction to various separation processes; Gas-Liquid, Gas-Solid, Liquid-Liquid, Liquid-Solid separa-
tion; Concept of phase equilibrium; Impingement separator; Electrostatic precipitation; Distillation-
Application of distillation in food processing; Membrane separation technology – Introduction to micro-
filtration, ultra-filtration, nano-filtration, reverse osmosis, electro dialysis; Physical characteristics of 
membrane separation; Factor affecting reverse osmosis process; Concentration of polarization; Design 
of reverse osmosis and ultra-filtration system; Operation layout of the modules; Electrodialysis; Perva-
porization; Fabrication of membrane; Application of membrane technology in food industry. Powder 
Technology; Classification of powder; Separation of powder; Sieving; Air classification; Factor affecting 
air classification; Cyclone application; Air separation; Particle size distribution; Super critical fluid (SCF) 
extraction - Introduction; Properties of SCF; Food application of SCF; Application of SCFE in analytical 
technique and pharmaceutical application. 
Text  Books 
1 Elements of Mass Transferring, PHI by Anantharaman N and Begum KMMS 
2 Mechanical Operations for Chemical Engineers, Khanna Publisher by Narayanan CM and 
Bhattacharyya BC 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 430 Separation Techniques in Food Engineering             
 
FP 433 Process Control and Instrumentation in Food Industry 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To learn process control and instrumentation in food processing industry 
Syllabus: 
Instruments for temperature, pressure, humidity measurements- types, calibration. Pressure gauge, 
basic concept of pneumatic pressure transmitter, pressure current and pressure resistance transducers. 
Positive displacement meter,  Weight measurement- mechanical scale, electronic tank scale, conveyor 
scale, measurement of specific gravity, measurement of humidity, measurement of viscosity, measure-
ment of density, automatic valves. Definition of process control, simple system analysis, dynamic behav-
ior of simple process, Laplace transform, process control hardware. Frequency response analysis, fre-
quency response characteristics, Bode diagram and Nyquist plots and stability analysis. Ionization tech-
niques, scanning technique, application of GC/MS, LC/MS / FAB/MS /MS/MS and Linked scan tech-
niques. Basic principles of chromatography. Paper chromatography, thin layer chromatography, HPLC 
(High performance liquid chromatography), Gas chromatography, Application in food analysis. Spectro-
photometry introduction and principles- Atomic absorption spectroscopy. Electromagnetic spectrum – 
The NMR Phenomenon – Types of information provided by NMR spectra, NMR –application of NMR to 
Food analysis. Operating procedures and application in analysis of foods:  FTIR, XRF, Differential Scan-
ning Calorimeter, XRD, SEM, TEM, water activity, textural analyzer, e –sensors, biosensors, Nitrogen ana-
lyzers. 
 
36 
 
Recommended Books 
1 The Chemical Analysis of Foods, Churchill Livingstone, New York by D. Pearson 
2 Instrumental Methods of Chemical Analysis, Goel Publishing House, New Delhi by B. K. Sharma. 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 433 
Process Control and Instrumentation in 
Food Industry 
            
 
 
FP 434 Food Process Modeling and Simulation 3 credits (3-0-0) 
 
Objectives: To learn application of modeling and simulations in food processing 
Syllabus: Fundamentals of modeling and simulation; Definition of basic terms like system, entity attrib-
ute, activity, state of system, system environment; Different steps for modeling and simulation, Types of 
models; Advantages of modeling and simulation; Monte Carlo Method or random simulation, Applica-
tion areas of simulation. Iterative convergence method, derivation and algorithm of bisectional method 
or intermediate value theorem; Regula Falsi method; Newton Raphson method, Generalized Newton’s 
method for multiple roots, Iterative or method of successive approximation; Introduction to numerical 
integration, Simpson’s 1/3rd rule, Solution of Ordinary Differential Equation Model: Picard Method, Tay-
lor’s Series method, Euler’s method, Modified Euler’s method, Runga Kutta method. Solution of partial 
differential equations models: Differential Laplace, Poisson, parabolic and hyperbolic equation, Finite 
difference method, graphical method, Bender - Schmidt method. Introduction to optimization, optimiza-
tion methods, Graphical and numerical methods of optimization, Unconstrained and Constrained opti-
mization, Programming optimization, experimental optimization, Response surface methodology (RSM). 
Modelling and simulation of selected food engineering operations. 
 
Recommended  Books 
1 Computerized Control Systems in the Food Industry by Gauri S. Mittal 
2 Computer aided techniques in Food Technology by Israel Saguy 
3 Design of Experiments by Montgomery 
 
Course Outcomes 
POs 
a b c d e f g h i j k l 
FP 434 Food Process Modeling and Simulation             
 
 
Detail Syllabi
319
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	MECHANICAL	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
ME 170 Machine Drawing and Solid Modeling 0-0-3 2
ME 210 Design of Machine Elements 3-1-0 4
ME 211 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery 3-1-0 4
ME 213 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4
ME 230 Primary Production Processes 3-1-0 4
ME 231 Total Quality Management 3-0-0 3
ME 250 Thermal Engineering 3-1-0 4
ME 251 Engineering Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4
ME 252 Thermal Problem in Electrical Systems 3-1-0 4
ME 253 Heat Transfer Problems in Electronics and Instrumentation 3-0-0 3
ME 254 Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 3
ME 256 The Quest for Absolute Zero 3-0-0 3
ME 271 Thermal Engineering Lab 0-0-3 2
ME 272 Mechanical Engineering Lab 0-0-3 2
ME 280 Machine Element Design Practice – I 0-0-3 2
ME 300 Finite Elements Analysis 3-0-0 3
ME 311 Composite Material 3-0-0 3
ME 313 Fundamentals of Ergonomics 3-0-0 3
ME 330 Metal Cutting and Tool Design 3-1-0 4
ME 331 Metal Machining and Automation 3-1-0 4
ME 332 Advanced Manufacturing Process 3-0-0 3
ME 333 Process Control and Assurance Science 3-0-0 3
ME 334 Surface Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 335 Metrology and Computer Aided Inspection 3-0-0 3
ME 336 Plastic Part Manufacturing and Tool Design 3-0-0 3
ME 350 Heat Transfer 3-1-0 4
ME 351 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4
ME 352 Fluid Dynamics and Hydraulic Machines 3-0-0 3
ME 353 Internal Combustion Engines 3-0-0 3
ME 354 Refrigeration and Air-conditioning 3-0-0 3
ME 355 Aircraft and Rocket Propulsion 3-0-0 3
ME 356 Turbo Machinery 3-0-0 3
ME 357 Gas Dynamics 3-0-0 3
ME 370 Heat Transfer and Refrigeration Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 372 Fluid Mechanics & Fluid Machines Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 373 Production Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ME 374 Computational Fluid Dynamics Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 375 Internal Combustion Engines and Automobile Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
ME 380 Production Engineering Project 0-0-3 2
ME 381 Machine Element Design Practice – II 0-0-3 2
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
320
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 410 Advanced Mechanics of Solids 3-0-0 3
ME 411 Vibration and Noise Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 412 Advanced Machine Dynamics 3-0-0 3
ME 413 Experimental Stress Analysis 3-0-0 3
ME 414 Mechatronics 3-0-0 3
ME 415 Fundamentals of Tribology 3-0-0 3
ME 416 Robotics 3-0-0 3
ME 417 Control System Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 418 Material Handling 3-0-0 3
ME 430 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3
ME 431 Decision Modeling 3-0-0 3
ME 432 Non-Conventional Machining Processes 3-0-0 3
ME 433 Advanced Manufacturing Systems 3-0-0 3
ME 434 Computer Graphics for CAD/CAM 3-0-0 3
ME 435 Concurrent Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 436 Entrepreneurship 3-0-0 3
ME 437 Welding Technology 3-0-0 3
ME 440 Industrial Management 3-0-0 3
ME 450 Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3
ME 451 Power Plant Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 453 Energy Conservation & Waster Heat Recovery 3-0-0 3
ME 455 Nuclear Power Generation and Safety 3-0-0 3
ME 457 Cryogenic Engineering 3-0-0 3
ME 470 Design Engineering Lab. 0-0-3 2
ME 480 Thermal Engineering Design Project 0-0-3 2
ME 481 Mechanical System Design Project 0-0-3 2
ME 483 Industrial Engineering Project 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
ME 170 MACHINE	DRAWING	AND	SOLID	MODELING 2 credits [0-0-3]
Drawing to be drawn manually: Projection of solids; Nut & bolt and Fasteners; Cotter joint; Plummer block; Expansion 
joint; Shaft coupling; Drawing to drawn using drafting software: Fundamentals of AutoCAD Mechanical Desktop, 
Dimension & annotations; Use of Layers; Working with constraint in dimension; Creating assembly; Axi-symmetrical 
parts; Creating surface features; Working with bill of material; Free hand sketches of commonly used parts are to be 
drawn and submitted to the teacher concerned in the sessional class. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. L. Narayana, P. Kannaiah, K. Reddy, Machine Drawing, - New Age International, 2006. 
2. AutoCAD Mechanical manual, Autodesk Inc. 
ME 210 DESIGN	OF	MACHINE	ELEMENTS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to machine design, methodology, strength, rigidity, fracture, wear, and material considerations in design, 
use of standards, Selection of materials and processes. Standard numbering system including BIS designations of 
materials. concept of factor of safety. Application of theories of failure to design. Design of Riveted, Welded, Bolted 
joints, Power screw, shafts, keys and couplings, belt, rope and chain drives, journal bearing and antifriction bearings, 
springs, clutches and Gears. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
321
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. E. Shigley and L. C. Mitchel, Mechanical Engineering Design - Tata Mc Graw-Hill, 8th Ed, 2007. 
2. P. C. Sharma, D. K. Agrawal, Machine Design –Kataria & sons, 2007. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. F. Spotts, T. E. Shoup, Design of Machine Elements, Pearson, 2003
2. R. C. Juvinal & K. M. Marshek Fundamentals of Machine Component Design - John Wiley, 2002. 
3. Design Data Book – PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore. 1995
ME 211 KINEMATICS	AND	DYNAMICS	OF	MACHINERY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mechanisms: Lower and higher pairs, degrees of freedom, various types of mechanisms, their inversions and 
applications, Kinematics and structure diagrams, equivalent linkages, steering mechanisms. Motion analysis of planer 
mechanisms by graphical, analytical and computer aided methods instantaneous centre, Corioli’s component of 
acceleration.; Cams: Cam follower systems, synthesis of roller cams, cam profiles, pressure angles,; Gears: Gearing 
terminology, spur, bevel, helical, worm, gears, motion and synthesis of simple, reverted and epicyclic gear trains, 
gear corrections.; Kinematic synthesis: Classical synthesis techniques, Analytical synthesis of four line mechanisms 
and planner mechanisms. Dimensional synthesis, three position synthesis for function generation, path generation.; 
Dynamics: Review of planar rigid & body dynamics, static and dynamic analysis of mechanisms, slider crank and quick 
return motion mechanism dynamics.; Balancing: Static and dynamic balancing of rotors, balancing of single cylinder, 
multi cylinder, inline, radial & V-engines. Dynamics of Flywheels, Cams & Gyroscopes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. E. Sigley & J. J. Ucker, Theory of Machines and Mechanisms - McGraw Hill. 
2. A. Ghosh & A. K. Mallick, Theory of Mechanisms and Machines - McGraw Hill. 
ME 213 MECHANICS	OF	SOLIDS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Definition of stress, stress tensor - normal and shearing stresses in axially loaded members. Normal and shearing 
strains - stress-strain relationship - Generalized Hooke’s Law - Poisson’s ratio - relationship between material 
properties of isotropic materials. - stress-strain diagram for uniaxial loading for ductile and brittle materials - working 
stress - factor of safety. Composite bars in tension and compression, temperature stresses, statically indeterminate 
problems. Thin Cylinders and Spherical Shells, Torsion of Circular Shafts and Helical Springs, shear force and bending 
moment diagrams, pure bending theory, shearing stresses in beams, Deflection of Beams, Theory of Columns, Plane 
stress and plane strain problems, Energy methods: Strain energy due to axial, torsion, bending and transverse shear. 
Castigliano’s theorem, reciprocity theorem, Theories of Failure. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. P. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, Elements of Strength of Materials - Affiliated East West Press Pvt. Ltd. 
2. E. P. Popov, Engineering Mechanics of Solids - Prentice Hall India, New Delhi. 1990. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. I. H. Shames, Introduction to Solid Mechanics - Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi. 1989. 
2. G. H. Ryder, Strength of Materials - ELBS. 
ME 230 PRIMARY	PRODUCTION	PROCESS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Foundry : Introduction to patterns and foundry process, Sand binders and different additives, Sand testing and 
melting furnaces for ferrous and non-ferrous metals such as cupola, Induction furnace, Arc furnace & Resistance 
Furnace. Solid fiction of castings, Continuous casting process: Precision investment casting, centrifugal casting, Die 
casting, Casting defects.; Welding and cutting: Introduction to gas welding, cutting, Arc welding and equipment’s. TIG 
(GTAW) and MIG (GMAW) welding, resistance welding and thermit welding. Weldability, Newer Welding methods like 
plasma Arc, Laser Beam, Electron Beam, Ultrasonic, Explosive and friction welding. Brazing and soldering, welding 
defects. Destructive and non-destructive testing of castings and weldings.; Brief introduction to powder metallurgy 
processes.; Plastic deformation of metals: Variables in metal forming and their optimization. Dependence of stress 
strain diagram on Strain rate and temperature. Hot and cold working of metals.; Rolling: Pressure and Forces in 
rolling, types of rolling mills, Rolling defects.; Forging: Smith Forging, Drop and Press forging, M/c forging. Forging 
defects.; Extrusions, Direct, Indirect, Impact and Hydrostatic extrusion and their applications. Extrusion of tubes. Wire 
drawing methods and variables in wire-drawing. Optimum die shape for extrusion and drawing.; Brief introduction to 
sheet metal working: Bending, Forming and Deep drawing. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
322
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. C. Mukherjee, Fundamentals of metal casting technology, Oxford and IBH. 
2. B. Ravi, Design of Metal Casting - PHI. 
3. H. Choudhury, Workshop Technology – Vol –I & II, Media Promotion & Publisher Pvt. Ltd. 
ME 231 TOTAL	QUALITY	MANAGEMENT 3 credits [3-0-0]
An Overview: Quality Definition, Quality, Price, Value Relationship, Hardware and Software Aspects of Quality. Quality 
Philosophies: Deming’s 14 Points, Juran’s Trilogy, Crosby’s Zero Defect, Ishikawa diagram. Quality Costs: Prevention, 
Appraisal, Internal Failure, External Failure. Total Quality Management: Concept, Comparison with Traditional Quality, 
Implementation of TQM, Malcolm Baldridge Award, TQM in Education. Kaizen: Concept of Waste Elimination, Various 
Forms of Waste, Various Causes of Waste, Kaizen Approach, Kaizen Benefits. Quality Systems: ISO 9000. Benchmarking, 
Business Process Re-engineering, Tools (old) & 7 Tools (new)
Essential	Reading:	
1. Dr. K. C. Arora, TQM and ISO 14000, S. K. Kataria & Sons, New Delhi. 
2. A. Feigenbaum, Total Quality Control, McGraw Hill
ME 250 THERMAL	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Laws of perfect gas; gas constants, concept of system, surrounding, equilibrium, Heat and work transfer, quasi-static 
process, temperature and Zeroth law of thermodynamics. Units & Dimensions; First Law of Thermodynamics: Internal 
energy, enthalpy, 1st law applied to non-flow and steady flow processes; Second Law: Clausius and Kelvin-Plank 
statements, Carnot cycle, corollaries, entropy, changes of entropy or a perfect gas in various processes. Properties 
of Pure Substances: Definitions, p-V, p-T, T-s and his diagrams for a pure substance, quality, Steam Tables, Charts for 
thermodynamics properties, Measurement of steam quality; Vapour Power Cycles: Rankine cycle, Comparison of 
Rankine and Carnot vapor cycles, Regenerative cycles, Ideal working fluid for vapor power cycles, Binary vapor cycle, 
Thermodynamics of couples cycles, Process heat and by-product power; I. C. Engines: Air standard Otto, Diesel and 
Dual cycles, C. I. and S. I. engines; Four stroke and two stroke cycles, Indicated Power, Brake Power, Mechanical, Thermal 
and relative efficiencies. Valve timing Diagram, fuel supply system; Air compressors and Motors: working principles 
of reciprocating air compressors, volumetric efficiency, effect of clearance, single and multistage compressors with 
intercooling, optimum inter-stage pressure, air motors and other application of compressed air. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. K. Nag, Engineering Thermodynamics, TMH. 
ME 251 ENGINEERING	THERMODYNAMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Basic concepts, thermodynamic equilibrium and quasi-static processes, Zeroth law of thermodynamics; Energy 
Interactions: displacement and other types of work, free expansion, Heat transfer; First Law of Thermodynamics: First 
law for a closed system, Energy - a property of the system, Different forms of stored energy, enthalpy, First law applied 
to flow processes; Second Law of Thermodynamics: Qualitative difference between heat and work, Heat Engines, 
Refrigerators and Heat pumps, Kelvin-Plank and Clausius statements of second law and their equivalence, Reversibility 
and irreversibility, Ideal processes, Carnot Cycle, Corollaries of second law, Carnot’s theorem, Absolute thermodynamic 
temperature scale, Clausius inequality; Entropy: Definition, Principles of increase of entropy, calculation entropy 
for various processes; Available Energy and Availability: Helmholtz and Gibbs functions, Availability in steady flow, 
Entropy equation for flow processes, irreversibility; Properties of Pure Substances: p-V, p-T, T-s and h-s diagrams for 
a pure substance, quality, Steam Tables and charts for thermodynamics properties, Measurement of steam quality; 
Properties of Gases and Gas Mixtures: equation of state, Calculation of property changes for ideal gases, Real gases 
definition and equations of state, Law of corresponding states, Gas mixtures and Dalton’s Law; Combined 1st and 
2nd Laws: Maxwell relations, T-dS equations, Joule-Kelvin effect, Clausius-Clapeyron equation, Gibb’s Phase rule and 
Conditions of stability; Reciprocating air compressors: Work required for single and multistage air compressors, Effect 
of intercooling, Optimum interstage pressure, Effect of clearance on volumetric efficiency, Air motors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Jones and Hawkins, Engineering Thermodynamics, John Wiley. 
2. V. Wylen and Sonntag, Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, John Wiley. 
3. Kadambi and Prasad, An Introduction to Energy Conversion (Vol. I & II), Wiley Eastern. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
323
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 252 THERMAL	PROBLEMS	IN	ELECTRICAL	SYSTEMS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Fundamentals of thermodynamics: Concept of system, surrounding, state, process and equilibrium, Temperature and 
Zeroth law of thermodynamics.; First and second law of thermodynamics: First and second law analysis, Concept of 
internal energy, enthalpy and entropy.; Heat Transfer: Fundamental modes of heat transfer-Conduction, Convection 
and Radiation. Effectiveness of a fin and its efficiency, Introduction to forced and natural convection, Surface radiation.; 
Properties of Pure Substances: Definitions, p-V, p-T and T-s diagrams for pure substance, Properties of substances 
from Steam tables.; Power Plant Engineering: Rankine cycle, procdure for improving the efficiency of the Rankine 
cycle, Regenerative cycle; Heat transfer in Transformers; air cooling and oil cooling, cooling of motor windings, cooling 
of electrical panels (control room)
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. K. Nag, Engineering Thermodynamics –Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2. Y. A. Çengel and M. A. Boles, Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach –MGraw-Hill. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering –Tata Mc. Graw Hill. 
2. P. L. Ballany, Thermal Engineering –Khanna Publishers. 
3. R. K. Rajput, A text book of Electrical Technology –laxmi Publications. 
4. M. N. Ozisik, Heat Transfer: A Basic Approach –McGraw-Hill. 
5. R. K. Rajput, Thermal Engineering –Laxmi Publications
ME 253 HEAT	TRANSFER	PROBLEMS	IN	ELECTRONICS	AND	INSTRUMENTATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fundamentals of Thermodynamics: Concepts and definitions, 1st law and its analysis for open and closed system, 2nd 
law: Kelvin-Plank and Claussius statements, Introduction to entropy. Fundamental modes of heat transfer: Conduction, 
Convection and Radiation.; Conduction: Fourier law, Problem formulation, Boundary conditions, 1-D temperature 
solution, Lumped system analysis, Heat transfer through extended surfaces (fins), Efficiency and effectiveness of 
fins. Design of fin geometry and optimum spacing of fins in a device, Heat transfer from fin surface of variable cross 
section. Convection: Forced and natural convection through flat plate and duct. Heat transfer coefficient correlations 
for laminar and turbulent convection. Radiation: Stefan law, emissive power, emissivity and reflectivity, equivalent 
heat transfer coefficient for combined convection and radiation.; Applications: Heat sink, Electronic chip cooling, 
Temperature measurement: static and dynamic characteristics of temperature sensors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. N. Ozisik, Heat Transfer: A Basic Approach –McGraw-Hill. 
2. P. K. Nag, Engineering Thermodynamics –Tata McGraw-Hill. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Y. A. Cengel, Heat Transfer: A Practical Approach –McGraw-Hill. 
2. S. P. Sukhatme, A Text Book on Heat Transfer –University Press (Fourth Edition). 
3. F. P. Incropera, D. P. DeWitt, T. L. Bergman, A. S. Levine, Introduction to Heat Transfer –Wiley. 
ME 254 RENEWABLE	ENERGY	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Solar Energy: Solar Radiation: Solar thermal process, heat transfer devices, solar radiation measurement, estimation 
of average solar radiation. Solar energy storage: stratified storage, well mixed storage, comparison, Hot water system, 
practical consideration, solar ponds, Non-convective solar pond, extraction of thermal energy and application of 
solar ponds.; Other Renewable Energy Systems: Wind energy: The nature of wind. Wind energy resources and 
modeling. Geothermal energy: Origin and types of geothermal energy and utilisation. OTEC: Ocean temperature 
differences. OTEC systems. Wave energy: Fundamentals. Availability. Wave-energy conversion systems. Tidal energy: 
Fundamentals. Availability. Tidal-energy conversion systems. Energy from biomass: Photosynthesis. Biomass resource. 
Utilisation of biomass. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. P. Sukhatme, Solar Energy Principle of Thermal Collection and Storage, TMH, 1990. 
2. Gary L. Johnson, 1985, Wind Energy Systems, Prentice Hall Inc. New Jersey. 
3. J. M. Kriender, ‘Principles of Solar Engineering’, McGraw Hill, 1987. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. S. Mangal, Solar Engineering, TMH, 1992. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
324
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. N. K. Bansal, Renewable Energy Source and Conversion Technology, TMH, 1989. 
3. P. J. Lunde, Solar Thermal Engineering’, John Willey, 1988. 
4. J. A. Duffie and Beckman W. A., Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes, Wiley, 1990. 
ME 256 THE	QUEST	FOR	ABSOLUTE	ZERO 3 credits [3-0-0]
Electrical and thermal properties of solids at extreme low temperature; Debye theory for specific heat of solids; Third 
law of Thermodynamics. Properties of liquid helium, Phase transition, Lambda point, super fluidity. Thermodynamic 
principles of refrigeration, Kapitza and Collins cycles for liquefaction of helium, Modeling and optimization of 
cryogenic cycles for refrigerators and liquefiers; Refrigeration with Helium – 3.; Refrigeration below 1 Kelvin, 
Magnetic refrigerators, dilution refrigerator; Pomeranchuk cooling.; Regenerative cycles – Stirling, GM and Pulse 
tube; Regenerator materials for deep low temperature refrigerators.; Extreme low temperature; Introduction to 
statistical mechanics in extreme low temperature physics. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Mendelssohn, The Quest for Absolute Zero: The meaning of low temperature physics, Wiley, 1977
2. T. Frederking, SWK Yuan, Cryogenics-Low Temperature Engineering & Applied Sciences, Yutopian Enterprises (December 15, 
2005), 
3. M. W. Zemansky, R. H. Dittman, Heat and Thermodynamics (Hardcover), McGraw-Hill. 
ME 280 MACHINE	ELEMENT	DESIGN	PRACTICE	–	I 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design and drawing of boiler (pressure vessels); Design and drawing of bolted joints; Design and drawing of welded 
joint; Design and drawing of cotter and knuckle joint; Design and drawing of flexible coupling; Design and drawing of 
universal coupling; Design and drawing of screw jack; Deign and drawing of belt/chain drive; Design and drawing of 
fly wheels; Design and drawing of cams. 
ME 300 FINITE	ELEMENTS	ANALYSIS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, brief history of development, advantages, disadvantages of finite element analysis, basic steps and 
limitations, error and accuracy in finite element analysis, structural stiffness and network analysis, assembly and 
analysis of a structure, finite element analysis of an elastic continuum, displacement approach, minimization 
of total potential energy, convergence criteria, generalization of finite element concepts, alternative approach to 
finite element formulation, plane stress and plane strain analysis, element characteristics, triangular, rectangular 
and isoparametric elements, some practical applications, axisymmetric stress analysis, some illustrative examples, 
computer methods and computer programmes, data input, stiffness generation, assembly and solution of equations 
and output of results, application of FEM to structural, plastic deformation, fluid flow and heat transfer problems, 
FEM software packages, modeling capabilities, preprocessors and postprocessors, modern trends in finite element 
analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Schaum’s outline of Finite Element Analysis, MGH 2008. 
2. Finite Element Analysis by University Press, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. O. C. Zienkiewicz, The Finite Element Method in Engg Science, TMH, 2006. 
2. S. S. Bhavikati, Finite Element Analysis, New Age, 2005. 
ME 311 COMPOSITE	MATERIAL 3 credits [3-0-0]
Definition and Classification of Composites, MMC, PMC, CMC. Reinforcing fibres- Natural fibres (cellulose, jute, coir 
etc), boron, carbon, ceramic glass, aramids, polyethylene (UHMWPE), polybenz-thiazoles etc. Particulate fillers-
importance of particle shape an size. Matrix resins-thermoplastics and thermosetting matrix resins. Coupling agents-
surface treatment of fillers and fibres, significance of interface in composites. Nanocomposites, short and continuous 
fibre reinforced composites, critical fibre length, anisotropic behaviour, SMC, BMC, DMC etc. Fabrication techniques 
pultrusion, filament winding, prepreg technology, injection and compression moulding, bag moulding, resin transfer 
moulding, reaction injection moulding. Properties and perfor mance of composites. Applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. K. Chawla, Composite Materials – Science & Engineering, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987. 
2. F. L. Matthews and R. D. Rawlings, Composite Materials: Engineering and Science, Chapman & Hall, London, 1994. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
325
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. Dr N. Chand, Tribology of Natural fiber Composites, Wood Head Publishing Limited, England
ME 313 FUNDAMENTALS	OF	ERGONOMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Objective : To develop awareness, acquire information, and experience human factors in design. Datalogging, data 
collection, data reduction and data analysis techniques. Gross human anatomy, anthropometry, biomechanics, muscle 
strength and exertion potential of different limbs, work capacity, environmental effects. Exercises for evaluation of 
postural forms and work spaces. Environmental conditions including temperature, illumination, noise and vibration. 
Perception and information processing, design of displays, hand controls, typography and readability, layout and 
composition. Exercises in evaluation of human response to product interface. Product safety and products liability. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. C. Alexgander, Applied Ergonomics - Taylor and Francis
ME 330 METAL	CUTTING	AND	TOOL	DESIGN 4 credits [3-1-0]
Geometrical parameters of cutting tool edges and their effect on tool force and power consumption, Mechanics 
of chip formation at low and high cutting speeds. Orthogonal and oblique cutting; Controlled contact cutting, 
Shear angles, Force and velocity relationships, Cutting forces in turning; Planning, Drilling and milling operations, 
controlled Contact Cutting, Chip-Breaking Effect, stress-distibution; Types of Tool Wear: Flank wear, Crater wear, Wear 
measurement, Cutting fluid and its effect; Machinability Criteria, Tool life and Taylor’s equation, Effect of variables on 
tool life, and surface finish, Tool-life test; Economics of Machining, Economic tool life, Gilbert’s Model.; Introduction 
to cutting tool materials, types of cutting tools, design of single point cutting tool, form tool, broach; Introduction to 
micro-machining, diamond turning, micro-turning, micro-drilling, micro-milling, hybrid-micromachining, micro-edm, 
micro-ecm, micro-wedm, micro-wedg; Sheet-metal working, blanking and piercing, compound and progressive die; 
Principles of location and clamping, design of drilling jig and fixture for milling, broaching, turning; Design of forging 
die block, drop forging and upsetting. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Bhattacharyya, Metal Cutting Theory and Practice - Central Book Publishers, Calcutta 2000. 
2. Lecain, Goold, Tool Design – Donaldson, TMH, New Delhi. 2004
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Arshinov, Metal cutting Theory Design - Mir Publisher
2. P. C. Sharma, A Text Book of Production Engineering - S. Chand & Co. 
ME 331 METAL	MACHINING	AND	AUTOMATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Principles of machine tools: Kinematics of machine tools, speed transmission from motor to spindle, Speed reversal 
mechanism, Tool holding and job holding methods in different M/C tools, Types of surfaces generated, Indexing 
mechanism and thread cutting mechanism. Concepts of Aesthetic and Ergonomics applied to machine tools, 
Acceptance tests and Standardisation of machine tools, Machine tool reconditioning. Latest trends in machine tool 
design; Non-Conventional metal removal process : Electro Discharge Machining, Laser Beam, Plasma Arc, Ion Beam, 
Electro Chemical, Abrasive jet, Ultrasonic and water jet-machining.; Numerical control: Brief principles and description 
of numerical control application to M/C tools. DNC, CNC and adaptive control. Programming of CNC M/C tools, CNC 
programming based on CAD.; Fundamentals of CAD/CAM, Computer integrated manufacturing, Compute Aided 
Process Planning, Computer Integrated Production Planning system.; Flexible Manufacturing Systems: types, Benefits 
and Elements of FMS Applications of FMS.; Robotics: Definition, Types and programming of Robots, Application of 
Industrial robots. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. Choudhury, Workshop Technology – Vol –II, Media Promotion & Publisher Pvt. Ltd. 
2. Production Technology – HMT-TMH. 
3. P. C. Pandey and H. S. Shen, Modern Machining process. 
4. G. C. Sen & A. Bhattacharya, Principles of M/c Tools –New Control Book Agency. 
5. M. P. Grover, Automation Production system and Computer Integrated Manufacturing –PHI. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Radhakrishnan & Subramanium, CAD, CAM, CIM - New Age India Publisher Pvt., Ltd. 
2. Bhattacharya, Metal cutting theory & Practice –New control Book Agency. 
3. N. K. Meheta, Machine Tool Design - TMH. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
326
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
4. G. C. Sen and A. Bhattacharya, Principles of Machine Tools - New Central Book Agency. 
5. R. K. Mittal & I. J. Nagrath, Robotics and Control - TMH. 
6. P. N. Rao, CAD/CAM, Principles and Applications - TMH. 
ME 332 ADVANCED	MANUFACTURING	PROCESSES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Surface engineering and High speed grinding: Application of advanced coatings in high performance cutting tools and 
high performance super-abrasive grinding wheels. Application of surface coating in metal-ceramic joining. Ultra high 
speed grinding with monolayer CBN grinding wheel. Machining and grinding under cryogenic environment. Micro 
and nano machining of glasses and ceramics in ductile regime using diamond cutting tool and diamond grinding 
wheel.; Theory and application of chemical processing: Chemical Machining, Aching of semi conductors, Coating 
and Electroless forming and CVD.; Rapid prototyping: Need for Rapid Prototyping, Basic Principles and advantages 
of RP, Classifications of different RP techniques with examples, Introduction to three Representative RP techniques: 
Fused deposition; modeling. Laminated Object Manufacturing and Stereo-lithography.; MEMS: Introduction, history, 
development and need of micro-electro-mechanical systems. IC fabrication processes used for MEMS; MEMS sensors 
and actuators; Mechanical Process techniques and process models for micro-machining; Fabrication processes and 
design of the process sequences; Agile prototyping; Reliability and process control of micro manufacturing processes’ 
Introduction to nano-technology processes.; Concurrent Engineering: Product development cycle, Sequential 
Engineering versus Concurrent Engineering, Implementation of Concurrent Engineering, Concurrent Engineering and 
Information Technology, Soft and Hard Prototyping, Characteristics of Concurrent Engineering Key factors influencing 
the success of CE. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Surface Wear Analysis, Treatment & Prevention - ASM Inernational, Materials Park, OH, U. S. A., 1st Ed. 1995
2. Advanced Thermally Assisted Surface Engineering - Kluwer Academic Publisher, MA, USA, 2nd ed. 2002. 
3. P. Radhakrishnan, CAD/CAM/CIM - New Age International Publishers., 4th ed. 2001
ME 333 PROCESS	CONTROL	AND	ASSURANCE	SCIENCE 3 credits [3-0-0]
METROLOGY: Line and End Standards, Principles of Measurements, Calibration, Accuracy and Precision; Measurement 
of Surface Roughness, Screw, Thread and Gears; Limits, Fits and Gauges, Assembly by full, partial and group 
interchangeability, geometric tolerances; QUALITY ASSURANCE: Some useful Probability Distribution, Testing of 
hypothesis, type I and type II errors, control limit theorem. Taguchi’s Loss function, Orthogonal Arrays, Linear Graphs, 
parametric design, signal-to-noise Ratio, ANOVA. Causes of Variation, standard error of mean, process capability, 
PCR, RPI, Natural tolerance Limits, Specification Limits, Trial and Revised control Limits, Rational subgroups, Control 
charts for variables (X-bar, R, S, CUSUM, EWMA), Control charts for fraction non-conforming, control charts for non-
conformation. Design of single sampling plan. Double, multiple and sequential sampling plans, O. C. curve, AOQ, 
AOQL, ATI, AFI, ASN MIL-STD 105D tables, switching rules. Neural network application in quality control; RELIABILITY: 
Definition, bath-tub-curve, system reliability, reliability improvement, maintainability and availability, Availability of 
single repairable system using Markov model, Life tests, Acceptance sampling plan based on life tests, Sequential 
acceptance sampling plan based on MTTF. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. R. Taher, Metrology, Measurement and Measuring Instruments, RNLBP, Allahabad. 
2. A. Mitra, Fundamentals of Quality Control and Improvement, 2nd Edn, PHI, New Delhi. 
ME 334 SURFACE	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Philosophy of surface engineering, general applications and requirements; Corrosion Processes: Basic principles of 
electrochemistry and aqueous corrosion processes; pitting, crevice and exfoliation corrosion; influence of deposits 
and anaerobic conditions; corrosion control; high temperature oxidation and hot corrosion; corrosion/mechanical 
property interactions; Friction and Wear: Abrasive, erosive and sliding wear. The interaction between wear and 
corrosion; Analytical Techniques: X-ray diffraction, TEM, SEM and  WDP analysis, surface analysis by  other techniques; 
Surface Engineering: Philosophy; surface engineering as part of a manufacturing process; integrating coating systems 
into the design process; Coating Manufacture: Electro deposition; flame and plasma spraying; physical vapor 
deposition; chemical vapor deposition; surface treatments; paint and paint systems; Applications: Coating systems 
for corrosion and wear protection; new coating concepts including multi-layer structures, functionally gradient 
materials, intermetallic barrier coatings and thermal barrier coatings. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
327
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 335 METROLOGY	&	COMPUTER	AIDED	INSPECTION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Metrological concepts - Abbe’s principle - need for high precision measurements - problems associated with 
high precision measurements. Standards for length measurement - Shop floor standards and their calibration – 
Light interference - Method of coincidence - Slip gauge calibration - Measurement errors. Various tolerances and 
their specifications, gauging principles, selective assembly, comparators. Angular measurements - principles and 
instruments. Gear and Thread measurements. Surface and form metrology - flatness, roughness, waviness, roundness, 
cylindricity, etc. Computer Aided Metrology - Principles and interfacing, software metrology. Laser metrology - 
Applications of Lasers in precision measurements - Laser interferometer, speckle measurements, laser scanners. 
Coordinate Measuring Machine - Types of CMM - Probes used - Applications - Non contact CMM using Electro optical 
sensors for dimensional metrology - Non contact sensors for surface finish measurements. Image processing and its 
application in Metrology. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. M. Anthony, Engineering Metrology, Pergamon Press. 
2. G. G. Thomas, Engineering Metrology, Butterworth. 
ME 336 PLASTIC	PART	MANUFACTURING	AND	TOOL	DESIGN 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fundamentals of Polymer Technology; Properties of Solid and Molten Polymers; Selection of Materials and 
Manufacturing Methods; Extrusion Equipment and Processing techniques; Injection Moulding; Blow Moulding, 
Rational Moulding, Compression and Transfer Moulding, Thermoforming; Resin Transfer Moulding; Rapid Prototyping 
and Tooling processes. Other Manufacturing methods (Machining, Joining, Finishing, Assembly) CAD/CAM of Dies/
Moulds/Tools; Flow analysis. Typical defects in plastic components and their prevention. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. A. Tres, Designing Plastic Parts for Assembly, Hanser Gardner Publications; 5th edition, 2003
2. R. A. Malloy, Plastic Part Design for Injection Molding: An Introduction, Hanser Gardner Publications, 1994. 
3. J. Rotheiser, Joining of Plastics: Handbook for Designers and Engineers, Hanser Gardner Publications, 2004
4. J. P. Beaumont, R. Nagel, R. Sherman, Successful Injection Molding: Process, Design, and Simulation, Hanser Gardner 
Publications, 2002
ME 350 HEAT TRANSFER 4 credits [3-1-0]
Modes of Heat Transfer, Combined heat transfer mechanism, Analogy between flow of heat and electricity, Conduction: 
Three dimensional Fourier conduction equation in Cartesian coordinates, One-dimensional steady conduction through 
slab, cylinder, Sphere and composite medium, Critical insulation thickness, Effect of variable thermal conductivity. 
Heat transfer through rectangular and pin fins. Fin effectiveness and Fin efficiency, Fin arrangement. Introduction to 
two-dimensional steady heat condition, Analytical methods for solving two-dimensional heat conduction problems; 
Convection: Hydrodynamics and thermal boundary layers for laminar flow over a flat plate. Integral solution of 
boundary layer equations for laminar flow over a flat plate. Heat transfer for laminar flow in tubes, heat transfer 
in turbulent flow, Reynolds analogy. Laminar free convection boundary layers equations for flow over a vertical 
plate. Dimensional analysis applied to forced and free convection. Boiling and Condensation: Film and drop wise 
condensation, Nusselt’s theory of laminar film condensation, Pool boiling regimes, Rohsenow correlation for nucleate 
boiling; Radiation: Black body and monochromatic radiation, Total emissive power, Stefan-Boltzmann law, Grey body 
Kirchoff’s law, Wien’s displacement law, Radiation between two black bodies, Shape factors for simple geometries, 
Radiation between two grey bodies, Electrical network method for solving radiation problems, Radiation shields; 
Heat Exchangers: Types, Overall heat transfer coefficient, Fouling factors, Logarithmic mean temperature difference, 
Effectiveness, Number of transfer units, Heat exchanger Design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Gupta and Prakash, Engineering Heat Transfer, Nemchand. 
2. J. P. Holman, Heat Transfer, TMH
3. M. N. Ozisik, Heat Transfer - A Basic Approach, McGraw Hill
ME 351 FLUID	MECHANICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Physical properties of fluids, Ideal and Real fluids, Concept of shear stress, Newtonian and Non-
Newtonian fluids. Fluid Statics: Pressure-density-height relationships, Manometers, Force on plane and curved 
surfaces, Centre of pressure, Buoyancy, Stability of immersed and floating bodies. Fluid masses subjected to uniform 
accelerations, Free and forced vortex. Fluid Kinematics: Steady and unsteady, uniform and non-uniform, laminar 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
328
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
and turbulent flows. Free surface flows and enclosed flows. Definition of one-, two- and three-dimensional flows. 
Stream lines, Streak lines, Path lines. Stream tubes. Stream function and velocity potential. Flow nets. Fluid Dynamics: 
Equation of continuity. One-dimensional Euler’s equation of motion and its integration to obtain Bernoulli’s equation 
and momentum equation. Flow through pipes (incompressible flow): Laminar and turbulent flow in pipes, Hydraulic 
mean radius, Darcy -Weisbach equation, Moody’s diagram. Minor losses, Pipes in parallel and series. Transmission of 
power. Water hammer in pipes. Measurements: Pitot tube, Current meter, Venturi meter, Orifice meter, Orifice and 
mouthpieces, Notches and Weirs. 
Essential	reading:	
1. S. K. Som and G. Biswas, Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Machines, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2. B. S. Massey, Mechanics of Fluids by ELBS. 
Supplementary reading: 
1. K. Mohanty, Fluid Mechanics, Prentice Hall. 
2. R. J. Garde and A. C. Mirajgackar, Engineering Fluid Mechanics by Nem Chand Bros. 
3. K. L. Kumar, Fluid Mechanics, S. Chand Co. 
ME 352 FLUID	DYNAMICS	&	HYDRAULIC	MACHINES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Boundary layer growth over a flat plate, Boundary layer thickness, Displacement thickness, Momentum thickness 
and energy thickness, Laminar and turbulent boundary layer, Momentum integral equation, Separation of boundary 
layer flow. Drag and lift, pressure drag and friction drag, stream lined body and bluff body, Drag over a flat plate, Drag 
characteristics of sphere and cylinder, Lift and Magnus effect, Lift characteristics of air foils. 
Dimensional homogeneity, Dimensional Analysis, Rayleigh’s method and Buckingham theorem. Similarity laws 
and model studies. Forces on fixed and moving flat plates and curved plates, work done and efficiency. Turbines: 
Classification, Study of Pelton, Francis and Kaplan Turbines, Blade Angle, Velocity Triangle, Efficiencies. Specific speed 
unit quantities, Performances of turbines, Principle of similarity applied to turbines. Centrifugal Pumps: Principle 
and Classification, Efficiency, Specific speed, Characteristic curves, Multi stage pumps, Pumps in series and parallel, 
Principle of similarity applied to pumps, cavitation in pumps, NPSH. Reciprocating Pump: Principle of working, 
Slip, Work done, Effect of acceleration and frictional resistance, Separation, Air vessels. Miscellaneous Machines: 
Rotary and air injection pumps, Hydraulic ram, Hydrostatic machines, Fluid power transmission systems, Hydraulic 
accumulator, Intensified, Press and Jack. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Dr. J. Lal, Hydraulic Machines - Metropolitan Book Co, New Delhi. 
2. S. K. Som and G. Biswas, Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Machines, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
3. B. S. Massey, Mechanics of Fluids, ELBS. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. K. Mohanty, Fluid Mechanics, Prentice Hall. 
2. V. P. Vasandani, Hydraulic Machines - Khanna Publishers. 
3. 3. K. L. Kumar, Fluid Mechanics by S. Chand Co. 
ME 353 INTERNAL	COMBUSTION	ENGINES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to I. C Engine-Classification-Components-Air standard cycles, characteristics of fuel air mixtures, 
variation of specific heats-Actual cycles, actual processes taking place in engines-Importance of Port, Valve timing 
diagram; Carburetion and fuel injection: Requirements of a good carburetor, simple carburetor, complete carburetor, 
Calculation of air-fuel ratio for a simple carburetor. Electronic fuel injection in S. I. engine. Requirements of diesel 
injection system, types of injection systems, fuel pumps. Ignition systems; Combustion in S. I. Engine and C. I. Engines: 
Stages of combustion in S. I. Engine, Detonation, Control of detonation. Stages of combustion in C. I. Engines, delay 
period, factors; Various systems of I. C. Engine, Lubrication system, function of lubricating system. Cooling system 
etc.; Testing and performance: Variable speed test of S. I. Engine, Constant speed load tests of C. I. Engines Morse 
tests; Engine Emissions-Pollutants and their ill effects, pollutants from Gasoline and diesel. Supercharging and turbo 
charging. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. B Heywood, Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals, McGraw Hill 
2. V. Ganesan, Internal Combustion Engines, McGraw Hill Company, (1992). 
3.  M. L. Mathur and R. P Sharma, A Course in internal combustion engines, Dhanpat Rai and Sons, (1980). 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
329
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
4. Newton and Steed: Automobile Engineering, ELBS Publishing, (1978). 
5. G. B. S Narang, Automobile Engineering, Dhanpat Rai and Sons, (1988). 
6. K. K. Ramalingam, Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals, Scitech Publications. 
ME 354 REFRIGERATION	AND	AIR-CONDITIONING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Refrigerants: Classification of Refrigerants, Halocarbon compounds, Azeotropes, Hydro-carbons, Inorganic 
compounds, Properties of refrigerants, Comparison of common refrigerants, Uses of important refrigerants, Brines, 
Ozone friendly refrigerants.; Vapor Compression Systems: Analysis of Theoretical vapor-compression cycle, Unit 
of refrigeration, Coefficient of performance, T-S and P-H diagram, Simple Saturated cycle, Subcooled cycle and 
superheated cycle, Effect of suction and discharge pressure on performance, Actual vapor-compression cycle.; 
Multistage compression and multi-evaporator systems Different arrangements of compressors and inter cooling, 
Multi-stage compression with intercooling, Multi-evaporator system, Dual compression system; Vapor-Absorption 
system: Simple Ammonia-absorption system, Improved absorption system, Analysis of vapor absorption system, 
Electrolux system, Comparison of absorption and vapor compression system.; Psychometrics: Properties of air-vapor 
mixtures, Psychometrics, Psychometric charts, Law of water vapor-air mixture - Enthalpy of moisture - simple heating 
and Humidification, Dehumidification - Mixture of air streams.; Requirements of comfort Air-conditioning : Oxygen 
supply, Heat Removal, Moisture removal, Air motion, Purity of Air, Thermodynamics of human body, Comfort and 
comfort chart, Effective temperature, Factors governing optimum effective temperature.; Air conditioning systems: 
Processes in Air conditioning, Summer Air conditioning, Winter Air conditioning and year round air conditioning, load 
calculations. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. P. Arora, A Course in Refrigeration and Air-conditioning, Tata Mc. Graw-Hill
2. H. F. Stoecker, A Text Book of Refrigeration and Air-conditioning, Tata Mc. Graw-Hill. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. F. Stoecker, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning - TMH. 
ME 355 AIRCRAFT	AND	ROCKET	PROPULSION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, Rocket system and aerodynamics of rockets, Fundamentals of gas turbine engines, Illustration of 
working principles of gas turbine engine, Propulsion system and operating principle, Thermodynamics of propulsion 
system, Engine performance parameters, The ramjet cycle, Working principles of ideal ramjet cycle, The turbojet 
cycle, Working principles of turbojet cycle, Non-ideal turbojet cycle, Axial flow fans and compressors, Polytrophic 
efficiency of compression, Calculation of stage performance and overall performance, Working principles of turbofan 
cycle, Rocket performance, Introduction and working principles of multistage rocket, Solid propellant rockets, Liquid 
propellant rockets, Thrust control in liquid rockets Cooling in liquid rockets, Hybrid rockets, Limitations of hybrid 
rockets, Relative advantages of liquid rockets over solid rockets 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. C. Oates, Aerothermodynamics of Aircraft Engine Components, AIAA Eduction Series, New York, 1985. 
2. W. W. Bathie, Fundamentals of Gas Turbines- John Wiley & Sons, 1984. 
3. M. L. Mathur and R. P. Sharma, Gas Turbine Jet and Rocket Propulsion, Standard Publishers and Distributors, Delhi, 1988. 
4. P. G. Hill, Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Propulsion- Addison Wesley, 1970. 
5. S. M. Yahya, Fundamentals of Compressible Flow - John Wiley, New York, 1982. 
6. A. K. Mohanty, Fluid Mechanics - Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 2003. 
ME 356 TURBOMACHINERY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Ideal and actual velocity triangles, Slip and its estimation, Impulse and reaction type machines, Degree of reaction, 
Effect of outlet blade angle on blade shape, Model laws, Specific speed and shape number, Special features of hydro, 
steam and gas turbines, Performance characteristics of turbo-machines; Axial flow compressors: Flow through 
cascades, cascade terminology, flow separation, radial equilibrium theory, actuator disc theory, effect of tip clearance, 
secondary flow, performance characteristics, surging and stalling; Axial flow turbine: Vortex theory, blade design, 
cooling of turbine blades, performance characteristics, profile loss, secondary flow loss, annulus loss, tip clearance, 
limiting factors in turbine design; Applications: Hydel power plant, Steam power plant, Gas turbine power plant, 
Aircraft propulsion. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. T. C. Sandy, Theory of Turbomachines, McGraw Hill. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
330
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. D. G. Shepherd, Principles of Turbomachinery, MacMillan. 
3. G. F. Wislicenus, Fluid Mechanics of Turbomachines, Dovers. 
4. S. M. Yahya, Turbines, Compressors and Fans, TMH. 
ME 357 GAS	DYNAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Energy equation for a flow process, Stagnation values, various regions of flow, critical velocity of sound. Crocco number, 
Effect of Mach number on compressibility, rate equations of momentum energy and entropy; Isentropic flow with 
variable area: Mach number variation, Stagnation and critical states, Area ratio as a function of Mach number, Impulse 
function, Mass flow rate, Flow through nozzles and diffusers, use of gas tables; Wave motion: Wave propagation 
in elastic solid medium, Propagation of sound waves, pressure field due to a moving source of disturbance, Mach 
angle; Flow with normal shock waves: Governing equation, variation of Mach number, Static Pressure, temperature 
and density etc. across the shock, Strength of a shock wave, Moving shock waves; Flow in constant area ducts with 
friction: The Fanno curves, Fanno flow equations and solutions, variation of flow properties, tables and charts for 
Fanno flow; Flow in constant area ducts with heat transfer: The Rayleigh lines, Fundamental equations, Rayleigh flow 
relations, Variation of flow properties, Maximum heat transfer, Tables and charts of Rayleigh flow; Jet propulsion: 
Thrust equation, maximum thrust relationship, Engine performance parameters, Ram Jet engine, ideal ram jet, ideal 
and actual turbojet engines; Rocket propulsion: Operating principle, thrust equation, specific impulse, jet velocity, 
thrust coefficient, characteristic velocity, impulse weight ratio. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. M. Yahya, Fundamentals of Compressible Flow, Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
2. Lipman and Rosco, Gas Dynamics, Mc Graw Hill
ME 370 HEAT	TRANSFER	AND	REFRIGERATION	LAB.	 2 credits [0-0-3]
To find overall heat transfer coefficient of a double pipe heat exchanger; To develop a correlation for natural convection 
of air around a vertical cylinder; To study the boiling heat transfer phenomena and determination of CHF for pool 
boiling of water; Measurement of thermal conductivity of solid by gaurded hot plate method; To determine the 
efficiency of a pin-fin in natural and forced convection; To find the heat transfer coefficient in forced convection of air 
in a tube; COP and Tonnage capacity of room air-conditioner; Performance study of vapour compression refrigeration 
test rig; Determination of COP and tonnage capacity of ammonia ice plant; Performance study of absorption 
refrigeration test rig; Performane study on LN2 Cryo-plant; Performane study on Pulse tube refrigerator
ME 372 FLUID	MECHANICS	&	FLUID	MACHINES	LAB.	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Verifications of momentum equation; Verifications of stokes apparatus; Calibration of Venturimeter; Verifications 
of Bernoulli’s equation through a convergent and divergent passage; Study of Major losses in Pipes; Study of Minor 
losses in Pipes; Velocity distribution in a pipe flow; Velocity distribution in open channel flow; Variable and constant 
speed characteristics of Pelton turbine; Performance characteristics of Francis Turbine; Performance characteristics of 
Kaplan Turbine; Constant discharge and constant speed characteristics of centrifugal pump; Pressure characteristics 
of a centrifugal blower; Determination of air power, static and overall efficiency of a fan at constant speed; Pressure 
characteristics of axial flow compressor; Study of simple/compound impulse and reaction steam turbines; Thermal 
efficiency of steam turbine; Performance study of screw compressor. 
ME 373 PRODUCTION	ENGG.	LAB.	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Calibration of slip gauge using interference of light by Interference Method; Internal taper and bore measurement 
using two precision spheres; External taper measurement by sine center; Bulge test of thin Aluminum blank in to a 
dome by hydraulic pressure and study it’s forming characteristics; Calibration of linear variable differential transformer 
(LVDT); Measurement of screw parameters by floating carriage machine; Measurement of tool angles of a single 
point cutting tool; Metrology of an external screw thread by “Tool maker’s Microscope”; Experiment on machining in 
machining center (CNC); Condition monitoring in machining processes using acoustic emission; Experiments on Ultra 
Sonic Machining; Experiments on Electro Discharge Machining; Experiments and demonstration of Laser Machining; 
Experiments and demonstration of Electro Chemical Machining process; Experiments and demonstration of Abrasive 
Jet Machining; Programming on various CNC machine tools and use of CIM
ME 374 COMPUTATIONAL	FLUID	DYNAMICS	LAB.	 2 credits [0-0-3]
CFD analysis for fluid flow problem with heat transfer over a flat plate; CFD analysis for fluid flow problem with heat 
transfer through a circular tube; Design of a thermal system: Thermal Power Plant; Calculation of heating/cooling 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
331
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
load for a conditioned space; Second law analysis for a heat exchanger; FDM application to high velocity flow with 
upwinding; FDM application to simplified Navier-Stokes equation; FEM applied to flow around a cylinder. 
ME 375 IC	ENGINES	AND	AUTOMOBILE	ENGG.	LAB.	 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of Two/Four stroke petrol/diesel engine; Determination of volumetric efficiency of reciprocating air-compressor; 
Valve timing diagram of four-stroke petrol/diesel engines; Load test on petrol Engine; Load test on diesel engine; 
Morse test on multi-cylinder petrol/diesel engine; Heat Balance study of petrol/diesel engine; Study of differential 
and transmission system of automobile; Study of 4-speed/5-speed gear box of automobile; Study of electric circuit 
and ignition system of automobile; Emission Analysis of I. C. Engines; Variable compression ratio test on I. C. Engines; 
CFR engines with pressure Vs Crank angle diagram – combustion process and emission control studies; Performance 
tests on multi-cylinder CI engines with bi-fuel operation & heat recovery system of exhaust gas. 
ME 380 PRODUCTION	ENGINEERING	PROJECT 2 credits [0-0-3]
Design and drawing of single point cutting tool for turning operation; Design and drawing of Form tool for mass 
production of conventional profile generation; Design and drawing of Broach tool for industrial mass production; 
Design and drawing of metal forming Press tool used in blanking & punching; Design and drawing of Jig & Fixture 
for mass production in a product focused system; Design and drawing of Gauges used in shop floor dimensional 
checking; Process planning for manufacturing by mass; Process planning for manufacturing by order; Tool layout 
optimization for a capstan lathe/machining center; Design of forging die blocks for mass production; Design and draw 
of metal forming Press tool used in deep drawing; Computer Aided Design of forging/forming die/ cutting tool for 
optimal function; Conceptual Design of a machine tool with better ergonomics/ environment friendly/ low cost/ less 
maintenance/ less running cost/ high precision etc. 
ME 381 MACHINE	ELEMENT	DESIGN	PRACTICE	–	II 2 credits [0-0-3]
Problems for practice on theories of failure; Problems for practice on fatigue and failure; Design of clutches; Design 
of spur gears; Design of spiral and bevel gears; Design of crank, piston and cylinders; Design of connecting rods, crank 
shafts; Design of Journal bearings; Design of ball bearings, roller bearings; Design of valves of IC engines. 
ME 410 ADVANCED	MECHANICS	OF	SOLIDS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Elementary concept of Elasticity: Stresses in three dimensional bodies, Equations of equilibrium, Strain displacement 
relations, Stress strain relations, Compatibility equations, Boundary conditions. Plane stress, Governing differential 
equation, Airy stress function ( Cartesian co-ordinates ); Energy Methods: Castigliano’s theorems, Maxwell’s 
theorem of Reciprocal relations and Betti’s Law, Principle of virtual work, Unit load and unit couple method; Thick 
Walled Cylinders: Thick cylinders subjected to internal and external fluid pressures, Compound cylinders, Shrink-
fit; Unsymmetrical Bending: Properties of beam cross sections, Slope of neutral axis, Stresses and deflections in 
unsymmetrical bending; Shear Center of thin wall beam cross section; Curved Beams: Bending of beams of large 
initial curvature, Stress distribution in beams with rectangular, Circular and trapezoidal cross sections, Location of 
neutral axis, Stresses in crane hooks, Rings and chain links; Membrane stresses in shells, application to cylindrical, 
Spherical and conical shells; Plastic Analysis of Beams: Plastic Modulus, Shape factor, Plastic hinge, Application to 
beams, Determination of collapse loads; Advanced Topics in Strength of Materials: Repeated stresses in structural 
and machine components, Fatigue in metals, Endurance limit, Concept of stress concentration, Stress concentration 
factor and notch sensitivity; Photoelastic Stress Analysis: Two dimensional photoelastic method of stress analysis, 
Stress optic law, Plane polariscope, Light and dark fields in a polariscope, Isoclinic and isochromatic fringe patterns. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. S. Srinath, Advanced Mechanics of Solids - TMH, New Delhi. 
2. S. P. Timoshenko, D. Van Nostrand Strength of Materials, Part I & II -. 
3. J. W. Dally and W. F. Riely, Experimental Stress Analysis - Mc Graw-Hill. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. P. Boresi, R. J. Schmidth and O. M. Sidebottom, Advanced Mechanics of Materials - John Wiley. 
2. F. B. Seely and J. O. Smith, Advanced Mechanics of Materials - John Wiley. 
3. Mobin, Experimental Stress Analysis, Khanna Publishers, 2003. 
ME 411 VIBRATION	AND	NOISE	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Undamped Free Vibration: Systems with single degree of freedom, Equilibrium method, The energy method, 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
332
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Rayleigh’s method, Stiffness of spring elements. Damped Free Vibrations: Viscous damping, laws of damping, 
logarithmic decrement. Forced Vibration with Harmonic Excitation: Steady state solution with viscous damping, 
Method of complex algebra, Reciprocating and rotating unbalance, Base excitation, Vibration isolation, Air springs, 
Energy dissipated by damping, Equivalent viscous damping, Structural damping, Sharpness of resonance, Vibration 
measuring instruments, Whirling of rotating shafts, Rigid shafts supported by flexible bearings. Two degree of 
freedom system: Vibration of undamped two degree of freedom system, coordinate coupling, vibration absorber. 
Multi-degree freedom system: Influence coefficients, generalized co-ordinates, matrix method, orthogonality 
principle, matrix iteration method. Vibration of Beams: Uniformly loaded, Carrying more than one concentrated load, 
Energy method, Dunkerley’s method, Rayleigh’s method. Torsional Vibration: Two rotor system, three rotor system, 
multi-rotor system, Geared system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. T. Thompson, Theory of Vibration with Application, CBS Publisher, 2002
ME 412 ADVANCED	MACHINE	DYNAMICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Advanced Kinematics: Computer Aidedkinematics analysis of four link and slider crack mechanisms, coupler 
curves and their properties. Design of Mechanisms by relative pole and inversion method, Coordination of angular 
displacements of input and output links & position of coupler point; Gyroscope: Gyroscopic couple - Plane disc, 
Two bladed air screw, Analysis of the forces on bearings due to the forced precession of rotating disc mounted on 
shafts, Gyroscopic effects on a two wheel and a four wheel vehicle, Gyroscopic stabilization; Cams: Simple Harmonic, 
Constant - velocity and constant acceleration types, Displacement, Velocity and acceleration of follower, cams with 
specified contours; Governors: Centrifugal Governors-Watt & Porter Governors, Spring Loaded Governor, Hartnell 
Governor, sensitiveness, stability, Isochronism, hunting, governor effort & power, curves of controlling force, Effect of 
friction; Balancing: Balancing of revolving masses in one plane and different planes, Partial balance of single cylinder 
engine, Balancing of multi cylinder engine, V and radial engines, graphical and analytical methods, method of direct 
and reverse cranks, dynamic balancing machines. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. S. Rattan, Theory of Machines, MGH
2. R. K. Bansal, Theory of Machines, Luxmi Publisher
3. D. R. Malhotra, Theory of Machines, Satya Prakash
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Rao & Dulchipati, Mechanism of M/C theory, New Age
2. Ghosh & Mallick, Theory of Mechanism & Machines, East West Press
3. AS Hall, Kinematics & Linkage Design, PHI
ME 413 EXPERIMENTAL	STRESS	ANALYSIS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Photoelasticity: Light and Optics as Related to Photoelasticity Behavior of Light, Polarized Light, Plane Polarizers,, Wave 
Plates, Arrangement of Optical Elements in a Polariscopic, Constructional Details of Diffused Light and Lens - Type. 
Theory of Photoelasticity: The Stress Optic Law in Two Dimensions at Normal Incidence, Effects of a Stressed Model 
in a Plane Polariscope, Effects of a Plane Model in a Circular Polariscope with Dark and Light Field Arrangements. 
Analysis Techniques: Isochromatic Fringe Patterns, Isoclinic Fringe Patterns, Compensation Techniques, separation 
Techniques, Sealing Model to Prototype Stresses. Three Dimensional Photoelasticity: Locking in Model Deformation 
Slicing the Model and Interpretation of the Resulting Fringe Pattern, Effective Stresses. the Shear Difference Method 
in Three Dimensions.; Strain Measurement Methods: Basic Characteristics of a Strain Gauge, Types of Shell Gauge, 
Moire Method of Strain Analysis, Grid Method of Strain Analysis. Electrical Resistance Strain Gauge: Factors Influencing 
Strain sensitivity in Metallic Alloys, Gauge Construction Temperature Compensation, Factors-Influencing Gauge 
Section Gauge Sensitivity and Gauge Factor, Correction for transverse Strain Effects, Semiconductor Strain Gauges. 
Rosette Analysis - three element rectangular Rosette. the Delta Rosettee, the Four Element. The Delta Rosette, 
The Stress Gauge, Strain Circuits, Potensiometer Circuits, The Wheatstone Bridge. Brittle Coating Method: Coating 
Stresses, Failure Theories Brittle Coating Crack Patterns Produced by Direct Loading Brittle-Coating Crack Patterns 
Produced by refrigeration Techniques, Brittle Coating Crack, Pattern Produced by Releasing the Load, Double Crack 
Pattern, Crack Detection, Load-Time Relation and Its influence on the threshold Strain Effects of a Biaxial stress Field. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. W. Dally and W. F. Riley, Experimental Stress Analysis - 2nd Ed. MGH. 
2. Mubin, Experimental Stress Analysis, Khanna, 2003. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
333
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Dureli. An Introduction to Experimental Stress and Strain Analysis. 
2. Srinath et. al. An Introduction to Experimental Stress Analysis - MGH. 
ME 414 MECHATRONICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Mechantronics- Systems-Measurement Systems-Control Systems-Mechatronics Approach; Sensors 
And Transducers: Introduction-Performance Terminology-Displacement, Position and Proximity-Velocity and Motion-
Fluid, Pressure-Temperature Sensors-Light Sensors-Selection of Sensors- Processing; Signal Conditioning: signal 
conditioning, operational amplifier, filtering, multiplexer, data accusation; Microprocessor: Introduction-Architecture-
Pin Configuration-Instruction set Programming of Microprocessors using instructions-Interfacing input and output 
devices Interfacing D/A converters and A/D converters-Applications-Temperature control-Stepper motor control-
Traffic light controller; Programmable Logic Controllers: Introduction-Basic structure-Input/Output Processing-
Programming-Mnemonics-Timers, Internal relays and counters-Data handling Analog Input/Output-Selection of 
a PLC; Design And Mechatronics: Stages in Designing mechatronic systems – Traditional and Mechatronic design 
-Possible design solutions-Case studies of mechatronic systems – Pick and place robot - automatic car park system 
-engine management system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Bolton, Measurements, Addison Wesley. 
2. HMT, Mechatronics, TMH
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Histand and Aliatore, Introduction to Mechatronics and Measurement system, MGH
2. A. K. Stiher, Design with Microprocessor for Mechanical Engineers, MGH
ME 415 FUNDAMENTALS	OF	TRIBOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to tribology and its historical background. Factors influencing Tribological phenomena. Engineering 
surfaces - Surface characterization, Computation of surface parameters. Surface measurement techniques. Apparent 
and real area of contact. Contact of engineering surfaces- Hertzian and non-hertzian contact. Contact pressure and 
deformation in non-conformal contacts. Genesis of friction, friction in contacting rough surfaces, sliding and rolling 
friction, various laws and theory of friction. Stick-slip friction behavior, frictional heating and temperature rise. Friction 
measurement techniques. Wear and wear types. 
Mechanisms of wear - Adhesive, abrasive, corrosive, erosion, fatigue, fretting, etc., Wear of metals and non-metals. 
Wear models - asperity contact, constant and variable wear rate, geometrical influence in wear models, wear damage. 
Wear in various mechanical components, wear controlling techniques. Introduction to lubrication. Lubrication 
regimes. Introduction to micro and nano tribology. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G Bayer, Mechanical wear prediction and prevention- Marcel Dekkar. Inc., New York
2. P. Sahoo. Industrial Tribology, Tata Mc Graw Hill
ME 416 ROBOTICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, Automation and Robotics, brief history, Social and economic aspects, Advantages overview of robots 
and future application; Classification & structure of robotic system: Classification, Configuration, wrist, end effectors, 
Links, Joints, Drive system; Control System: Basic control system concepts, model, transformation and block diagrams, 
controllers ON & OFF, transient response; Robot Kinematics: Direct & inverse kinematics, rotation matrix, composite 
rotation matrix, homogenous transformations, links, joints D-H representation, Geometrical approach of direct 
& reverse kinematics; Robot Arm dynamics: Joint velocities, KE, PE & motion equation of manipulating trajectory 
planning, joint interpolated trajectory; Robot Programming: Languages, Graphics, Storing & operating, Task programs; 
Sensors: State and external state sensors, tactile and non-tactile sensors, force – torque sensors, Image processing & 
analysis, Computer vision. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Groover, Industrial Robot, PHI. 
2. Y. Korem, Robotics, Mc Graw-Hill. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
334
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 417 CONTROL	SYSTEM	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Closed loop and open loop system, design principles of control systems, Laplace transforms method, transfer 
functions, block diagrams, deriving transfer functions of physical systems, signal flow graphs, proportional, derivation 
and integral controllers, impulse response functions; First order systems, second order systems, higher order 
systems, Routh’s stability criterion, static and dynamic error coefficients, introduction to system optimization; Root 
locus plots, root locus analysis of control systems; Logarithmic, polar and log magnitude versus phase plots, Nyquist 
stability criterion, stability analysis, closed loop frequency response lag, lead compensations; Nonlinear control 
systems, describing function analysis of nonlinear control systems; Introduction to discrete time systems, state space 
representation of systems, optional control systems and adaptive control systems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, PHI. 
ME 418 MATERIAL	HANDLING 2 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Development of Material Handling Technology, Design objectives; Classification and characteristics of 
materials, Types of industrial transport, classification and working principles of materials handling devices; Cranes: 
Structural and mechanical design of electrical overhead traveling cranes; Conveyors: Design of belt, Apron, Screw, 
Roller, Vibrating and pneumatic conveyors; Elevators: Design of bucket, Arm and swing tray elevators; Steel mill 
cranes: Working principles and operations of various types of steel mill cranes such as stripper, charger, ladle and 
soaking pit cranes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. Spivakovsky and V. Dyackov, Conveyors and related equipments, MIR Publishers. 
2. N. Rudenko, Materials handling equipment, MIR Publishers. 
3. M. P. Alexandrov, Materials handling equipment, MIR Publishers. 
ME 430 INDUSTRIAL	MANAGEMENT 3 credits [3-0-0]
Management Concept, Principles and Functions of Management, Evaluation of Scientific Management; Forms of 
Industrial Organization Structure, Authority, Responsibility, and Span of Control, Factors affecting Span of Control, 
delegation of authority; Types of industrial Ownership, Formation of companies, Authorized Capital, Shares, 
Debentures, Bonds and Sources of Finance, Introduction to balance sheet and profit and loss statement; Engineering 
Economics – Break Even Analysis, Interest Calculation, Depreciation, Choosing of alternatives; Materials management 
– Functions, Objectives, Purchasing Procedure, Inventory Management, EOQ, ELS, Discount and Shortage Models, 
Inventory Classification Models viz., ABC, VED analysis etc, Introduction to MRP, JIT, OPT and ERP; Marketing 
Management: Selling concept v/s Marketing Concept, Marketing Mix, Marketing function; Time and Motion study 
– Procedures, Process Chart, Multiple Activity chart, SIMO Chart, Standard Time, Normal Time, Rating factor, Work 
sampling; Personnel Management: Functions of Personnel Management, wages and incentive Plans, Job Evaluation, 
Merit Rating; Productivity – Concepts, Total and Fractional Productivity Indices, Types of Wastes, Waste Elimination 
Techniques, Productivity Cycle; Quality management – Quality costs, Definition of T Q M, Leadership, Motivation, 
Seven tools of Quality, Participatory Approaches, Quality Function Deployment, Value Analysis, International Quality 
Systems, ISO Registration Procedure and Implementation strategies, Intellectual property Rights, ISO 9000 and 14000. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. O. P. Khanna, Industrial Engineering and Management, Khanna publishers, New Delhi. 
2. Dr. K. C. Arora, TQM and ISO 14000, S. K. Kataria & Sons, New Delhi. 
ME 431 DECISION	MODELING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Linear Programming – Formulation and Solution of LPP, Duality, Sensitivity Analysis, Dual Simplex Method, 
Transportation and Assignment Problem, Goal Programming, Simple Case Studies, Introduction to OR Software 
package; Production Planning & Control – Short range and Long range Planning, Production Planning, Master 
Production Schedule, Capacity Planning, Aggregate Planning, GANT Chart Forecasting, Time series, Causal and 
Predictive Methods, Forecasting using neural network ( back propagation algorithm), Scheduling and Sequencing, 
Flow shop and Job Shop scheduling, Flow shop scheduling using Johnson’s rule, Branch and Bound Technique and 
Genetic Algorithm; Plant Layout – Types of layout, Design of Functional Layout using CRAFT, ALB Problems, Solution 
of ALB Problem using heuristics ( Largest Candidate Rule, Ranked Positional Weight, Combination of heuristics, and 
COMSOAL) and Simulated Annealing, Group Technology, Classification and Coding Systems, Solution of GT problems 
using heuristics viz. ROC-I, ROC-II and MODROC and neural networks ( Adaptive Resonance Theory); Plant Location 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
335
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
– Introduction to subjective and objective factors, Brown Gibson Model, Multiple Locations, Application of AHP in 
plant Location; Project Management –. Project Network, Critical path, PERT & CPM, Crashing and Resource Leveling; 
Simulation – Random Variables, Random Number Generation, Simulation of simple Queuing Models, Validation and 
Data collection; Decision Environment – Decision making under Certainty, Risk and Uncertainty, Decision Tree, Game 
Theory; Maintenance management - Preventive, Predictive and Corrective maintenance, Determination of Optimum 
Schedule for Maintenance, Replacement analysis. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. A. Taha, Operation Research: An Introduction, 8th Edn. PHI, New Delhi. 
2. L. J. Krajewski, L. P. Ritzman, M. K. Malhotra, Operations Management, 6th Edn. PHI, New Delhi. 
ME 432 NON-CONVENTIONAL	MACHINING	PROCESSES 3 credits [3-0-0]
Modern Machining Processes: Electro Discharge Machining (EDM), Processes mechanism of material removal, 
parameters effects EDM & application, Electrical Discharge Grinding(EDG), Traveling Wire EDM, Electro-chemical 
Machining (ECM), Processes, Mechanism of material removal, Tool design, Parameters affecting ECM, Applications, 
Electro-chemical Honing(ECH), Electrochemical Deburring (ECD), Electrochemical Grinding(ECG), Electrochemical 
Discharge Grinding, Chemical Machining, Ultrasonic Machining, Cutting Tool System Design, Mechanism of 
cutting, Parameters affects USM applications, Abrasive Jet Machining, Variables of AJM, Nozzle Design, Laser Beam 
Machining, Thermal and Non-thermal analysis, and applications, Electron – Beam Machining and its mechanism, 
Applications, Plasma arc machining, Equipments, Arc transfer mechanism, Metallurgical efforts, Safety precautions 
and applications, Plasma are surfacing and plasma Arc Springing, Iron Beam machining and water Jet Machining. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. HMT - Production Technology - TMH, 1980. 
2. G. F. Benedict, Non Traditional Manufacturing Processes, Marcel Dekker, 1987. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Bhattacharya, New Technology - I.e.(India), 1973. 
2. Pandey, Modern Machining process - TMH, 1980. 
ME 433 ADVANCED	MANUFACTURING	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Definition and broad characteristics of Flexible Manufacturing Cells, Systems, Islands and Flexible transfer lines - Place 
of flexible manufacturing systems in CIM - The FMS relational: Economics and technological justification for FMS - 
Design and Planning: the role of associated technologies such as GT, JIT and simulation - Installation, Operation and 
evaluation - Scheduling problems - FMS hardware CNC machines tools, robots, AGVs, ASRs, Inspection and Cleaning 
stations - Control aspects of FMS-DNC of machine tools, cutting tools, robots, quality control and inventories - 
Personnel and infrastructural aspects - Flexible machining cells and islands - Flexible assembly Systems; structure, 
control and applications - FMS in action: Understanding Flexibility, Types of Flexibility in FMS, Flexible and Dynamic 
Manufacturing Systems, IT facilitated flexibility, integration and automation, Role of Integrated and automated 
material handling systems, Typical FMS operation, IT based Tools: Computer simulation and AI for FMS, Group 
technology, Decision Support Systems, Design, Planning, Scheduling and Control Issues in FMS, Real time control 
strategies, Various FMS configurations, Computer configurations, FMS as mini-CIM, Benefits and Justification for FMS, 
Role of Information Technology, Overview of Multi model and mixed model flexible lines, Typical case studies. Future 
prospects. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. P. Groove, Automation, Production systems & Computer Integrated Manufacturing, PHI. 
2. P. Radhakrishna and V. Raju, CAD, CAM & CIM, New Age, International Publisher. 
ME 434 COMPUTER	GRAPHICS	FOR	CAD/CAM 3 credits [3-0-0]
Fundamental of CAD: The design process, Application of computers for design, Creating the manufacturing data 
base, The design work station, Graphics terminal, Operator input devices, Plotters and other output devices, The 
CPU, Secondary storage. Graphics output devices, Rasterization, scan conversion. Raster scans Graphics: Algorithms 
for rasterization of straight lines and circles. Display Generation Techniques: Real time scan conversion, Run-length 
encoding, Cell organization, Frame buffer memory. Curves and Surfaces: Splines, parametric curves, Bezier and 
B-spline curves and surfaces, ruled surfaces and surfaces of revolution. Solids and their properties: Surfaces and 
curves in solids, Intrinsic and global properties, Characteristic tests and Intersections. Solid Modeling: Data structures 
and Boolean operations. Computer Graphics Display Interface: Modeling transformations, Viewing transformations, 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
336
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Projections, Clipping, Hidden line/surface elimination, shading and light sources, Double buffering, Hardware graphics 
engines. Computer-aided drafting, Parametric drafting, Design visualization, Integration with NC machines and 
manufacturing. Scientific Visualization: Animation, physical principles. Graphics Standards: 2D and 3D standards and 
graphics portability Introduction to Product data standards and data structures database integration for CAD/CAM. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Groover and Zimmer, CAD / CAM, Prentice Hall of India. 
2. D. Hearn, M. P. Balles, Computer Graphics, Pearson Ed. Publisher
3. D. D. Voisinet, Introduction of Computer Aided Drafting by McGraw Hill Co. 
4. S. Harring Ton, Computer Graphic, Mc Graw Hill Publisher. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. F Rogers, Procedural elements for computer graphics, TMH Publisher. 
2. Rogers, D. F. and Adams, A., Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw-Hill Inc., NY, 1989. 
3. I. D. Faux and M. J. Pratt, Computational Geometry for Design and Manufacture, John Wiley and Sons, NY, 1979. 
4. M. E. Mortenson, Geometric Modelling, John Wiley and Sons, NY, 1991. 
ME 435 CONCURRENT	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Product life cycle, quality products, evaporative markets, globalization and Concurrent engineering. Review of 
concurrent engineering techniques like DFM (design for manufacture). DFA (design for assembly), QFD (quality function 
deployment), RP (rapid prototyping), TD (total design) for integrating these technologies. Product information systems 
and their architecture. Information environment for suppliers, management, testing & inspection design engineering, 
purchasing, process control, manufacturing, support plans, operators, quality control, servicing and maintenance. 
Product information modeling. Integration of information models and end users applications. Computer aided 
simultaneous engineering systems. Integrated concurrent design and product development. Constraint networks. 
created by capacity expansion and professional resource expansion. Case studies, DYNAMO, STELLA and SD based 
management games. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. G. Miller, Concurrent Engineering Design: Integrating the Best Practices for Process Improvement, Landon. 
2. D. D. Bedworth, M. R. Henderson and P. M. Wolfe, Computer Integrated Design and Manufacturing, 1991. McGraw Hill. 
ME 436 ENTREPRENEURSHIP 3 credits [3-0-0]
Enterprise Launching and Resourcing: Environmental Analysis: Entrepreneurial process and enterprise building, 
environmental scanning & analysis, Institutions and their role, procedures for launching small scale industries, 
incentives and finances available to SSI units and new entrepreneurs. How to identify and select good business 
opportunity; Project formulation: Feasibility; industry and firm level feasibility, study of formats of applications 
of financial institutions, determining project size, investment magnitude and forms of organization, estimation of 
cost, project scheduling, financial analysis, plant layout; Enterprise Management: Basic management concepts: 
Functions of management, planning, organizing, directing, controlling, coordinating. Introduction to computers 
and management information systems, business communication; Personnel management: Work motivation, labor 
relations, wage administration, incentives etc; Production management: Production, planning and control routing. 
Scheduling, dispatching, expediting and evaluation. production scheduling technique, quality control inspection. 
Standards and specifications – ISI; Financial Management including costing & Accounting practices: Tools of financial 
analysis, volume, profit analysis, sensitivity analysis, management of working capital, financing of working capital 
requirements, financial accounting, cost accounting, risk taking and insurance; Marketing management: Role of 
marketing in small industry and business. Importance of consumer’s point of view, consumer behavior, buying habits, 
marketing, packing, pricing policies and practices, product mix-segmentation of marketing, sales control, appraisal 
of sales performance, management of receivables, Advertising and sales promotion, Introduction to import/export 
procedures; Problem solving and innovation; Industrial and business laws: Laws governing business operation, laws 
governing taxation, laws governing personnel. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. B. Chadda, Basics of Business, Executive publishers, New Delhi. 
2. V. Desai, Problems and Prospects of Small Scale Industries, Himalaya Pub. House, Bombay. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
337
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 437 WELDING	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, types of welding, conventional and non conventional welding, fusion welding processes, heat flow in 
welding, chemical reactions in welding, fluid flow and metal evaporation in welding, residual stresses, distortion and 
fatigue, basic solidification concepts, weld metal solidification, : - grain structure, microstructure within grains, post 
solidification phase transformation, weld metal chemical in homogeneities, weld metal solidification cracking, the 
partially melted zone: formation of the partially melted zone, difficulties associated with the partially melted zone, 
the heat affected zone: work-hardened materials, precipitation –hardening materials: aluminum, nickel based alloys, 
transformation –hardening materials: carbon and alloy steels, corrosion-resistant materials: stainless steels. 
Nomenclature of welded joint, types of welded joint, design consideration of weldment, failure analysis of the welded 
joint, testing of weldment, process control parameters of welding, properties of desired weldment: bead geometry, 
HAZ, mechanical-metallurgical characteristics of the weld, weld chemistry, parametric optimization of welding, 
different types of optimization techniques; advantages and limitations, case study. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Little, Welding & Welding Technology, McGraw Hill Publication
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Dr. O. P. Khanna, A Textbook of Welding Technology, Dhanpat Rai Publications (P) Ltd. 2000
ME 450 COMPUTATIONAL	FLUID	DYNAMICS	&	HEAT	TRANSFER 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Basic tools of CFD, Numerical vs. experimental tools. Mathematical Behavior of PDEs: Parabolic, 
Hyperbolic and Elliptic PDEs. Methodology of CFDHT: Discrete representation of flow and heat transfer domain: Grid 
generation, Governing equations and boundary conditions based on FVM/FDM, Solution of resulting set of linear 
algebraic equations, Graphical representation and analysis of qualitative results, Error analysis in discretization using 
FVM/FDM. Solution of 1-D/2-D steady/unsteady: Diffusion problems, Convection problems, Convection-diffusion 
problems, source term linearization. Explicit and Implicit Approach: Explicit and implicit formulation of unsteady 
problems, Stability analysis. Solution of Navier-Stokes Equations for Incompressible Flows: Staggered and collocated 
grid system, SIMPLE and SIMPLER algorithms. Special Topics in CFDHT: Numerical Methodology for Complex Geometry, 
Multi-block structured grid system, Solution of phase change problems. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S V. Patankar, Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow by Taylor and Francis. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. K. Versteeg and W. Malalasekra, Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics: The Finite Volume Method by Prentice Hall 
(2nd Edition)
2. Jr D. A. Anderson, Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer, McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. M. N. Ozisik, Finite Difference Method, CRC (1st Edition). 
ME 451 POWER	PLANT	ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Vapor Power Cycles: Rankine cycle, Comparison of Rankine and Carnot vapor cycles, Regenerative cycles, Ideal 
working fluid for vapor power cycles, Binary vapor cycle, Thermodynamics of couples cycles, Process heat and 
by-product power.; Steam Generators: Classification of boilers, Description of Cochran, Lanchashire and Babcock-
Wilcox boilers, Boiler mounting and accessories, High pressure boilers, Lamont, Benson and Velox boilers.; Nozzle: 
Introduction, Types of nozzles, Flow of steam through nozzles, Momentum equation, Entropy change with friction, 
Effect of friction, Calculation of nozzle area, Mass flow, Critical pressure, Stagnation enthalpy and pressure, Effect 
of friction on critical pressure ratio, Super-saturated flow in nozzles, Effect of variation of back pressure.; Steam 
Turbines: (a) Principles of operation of steam turbine, Types of steam turbine, Compounding of steam turbine. (b) 
Impulse Turbine: Velocity diagram, Effect of blade friction, Forces on Blades, Work done, Diagram efficiency, Stage 
efficiency, Gross stage efficiency, Choice of blade angles, Blade heights etc. (c) Impulse Reaction Turbine: Velocity 
diagram, Degree of reaction, Parson’s turbine, Blade sections, Internal losses in steam turbine, State point locus and 
reheat factor.; Condensers: Jet and surface type - Dalton’s law of partial pressure and its application to condenser, 
Air leakage, Extraction pump and air-pump, Cooling water requirement, Vacuum efficiency.; Nuclear Power Plants: 
Release of nuclear energy, Criticality of reactors, Thermal reactors, nuclear fuels, Moderator, Reflector, Coolant and 
control of reactors, BWR, PWR and gas cooled reactors. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering, TMH Publication
2. El-Wakil, Power Plant Technology, Mc Graw Hill Publication
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
338
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 453 ENERGY	CONSERVATION	&	WASTE	HEAT	RECOVERY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Pattern of energy use, potential for energy conservation, optimum use of energy resources, total energy approach. 
Coupled cycles, combined plants and cogeneration systems; Need for energy storage, thermal electrical, magnetic 
and chemical energy storage systems; Utilization of industrial waste heat; gas-to-liquid and liquid-to-liquid heat 
recovery systems; Recuperation and regenerators heat pipes; waster heat boilers; fluidized bed heat recovery; shell 
and tube heat exchangers; Prime mover exhausts; incineration plants; heat pump systems; thermoelectric devices; 
Utilization of low grade reject heat from power plants; Thermal insulation; energy economics. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. G. Stick and A. Thumann, Principles of Waste Heat Recovery, PHI, 1986. 
ME 455 NUCLEAR	POWER	GENERATION	AND	SAFETY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Descriptions of nuclear power plants and operations, Thermodynamics of nuclear power, Nuclear power cycles, Fluid 
systems analysis and introduction to two-phase flow, Heat generation in nuclear reactors, heat conduction in fuel 
matrixes, Heat transfer and fluid flow phenomena in rod bundles, Heat transfer with phase change, Quenching and 
rewetting phenomena in rod bundles, Hydrodynamics of countercurrent two-phase flow, Nuclear reactor accidents, 
Loss of coolant accident and emergency core cooling system, Principles and methods used in safety evaluation of 
complex engineered systems, Safety characteristics of LWR and BWR, Safety culture, Safety improvements in nuclear 
reactors, Waste management, Indian nuclear power programme. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. M. EI. Wakil, Nuclear Power Engineering, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York, 1987. 
2. S. Glasstone and A. Setonske, Nuclear Reactors Engineering - CBS Publishers and Distributors, 1992. 
3. T. J. Connoly, Fundamentals of Nuclear Energy- John Wiley, 1978. 
4. J. H. Rust, Nuclear Power Plant Engineering, Haralson Publishing Company. 
ME 457 CRYOGENIC ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Definition of cryogenics, applications – industrial gases, LNG, space propulsions, superconducting devices; properties 
of Fluids and Materials at low temperature, Refrigeration and Liquefaction cycles – Linde, Claude, Stirling, GM, and 
their derivatives, storage of cryogenic liquids, design of storage vessels. Vacuum Technology – definition, production 
and measurement of vacuum, multilayer insulation and application. Superconductivity and Superconducting devices. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. K. D. Timmerhaus and T. M. Flynn, Cryogenic Process Engineering, Plenum Press, 1989. 
2. A. R. Jha, Cryogenic Technology and Application, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2006. 
ME 470 DESIGN	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Critical speed of shafts; Measurement of damping; Study of cam and follower kinematics; Experiment on vibration 
measurement set-up; Experiment on gyroscope; Study of dynamic balancing machine; Balancing of a rotating shaft; 
Experiment on epicyclic gear trains; Calibration of photoelestic model; Isochromatic fringe pattern for a specimen 
under bending; Calibration of strain gauge; Stress measurement using strain rosette; Experiment on journal bearing 
test rig; Experiment on abrasion tester; Erosion tester; Ferrograpgh analysis. 
ME 480 THERMAL	ENGINEERING	DESIGN	PROJECT 2 credits [0-0-3]
Mathematical modeling and curve fitting of linear algebraic systems; Numerical model for a Thermal system and System 
simulation; Calculation of interest and worth of money as a function of time; Lagrange multipliers and Optimization 
of constrained and unconstrained problems; Search methods: Single-variable problem and Multivariable constrained 
optimization; Design of thermal systems: Geometric, linear, and dynamic programming
ME 481 MECHANICAL	SYSTEM	DESIGN	PROJECT 2 credits [0-0-3]
Introduction and salient features of EOT crane design; Design of trolley structure; Design of main girder; Design of 
side truss; Design horizontal truss; Design of members; Design of gantry girder and column; Design of mechanical 
components, rope, pulley, drum; Design of crane hooks, brakes, drives etc. 
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
339
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ME 483 INDUSTRIAL	ENGINEERING	PROJECT 2 credits [0-0-3]
Generation and Testing of Random numbers: Solution of Queuing problem; Design of Network system and find its 
optimal solution; Formulation and solution of practical industrial problems using LP; Solution of Transportation and 
Assignment problem; Conceptual Design of a product focused system for high volume rate; Design of Functional 
Layout using numerical technique; Conceptual Design of a job shop for optimal man & machine use; Optimal cell 
formation for batch production; Brain storming session to reach an optimal decision point; Design and determination 
of Optimal Schedule for Maintenance for a medium plant; Application of advanced forecasting techniques for sales; 
Acquaintance with advanced Flow shop and Job Shop scheduling techniques
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Detail Syllabi
340
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
341
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	METALLURGICAL	&	MATERIALS	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
MM 201 Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics 3-1-0 4
MM 211 Science and Technology of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 212 Casting and Solidification of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 215 Physics of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 220 Unit Process of Extraction 3-1-0 4
MM 227 Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3
MM 256 Transport Phenomena 3-0-0 3
MM 257 Non – Metallic Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 258 Experimental Technique 3-0-0 3
MM 268 Ceramic and Powder Metallurgy 3-0-0 3
MM 270 Electro Metallurgy & Corrosion Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 271 Mineral Dressing Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 272 Characterization of Material Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 273 Polymer Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 311 Phase Transformation 3-1-0 4
MM 314 Heat Treatment of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 317 Materials Technology 3-0-0 4
MM 318 Principles and Practice of Heat Treatment 3-0-0 3
MM 321 Ironmaking 3-1-0 4
MM 324 Steelmaking 3-1-0 4
MM 325 Iron and Steel Making 3-0-0 3
MM 326 Non Ferrous Extractions 3-1-0 4
MM 331 Deformation Theory of Metals 3-1-0 4
MM 336 Mechanical Working of Metallic Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 345 Nuclear Metallurgy 3-0-0 3
MM 352 Material Characterization Techniques 3-1-0 4
MM 356 Pollution in Metallurgical Industries and its Control 3-0-0 3
MM 357 Corrosion and Degradation of Materials and their Prevention 3-1-0 4
MM 358 Experimental Techniques in Material Engineering 3-0-0 3
MM 359 Engineering Polymers and Composites 3-0-0 3
MM 370 Fuel Testing Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 371 Thermodynamics & Kinetics Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 372 Thermal Analysis Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MM 373 Mechanical Testing Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 374 Structure Property Correlation project 0-0-3 2
MM 375 Metallography & Heat Treatment Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 376 Computational Technique in Materials Engg. Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 391 Special Topic in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - I 3/4
MM 392 Special Topic in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - II 3/4
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
342
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 393 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - I 0-0-3 2
MM 394 Special Laboratory in Metallurgical & Mat. Engineering - II 0-0-3 2
MM 395 Engineering Product Development Project - I 0-0-6 4
MM 396 Engineering Product Development Project - II 0-0-6 4
MM 408 Energy, Environment & Recycling 3-0-0 3
MM 416 Complex Ferrous & Non Ferrous Alloys 3-1-0 3
MM 426 Secondary Steelmaking 3-0-0 3
MM 427 Sponge Iron Technology 3-1-0 4
MM 428 Advances in Steelmaking 3-1-0 4
MM 431 Mechanical Behaviour of Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 435 Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue of Metals 3-1-0 4
MM 442 Advanced Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 446 Composite Materials 3-1-0 4
MM 448 Advanced Engineering Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 449 Nanostructured Materials 3-0-0 3
MM 468 Joining of Metals 3-1-0 4
MM 471 Composite Materials Lab. 3-0-0 2
MM 472 Modeling of Materials Processes 0-0-3 2
MM 473 Design & Calculation Lab. 0-0-3 2
MM 491 Research Project – I 0-0-6 4
MM 492 Research Project – II 0-0-9 6
MM 493 Seminar & Technical Writing – I 0-0-3 2
MM 494 Seminar & Technical Writing – II 0-0-3 2
MM 495 Short Term Industrial / Research Experience 0-0-0 2
MM 496 Comprehensive Viva- Voce 0-0-0 2
For	B.	Tech	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
MM 201 METALLURGICAL	THERMODYNAMICS	AND	KINETICS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Basic concepts of systems; State and Path functions; Internal energy and Thermodynamics Processes; First law of 
thermodynamics and its application for various metallurgical processes; Heat capacity; Enthalpy changes; Second 
law of thermodynamics and entropy; Entropy changes for various processes; Free energy and its significance; Free 
energy change as a function of temperature; Gibbs – Helmholtz equation; Concepts of standard state, fugacity, 
activity and equilibrium constant; Van’t Hoff equation; Criteria for thermodynamic equilibrium; Maxwell’s equations; 
Third law of thermodynamics; Ellingham diagram (ΔG0 – T diagram) and its significance in Metallurgical Engineering; 
Thermodynamics of solutions; Gibbs – Duhem equation; Raoult’s law; Ideal, non-ideal and regular solutions and 
their thermodynamic properties; Henry’s law and alternative standard states; Excess quantities; Activities in multi-
component systems. Basic concepts of reaction rates; Arrhenius equation in reaction kinetics; Mechanism of reaction 
and rate controlling steps; Activated complex and its thermodynamic & kinetics aspects; Kinetics of heterogeneous 
reactions; Fick’s laws of diffusion and their applications; Diffusion in interstitial and substitutional solid solutions; 
Diffusion coefficients; Mass transfer at solid-fluid interface; Mass transfer coefficient and its application to dimensional 
analysis; Concept of concentration boundary layer; Kinetic steps involved in the reduction of iron ore and roasting of 
sulphides. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. L. S. Darken and R. W. Gurry, Physical Chemistry of Metals, McGraw Hill, N. Y. 
2. D. R. Gaskell, Introduction to Metallurgical Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, N. Y. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
343
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. R. A. Swalin, Thermodynamics of Solids, John Wiley, N. Y. 
4. G. S. Upadhyay and R. K. Dubey, Problems in Metallurgical Thermodynamics and Kinetics, Pergamon, N. Y. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. H. Tupkary, Introduction to Metallurgical Thermodynamics, T. U. Publishers, Nagpur. 
2. A. Ghosh, Text book of Materials and Metallurgical Thermodynamics, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi. 
3. T. Rosenquist, Principles of Extractive Metallurgy, McGraw Hill, N. Y. 
4. G. H. Geiger & D. R. Poirer, Transport Phenomena in Process Metallurgy, Addison Wesley, N. Y. 
5. J. Szekely & N. J. Themelis, Rate Phenomena in Process Metallurgy, John Wiley, N. Y. 
6. S. Glasstone, K. J. Laidler & H. Eyring, Theory of Rate Processes, Mc. Graw Hill, N. Y. 
7. A. K. Mohanty, Rate Processes in Extractive Metallurgy, Prentice Hall of India. 
MM 211 SCIENCE	&	TECHNOLOGY	OF	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Crystal Structure: Space lattices and Bravais lattices, Miller Indices of planes and directions, slip planes and slip 
directions. Bonding in Solids: Ionic, Covalent, and Metallic bonding, Substitutional and interstitial solid solution, Hume 
Rothery Rules, Intermetallic compounds, Normal valency compounds, Electron compounds, Interstitial compounds. 
Imperfections: Point defects, Vacancies, Interstialcies, Dislocations; Edge & Screw dislocations; Burgers vector. Binary 
Phase Diagrams: Isomorphous, Eutectic, Peritectic, Eutectoid, Monotectic and Syntectic systems, Phase rule and Lever 
rule. Iron-Cementite Equilibrium diagrams and its applications, Plain carbon and alloy steel, Industrial applications 
of steels. Diffusion: Fick’s First and Second law of diffusion, Atomic model of diffusion, Grain boundary, surface and 
thermal diffusion, Kirkendall Effect, Interstitial diffusion. Nucleation: Homogeneous and Heterogeneous nucleation, 
Kinetics of nucleation, Growth and overall transformation kinetics. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Raghavan, Materials Science and Engineering, Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited (2003). 
2. W. F. Smith, Mc Graw Hill, Principles of Materials Science and Engineering, New York (1994). 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. R. E Reid Hill, Physical Metallurgy Principles, PWS-Kent Publishing (2004). 
2. Vijendra Singh, Physical Metallurgy, Standard Publisher (2008). 
3. W. D. Callister, Materials Science & Engineering, An Introduction, John Wiley & Sons (2007). 
4. L. H. Van Vlack, Addison Wisley, Elements of Materials Science and Engineering, New York (1985). 
MM 212 CASTING	AND	SOLIDIFICATION	OF	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Casting as a process of Manufacturing. Moulding Processes, Equipments and Mechanization: Different 
types of Moulds, Moulding Materials and Moulding processes, Pattern and other mould making equipments, forces 
acting on moulds, Mould factors in metal flow, Moulding factors in casting design. Different types of binders and 
their uses in mould and core-makings. Melting of Metals and Alloys for casting: Brief mention of various melting 
units, melting and post melting treatments, melting practices as adopted for a few metals and alloys such as CI, Al, 
Cu, steels, cast irons. Solidification of Metals and Alloys: Nucleation, Growth, Role of alloy constitution, Thermal 
conditions and inherent nucleation and growth conditions in the liquid melt, Significance and practical control of cast 
structure
Principles of Gating and Risering: Feeding characteristics of alloys, Types of Gates and Risers, Time of solidification and 
Chowrinov rule, Wlodawer system for feeder head calculations, gating ratio, concept of directionality in solidification, 
Yield of casting and prescription for its augmentation. Special casting Methods: Investment casting, Die casting, 
Centrifugal casting, Full mould casting, Vacuum sealed casting. Casting Defects: A detailed analysis of casting defects. 
Their causes and prescription of remedial measures. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. R. Beeley, Foundry Technology, Newnes-Buttterworths, 2001. 
2. P. D. Webster, Fundamentals of Foundry Technology, Portwillis press, Red hill, 1980. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. C. Mukherjee, Fundamentals of Metal casting Technology, Oxford IBH, 1980. 
2. R. W. Hein, C. R. Loper and P. C. Rosenthal, Principles of Metal casting, Mc Graw Hill, 1976. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
344
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 215 PHYSICS	OF	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Crystallography: Crystalline and amorphous structures, Elements of Crystal Symmetry, Symmetry elements and 
axes, two, three, four and six fold Symmetry, Review of atomic bonding. Order-Disorder Transformation: Ordering, 
Degrees of long range and short range ordering, Anti phase Domain, Super lattice, Elements of Super lattice Theories, 
Properties and Applications. Electron Theory of Materials: Heisenberg’s uncertainty Principle, Schrodinger’s equation. 
Free Electron Theory, Zone Theory, Density of States, Fermi Energy Level, Application of Zone Theory to Alloy Phases; 
Conductors and Insulators, Semiconductors, P & N – Type Semiconductors. Magnetic Properties: Dia, Para and 
Ferro-magnetism, Domain Theory of Ferromagnetism Antiferromagnetism and Ferrites, Hysteris loop, Soft Magnetic 
Materials, Hard Magnetic Materials, Super Conductivity, BCS Theory, Type-I & Type-II Super Conductors. Elements of 
X-ray Diffraction: X-ray, Bragg’s Law, Laue, Rotating Crystal and Powder Methods, Structure Determination with the 
help of X-ray. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Hume Rothery and B. R. Coles – Atomic Theory for Students of Metallurgy. The Institute of Metals (London) (1988). 
2. R. E. Reid – Hill, Physical Metallurgy Principles, East – West Press Pvt. Ltd., (New Delhi), (2004). 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. L. Kakani and A. Kakani, Material Science, New Age International Publishes Ltd., (New Delhi) (2004). 
2. R. A. Higgins, Engineering Metallurgy, Standard Publishes Distributors (Delhi) (1998). 
3. M. S. Vijaya, G. Rangarajan, Materials Science, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Limited (New Delhi) (2004). 
4. V. Raghavan, Material Science and Engineering, Princep Hall (New Delhi) (2003). 
5. C. S. Barrett and T. B. Massalski, Structure of Metals, Euresia Publishing House (Pvt. ) Ltd., (New Delhi) (1968). 
MM 220 UNIT	PROCESS	OF	EXTRACTION 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Role of Unit Processes in Metal Extraction; Ore preparation: Principles of Comminution, Crushing and 
Grinding, Sizing of comminuted particles, Drying, Calcination, Roasting, Sintering; Role of Ellingham diagrams in 
Extraction of metals; Pyrometallurgical Processes: Reduction and smelting using Blast furnace and Electric arc furnace, 
Flash smelting, Converting, Principles of metallothermic reduction, Refining processes such as Fire refining, Liquation, 
Zone Refining, Distillation and Vacuum Refining; Hydrometallurgical Processes: Leaching, Various types of Leaching 
such as Pressure leaching and Bacterial leaching, leaching methods such as In-situ, Heap, and Percolation leaching, 
Mechanical and Pneumatic vats, Solution purification methods such as Chemical, Ion exchange and Solvent extraction, 
Cementation; Electrometallurgical Processes: Faraday’s laws, Review of properties of aqueous electrolytes, Ionic 
mobilities, Transport number and Conductivity in electrolytes, Debye-Huckle limiting law. Mean activity coefficient of 
ions in electrolytes, Electrode potential, Polarization, Gas and Metal over voltage, E. M. F. of cells, Elementary theory 
of Electro deposition, Electro winning and Electro refining; Brief idea of metal extraction processes in the Indian 
context; Calculations of material and heat balances pertaining to some important metal extraction processes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. Bodsworth, Extraction and Refining of Metals, CRC Press, 1994. 
2. A. Ghose and H. S. Ray, Principles of Extractive Metallurgy, Wiley Eastern, 1991. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. S. Ray, R. Sridhar, K. P. Abraham, Extraction of Non-ferrous Metals, Affiliated East-West Press Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi-1985. 
2. T. Rosenquist, Principles of Extractive Metallurgy, McGraw hill, 1974. 
3. R. D. Pehike, Unit Processes of Extractive Metallurgy, American Elsevier, N. Y., 1968. 
MM 227 FUEL	TECHNOLOGY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction of fossil fuels and their world-wide reserves; Primary and secondary fuels, Coking and non-coking coals. 
Characterization of coal properties (caking and swelling indices, calorific value, proximate and ultimate analyses, etc. 
); Coal carbonization and effects of different parameters; Properties of coke, char and graphite. Selection of coal for 
sponge iron making and thermal power plants; Fuel combustion and the effects of different factors; Combustion 
calculations. Alternative sources of energy (viz. ferro-coke, formed coke, charcoal, solar, wind, tidal, etc. ) and their 
suitability for metallurgical and power industries; Renewable and non-renewable sources of energy; Activated carbon 
and its uses; Modern trends in the utilization and conservation of fossil fuels. Properties and uses of gaseous fuels 
like coke oven gas, blast furnace gas, basic oxygen furnace gas, producer gas, etc.; Petroleum coke and its utilization 
in metallurgy. Solid energy wastes and their possible industrial applications; World-wide approach in the utilization of 
energy wastes; Energy crises and its possible solution. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
345
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Her Majesty’s, The Efficient use of fuels, Published stationary office, 423, Oxford Street, London W. I. 
2. Marion L. Smith and Karl W. Stinson, Fuels and Combustion McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. New York. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. B. Pandya, Conventional Energy Technology – Fuels and Chemical Energy, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi. 
2. Samir Sarkar, Fuels and Combustion, Orient Longman Ltd., Mumbai. 
3. S. P. Sharma and C. Mohan, Fuels and Combustion, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi. 
MM 256 TRANSPORT PHENOMENA 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Fluid Flow: Classification of fluids, ideal & real, Newtonian & Non-Newtonian, Newton’s law of viscosity. Types of 
fluid flow – streamline & turbulent, continuity equation for incompressible and compressible fluid and its application. 
Concept of velocity bounds layer.; Bernoulli’s equation and its application for flow measurement by venturimeter, 
orifice meter, pilot tube and rotameter. Dimensional analysis by Rayleigh’s method of indices and Buckingham’s 
π theorem. Example of analysis of pressure gradient, mass transfer co-efficient & convective heat transfer co-
efficient, concept of similarly and dimensionless criteria. Dimensionless groups & their significance. Pressure drop 
& friction factor in various configurations, flow in packed bed & fluidized bed. Free and partially restricted jets, 
high velocity fluid jets. Mass Transfer: Law of diffusion and their application, concept of mass transfer co-efficient 
& concentration boundary layer, Interfacial mass transfer, overall mass balance. Heat Transfer: Internal & External 
modes of heat transfer, steady state heat conduction in monolayer and composite flat walls & cylinders. Unsteady 
state heat conduction, thin & massive body heating & cooling. Finite difference method in solving unsteady state 
heat conduction. Natural and forced convection, concept of heat transfer co-efficient, thermal boundary layers, some 
examples of connective co-relations. Law of radiation – Steffan-Boltzmann’s law, Kirchoff’s law & Lambarth’s law, 
Black & grey body concepts, view factor, Radiation from flames & gases. Radiation between simple surfaces with & 
without absorbing gas media. Radiation shields. Overall Heat transfer co-efficient. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. B. Bird, W. E. Stewart and E. N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, Wiley, 1994. 
2. G. H. Geiger and D. R. Poirier, Transport Phenomena in Materials Processing, Addison Wesley, Mass, 1994. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. R. Welty, R. E. Wilson and C. E. Wicks, Fundamentals of Momentum Heat and Mass Transfer, Wiley, 1976. 
2. R. I. L. Guthrie, Engineering in Process Metallurgy, Oxford Science, 1992. 
MM 257 NON	–	METALLIC	MATERIALS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Classification of materials, Bonding, Crystal structure, Imperfections in solids, Relationship between structure, property 
and processing, Basic principles of materials selection. Polymers: Applications, Structure of polymers, Mechanism of 
deformation and strengthening of polymers, Crystallization and Glass transition phenomena in polymers, Conduction 
in organic materials, Doping effects and copolymerization, Superconducting inorganic polymers (SN), Polymers in 
metallurgical applications. Bio-degradable polymers. Ceramics: Applications, Structure and properties of ceramics, 
Types of ceramics, Hi-tech ceramics, Bioactive and bioresorbable ceramics, Principles of ceramic processing. 
Composites: Classification of composite materials, Dispersion strengthened, Particle-reinforced and fiber-reinforced 
composites, Properties of matrix and reinforcement materials, Micromechanics and principles of strengthening, 
Elastic properties, stress-strain relations, Polymer matrix composites, Ceramic matrix composites, Processing and 
properties, Applications. Biodegradable composites. Special materials: Carbon fullerene and nanotubes, Core-shell 
structures, Organic-inorganic hybrids, Intercalation compounds, Mesoporous materials, Nanocomposites. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Callister, Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction, Willey Publishers, 2007. 
2. D. R. Askeland and P. P. Phule, The science and Engineering of Materials, Thomson Publishers, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Chapman and Hall, Composite Materials: Engineering and Science, 1994. 
2.  P. Vencizini, Elsevier, High Tech Ceramics, 1987. 
MM 258 CERAMIC	AND	POWDER	METALLURGY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction of ceramics, Common ceramics crystal structures: silicates, clay, minerals, graphite and carbides. 
Classification and applications of ceramics materials. Raw materials preparation, Different structural ceramics: their 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
346
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
properties and applications. Mechanical behavior of different structural ceramics-brittleness of ceramics, Concept 
of fracture toughness and different toughness measurement techniques, Elastic modulus, Strength measurement, 
Weibull theory. Processing and properties of ceramics composites, Powder preparation: Powder flow, Compressibility 
and porosity measurements, Powder forming, Consolidation and different powder processing routes, Behavior of 
powder during compaction: Die compaction. Different modern powder compaction methods: Hot isostatic pressing, 
Spark plasma sintering, and Microwave sintering. Sintering of powders and evaluation of sintered products. Sintering 
theories, Solid and liquid phase sintering, Characterization of powders: composition and their structure, Particle size 
and shape determination. Applications of sintered products: Thermal, friction, High temperature, Corrosion, Bearing, 
Magnetic and electrical applications. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen, D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics, Wiley Publishers, 1986. 
2. Randall German, John Wiley & Sons, Powder Metallurgy, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. N. Rahaman, Marcel Dekker, Ceramic processing & Sintering, 1995. 
MM 270 ELECTRO	METALLURGY	&	CORROSION	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Electro winning of Cu from acidified CuSO4 solution; Electro winning of Zn from SnSO4 solution; Electro deposition 
of Cu on mild steel electrode from acid bath; Electro deposition of Cu on mild steel electrode from an alkaline 
bath; Deposition of Nickel on Cu plate by electro plating and thickness  determination of deposit by BNF Jet test; 
Determination of throwing power and throwing efficiency of alkaline Cu plating solution; Monitoring of corrosion rate 
of mild steel; Anodisation of given Aluminium rods; Electro deposition of Brass on mild steel plate from cyanide bath. 
MM 271 MINERAL	DRESSING	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
To determine the average size of particles by Sieve Analysis; To study the Jaw crusher and to determine the actual 
capacity and reduction ratio; To study a hammer mill and to determine its actual capacity and reduction ratio; To study 
the effect of ball load on grinding operation in a ball mill; Verification of Rittinger’s Law of crushing in a Jaw crusher; To 
study the vibrating screen and determination of its effectiveness; Study of magnetic separator and determination of 
its efficiency; To study a simple jig and to determine its efficiency; Study of Wilfley table and to find out its efficiency; 
Study of flow diagram for extraction of copper; Study of flow diagram for beneficiation of coal. 
MM 272 CHARACTERIZATION	OF	MATERIALS	LAB 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Preparation and examination of metallography specimens; Primary calibration of thermocouple and measurement 
of melting point of a metal; Theory and practice of thermal analysis: Scanning calorimeter; Dilatometer; Thermo 
gravitometer. High temperature microscopic study of: Ceramic material; Metallic material; Topological and elemental 
analysis of metallic sample by SEM; Theory and practice of XRD technique. 
MM 273 POLYMER	LABORATORY 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Synthesis of a polymer; Determination of “Melt–flow–index” of the polymer samples supplied in the Laboratory; 
Fabrication of polymer test – specimen using “injection moulding” techniques out of the polymer samples supplied 
in the laboratory; Fabrication of polymer test specimen using “press moulding” techniques out of Bakelite powder 
supplied; Tensile testing of the polymer test specimen fabricated in the laboratory using Instron-1195; Effect of 
temperature/time on curing behavior; Study of viscosity behaviour of polymer; Determination of glass transition, 
crystallization and melting temperatures. 
MM 311 PHASE TRANSFORMATIONS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Thermodynamics and Kinetics of solid state Phase transformation, Atomic models of Diffusion, Allotropy of Iron and Fe-C 
Phase diagram, Functions of alloying elements, Importance of Austenite Grain size; Formation of Austenite, TTT and 
CCT Diagrams, Homogeneous and Heterogeneous nucleations, Strain energy effects; Overall Transformation Kinetics, 
Empirical equations, Transformation kinetics for Interface-controlled and Diffusion-controlled growth; Pearlitic, 
Bainitic and Martensitic Transformations (Mechanisms, Kinetics and Morphologies). Pearlitic transformation, Factors 
influencing pearlitic transformation, Mechanism of transformation, Nucleation and growth, Orientation relationship; 
Bainitic transformation: Mechanism of transformation, Nucleation and growth, Orientation relationships, Surface 
relief, Classical and non-classical morphology, Effect of alloying elements; Martensitic transformation: Characteristics 
of transformation, Thermodynamics and kinetics, Nucleation and growth, Morphology, Crystallography, Stabilization; 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
347
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Strengthening mechanisms, Recovery, Recrystallization and Grain growth, Annihilation of point imperfections, 
Mechanism of nucleation and driving force for growth; Massive and Spinodal Decomposition, Mechanism and 
Kinetics of precipitation of age-hardenable alloys. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. A. Porter and K E Easterling, Phase Transformations in Metals and Alloys, CRC Press. 
2. V. Raghavan, Solid State Phase Transformations, PHI. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. W. Christian, The Theory of Transformations in Metals and Alloys, Pergamon Press. 
2. J. E. Hilliard, Phase Transformations, ASM. 
3. S. H. Avner, Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
4. R. E. Reed-Hill, Physical Metallurgy Principles, East-West Press. 
5. A. K. Jena and M. C. Chaturvedi, Phase Transformation in Materials, Prentice Hall
MM 314 HEAT	TREATMENTS	OF	METALLIC	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Objective and variables of heat treatments, Limitation of Fe-Fe3C Phase Diagram, Formation of Austenite, TTT and 
CCT Diagram, Types of TTT Diagram. Application of TTT Diagrams (Martempering, Austempering and Patenting). 
Annealing (Full, Homogenising, Spheroidisation and Stress-relieving annealing), Normalising, Comparison of 
Annealing and Normalising, Hardening and Tempering of plain and alloy steels, Hardening (Objective, Austenitizing 
temperature and Internal stresses), Quenching Mediums and Methods, Retained austenite and Defects in hardening, 
Tempering of steels, Aims and stages of tempering, Effects of Carbon and alloying elements, Tempering of alloy steels 
and Multiple tempering, Embrittlement during tempering, Hardenability and its determination, Factors affecting 
hardenability. Case and Surface hardening: Carburising, Nitriding and Carbonitriding, Induction and Laser Hardening. 
Heat treatments of general engineering steels: Spring, Bearing steels, Tool steels, HSLA steel and Maraging steels, 
Dual phase steels and Stainless steels, Heat Treatments of Al-alloys, Cu-alloys and Ti-alloys. Age-Hardening: Types and 
sequence of precipitates, Mechanism and kinetics of precipitation. Heat-treatment defects and their rectification. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. Zakharov, Heat Treatment of Metals, CBS Publishers. 
2. Principles of Heat Treatment of Steels, ASM. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C R Brooks, Principles of the Heat Treatment of Plain Carbon and Low Alloy Steels, ASM International. 
2. R Kumar, Physical Metallurgy of Iron and steels, Asia Publishing House. 
3. G. Krauss, Steels: Processing, Structure and Performance, ASM International. 
4. K E Thelning, Steel and Its Heat Treatment, Butterworth. 
5. W C Leslie, The Physical Metallurgy of Steels, MeGraw-Hill International. 
MM 317 MATERIALS	TECHNOLOGY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Metallic Materials: Concept of phase diagram crystallography and microstructure, Steels, Different types of Steel, Iron-
Iron Carbide phase diagram, TTT and CCT diagrams. Heat-Treatment of steels: Annealing, Normalizing, Hardening and 
Tempering of steels, Plain carbon steels and their applications. Alloy steels: High speed steels, stainless steels, HSLA; 
Non Ferrous alloys: Al alloys, Cu alloys, applications of these alloys, Magnesium alloys, Titanium alloys and Zirconium 
alloys. Electrical and Magnetic properties of materials: Band Structure, Conductors, Insulators, semiconductors, 
superconductors, p-n junction and application of these properties. Engineering polymers and composites: 
Thermoplastics, Thermosetting polymers, processing of composites, Hybrid composites. Ceramics: Different ceramics 
available, Properties of ceramics, Crystal structure, Overview of Ceramic Applications, Processing of ceramics, 
Densification and sintering, Mechanical properties and characterization. Mechanical Characterization: Tension test, 
Fatigue test, Creep test, Hardness, Impact Tests, Fracture of materials, Modes of fracture. Non Destructive Testing: 
Ultrasonic Radiography, X-ray diffraction, Crystal Structure, Bragg’s law, Liquid penetrant testing, Ultrasonic testing, 
Electromagnetic testing, Acoustic emission testing, Magnetic resonance imaging and NMR spectroscopy. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Van Vlack L H, Elements of Material Science and Engineering, ISBN: 8131706001 ISBN-13: 9788131706008, Addison Wesley, 
6th edition, 1967. 
2. W. F. Smith, Principles of Materials Science and Engineering (McGraw Hill Series in Materials Science and Engineering), 
McGraw-Hill College; 3rd edition (1995) ISBN-10: 0070592411. ISBN-13: 978-0070592414
3. William D. Jr. Callister, Wiley, Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction, 7th edition (2006) ISBN-10: 0471736961 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
348
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
ISBN-13: 978-0471736967
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Vernon John, Introduction to Engineering Materials, ISBN-10: 0333124650 ISBN-13: 9780333124659, Macmillan, 1972-06
2. James P. Schaffer, Ashok Saxena, Thomas H. Sanders, Jr. Stephen D. Antolovich, Steven B. Warner, McGraw, Science and Design 
of Engineering Materials, -Hill Publishing Co.; 2nd edition (2000) ISBN-10: 0071131485 ISBN-13: 978-0071131483 
MM 318 PRINCIPLE	AND	PRACTICE	OF	HEAT-TREATMENTS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Objective and variables involved in heat treatments, Thermodynamics and Kinetics of phase transformation, Diffusion, 
Allotropy of Iron and Fe-C Phase diagram, Functions of alloying elements Limitation of Fe-C diagram. Formation of 
Austenite, TTT and CCT Diagrams. Pearlitic, Bainitic and Martensitic transformations; Heat treatment furnaces and 
furnace atmosphere. Annealing (Full, Homogenising, Spheroidization and Stress-relieving annealing), Normalising, 
Comparison of Annealing and Normalising, Hardening (Objective, Austenitizing temperature and Internal stresses), 
Quenching mediums and Methods, Retained austenite and Defects in Hardening. Tempering of steels, Aims and 
stages of tempering, Effects of Carbon and alloying elements, Tempering of alloy steels and Multiple tempering; 
Thermo-mechanical Treatment of steels: Principles and Practices, Ausforming and Isoforming; Heat treatments of 
general engineering steels: Spring, Bearing steels, Tool steels, HSLA steel, Maraging steels and Dual phase steels; Heat 
treatment defects and their rectification; Advances of heat treatment technology. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. V. Singh, Heat Treatment of Metals, Standard Publishers. 
2. B. Zakharov, Heat Treatment of Metals, CBS Publishers. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S H Avner, Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
2. R E reed-Hill, Physical Metallurgy Principles, East-West Press. 
3. I Novikov, Theory of Heat Treatment of Metals,, MIR
4. W D Callister, Materials Science and Engineering, Jr., Wiley India. 
5. R E Smallman, Modern Physical Metallurgy, Butterworth. 
MM 321 IRONMAKING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Raw materials and their properties: Iron ore, Limestone, Agglomerates and Coke. Preparation of ores: sintering and 
palletizing, blast furnace burdening and distribution, testing of raw materials for blast furnace. Design: Blast furnace 
profile, stove and gas cleaning units; instrumentation, refractory used in blast furnace and stove. Reactions: Fe-C-O, 
Fe-O-H phase equilibria, Reactions in stack, bosh and hearth; formation of primary slag, bosh slag and hearth slag. 
Slag composition and its control, Metal-slag reactions, Control of hot metal composition. Process Control: Factors 
affecting fuel consumption and productivity, Recent developments in Blast furnace operations like, Bell-less top 
charging system, High top pressure, Humidified & Oxygen enriched blast and Auxiliary fuel injection through tuyers. 
Irregularities in blast furnace operation and their remedies. Alternative routes of iron making: Introduction, Processes 
of Sponge Iron production; SL/RN, MIDREX, HyL processes. Smelting Reduction Processes; COREX, ROMELT, Hismelt. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. K. Biswas, Principles of Blast Furnace Iron Making, SBA publication, Calcutta, 1999
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. Ghosh and A. Chatterjee: Ironmaking and Steelmaking Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, 2008
2. G. R. Bashforth, The Manufacture of Iron and Steel, Vol. I, Chapman, London, 1962. 
3. D. H. Wakelin (ed. ): The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel (Ironmaking Volume), The AISE Steel Foundation, 2004. 
MM 324 STEELMAKING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Principles of steel making reactions, Viz. Decarburisation, dephosphorisation, desulphurisation, silicon 
and managanese reaction. Slag Theories: Molecular and Ionic theories; Interpretation of the above reactions in 
terms of ionic theory of slag. LD Process: Design of converter & lance, Quality of raw materials charged, Operation 
of the converter and control of bath and slag composition, Chemical reactions involved, Temperature and residual 
bath oxygen control, Use of oxygen sensor, Some characteristics of L. D. blow Viz. Emulsion formation, Slopping, 
Maneuvering lance height for dephosphorisation and decarbunisation. Catch Carbon technique, Recovery of waste 
heat, OBM/Q-BOP, Process, Concept and operation of the process, Mixed/Combined blowing Processes, Oxygen top 
blowing with inert gas purging at bottom, Oxygen top blowing with inert and oxidizing gases at bottom, Oxygen 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
349
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
top and bottom blowing. Steel making scenario in India. Open Hearth Furnace: Its modification into Twin Hearth, 
Operational principle, Advantages. Electric Arc Furnace: Advantages; Charging, Melting and refining practices for 
plain carbon and alloy steels, Use of DRI in arc furnace and its effect on performance, UHP electric arc furnace with 
D. C. supply, Single graphite electrode, Oxygen lancing, Oxyfuel burner, Water cooled panel and computer control. 
Duplex processes of stainless steel making using VOD, AOD & CLU. Induction Furnace: Advantages, principle of 
induction melting, Its use in steel industry. Deoxidation of liquid steel: Requirements of deoxidisers, deoxidation 
practice, Stoke’s law, Use of complex deoxidisers, Inclusions and their influence on quality of steel, Killed, Semi-killed 
and Rimming steel. Secondary refining of steel: Objectives, Principle of degassing, Different industrial processes such 
as DH, RH, VAD, SD. LF, and ESR, Limitations and specific applications. Continuous Casting of Steel: Advantages, types 
of machines, Mould lubrication and reciprocation, Developments in technology with respect to productivity, quality 
and energy conservation, Near-net-shape casting, Strip casting. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. J. Fruehan (ed. ), The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel (Steel Making Volume), The AISE Steel Foundation, 2004. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Ghosh and A. Chatterjee, Ironmaking and Steelmaking Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, 2008
2. R. G. Ward, Physical Chemistry of iron & steel making, ELBS and Edward Arnold, 1962. 
3. F. P. Edneral, Electrometallurgy of Steel and Ferro-Alloys, Vol. 1 Mir Publishers, 1979. 
MM 325 IRONMAKING	AND	STEELMAKING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction, Blast Furnace Route for Iron Making; The Blast Furnace and its accessories, The burden and its preparation, 
Physical – Thermal and Chemical process in a Blast Furnace, Blast Furnace slag and its control, Control of hot metal 
composition, Blast Furnace plant and accessories, Modern trends in Blast Furnace practice, Control of irregularities in 
the blast furnace, Performance of Blast Furnace over the years. Alternative Methods: Need for alternative Methods, 
Sponge Iron production by using solid and gaseous reductants, Smelting Reduction Processes. Modern Steel Making: 
Different routes of steelmaking; Oxygen Steelmaking; Top and Bottom blown converter processes, Hybrid processes. 
Electric Steel making; Electric Arc furnaces, Induction furnaces. Secondary Steelmaking. Casting of liquid steel: Ingot 
Casting of Steel, Continuous Casting of Steel. Iron and Steel Scenario in India in the last decade. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Ahindra Ghosh and Amit Chatterjee: Ironmaking and Steelmaking Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, 
2008
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Anil K. Biswas: Principles of Blast Furnace Iron making, SBA Publication, 1999
2. David H. Wakelin (ed. ): The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel (Iron making Volume), The AISE Steel Foundation, 2004. 
3. Richard J. Fruehan (ed. ): The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel (Steel making Volume), The AISE Steel Foundation, 2004. 
MM 326 NON–FERROUS	METAL	EXTRACTION 4 Credits [3-1-0]
General principles of extraction of metals from oxides and sulphides; Mineral resources of non – ferrous metals 
in India; their production, consumption and demand; Future of non – ferrous metal industries in India; Kinetics of 
leaching of ores and the effects of operation variables. Aluminium: Bayer’s process and factors affecting its operation; 
Hall – Heroult process: principle & practices, use of electrodes, anode effect; Refining of Aluminium; Alternative 
methods of Alumina and Aluminium production. Copper: Roasting of sulphides; Matte smelting; Converting; Refining; 
By – products recovery; Recent developments; Continues copper production processes, hydrometallurgy of copper. 
Zinc: Pyrometallurgy of zinc; principles and practices of roasting, sintering and smelting; Hydrometallurgy of zinc.; 
Lead: Roasting and agglomeration of galena concentrate; Blast furnace smelting; Refining of lead bullion. Uranium: 
Processes for the digestion of Uranium ores; Purification of crude salts; Production of reactor grade UO2. Titanium: 
Methods for upgrading ilmenite; Chlorination of titania; Kroll & Hunter processes; Consolidation and refining. Other 
Metals: Simplified flow sheets and relevant chemical principles of extraction of Ni, Mg, Au, Be, etc. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. K Grjotheim & B J Welch: Aluminium Smelter Technology, Aluminium – Verlag, 2nd Edn. 1988. 
2. A K Biswas & W G Devenport: Extractive Metallurgy of Copper, Pergamon, 4th Edn. 2002. 
3. W H Dennis, Metallurgy of Non – Ferrous Metals, Pitman, London, 1954. 
4. J N Anderson & P Queneau, Pyrometallurgical Processes in Non – Ferrous Metallurgy, Gorden & Breach, New York, 1967. 
5. N Sevryukov, Non – Ferrous Metallurgy, Trans. By I V Savin, Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1975. 
6. J L Bray, Non – Ferrous Production Metallurgy, John Wiley, New York. 
7. R D Pehlke, Unit Processes of Extraction Metallurgy, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1982. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
350
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 331 DEFORMATION	THEORY	OF	METALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Elastic Behaviour: Concept of elasticity in three dimensions, Generalised Hook’s Law, Plane stress and plane strain 
state, Strain energy, Stress intensity factor, Concept of finite element method. Theory of Plasticity: Flow curve; 
Yield criteria, Plastic stress strain relationship. Dislocation Theory: Line defects, Deformation by slip, Theoretical 
shear strength, Critical resolved shear stress, Burger’s vector and dislocation loop, Edge, Screw, Mixed and Partial 
dislocations, Dislocation reactions, Dislocations in fcc and bcc crystals, Cross slip and climb of dislocations, Interaction 
of dislocations, Energy of dislocations, Forces on dislocations, Dislocation sources and multiplication of dislocations. 
Dislocation pile-ups and Bauschinger’s effect, Strain hardening in single crystals and polycrystals, Yield point 
phenomenon, Strain aging, Dynamic strain aging, Strengthening mechanisms. Deformation Twinning: Classification, 
Slip vs. twinning, Stress for twinning. 
Essential	Reading: 
1. G. E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, McGraw Hill Publication, 1988. 
2. D. Hull and DC Bacon, Introduction to Dislocation, Elsevier Butterworth – Heinemann, Pub., 4th Ed. (2001). 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Wole Soboyejo, Mechanical Properties of Engineering Materials, Marcel Dekker Publication, 2003. 
2. R. W. Hertzberg, Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering Materials, John Wiley & Sons Publication, 1995. 
3. R. E. Reed–Hill, Physical Metallurgy Principals, Litton Education Publication, 2004
MM 336 MECHANICAL	WORKING	OF	METALLIC	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Fundamentals of Metal Working: Classification of forming processes; Temperature in Metal– working, Hot working, 
Cold working and Warm working of metals, Heating of metals and alloys for hot working, Friction in Metal working, 
Lubrication, concept of yield criteria. Rolling of Metals: Classification of Rolled products, Types of rolling mills, 
Terminology used in rolling; Forces and Geometrical relationships in rolling, Rolling variables, Theories of rolling, 
Rolling Torque and HP calculations. Roll-pass Design: Fundamentals of Roll-pass-design; Mill type, Layout and rolling 
practice adopted for some common products such as Slabs, Blooms, Billets, Plates, Sheets etc. Rolling defects and 
their control. Forging of Metals: Forging principles, types of forging and equipments needed; calculation of forging 
load under sticking and slipping friction conditions. Forging defects and their control. Manufacture of rail wheels and 
tyres. Extrusion: Types, Principles and Equipments. Variables in extrusion, deformations in extrusion, calculation of 
extrusion pressure under plane strain conditions; extrusion defects; production of tubes and seamless pipes. Wire 
Drawing: Drawing of Rods, Wires and Tubes, calculation of drawing load; drawing defects. Sheet Metal Forming: 
Forming methods such as bending, stretch forming, shearing and blanking, deep drawing, and redrawing. Defects 
in formed products. Special forming methods such as explosive forming (elementary ideas excluding mathematical 
treatment). 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy, Mc Graw Hill-1988
2. Roll pass Design, the united steel companies Ltd., U. K. -1960
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. W. Rowe, Principles of Industrial Metal Workinging processes, Crane Russak, 1977. 
2. Amitabh Ghosh, Asok Kumar Mallick, Manufacturing sciences, East-west press private ltd; latest reprint-1991. 
MM 345 NUCLEAR	METALLURGY 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Nuclear Structure: Structure of nucleus, binding energy, fission reaction, neutron cross sections, moderation of 
neutrons, multiplication factor, fusion reaction. Reactors and Materials: Classification of nuclear reactors, materials for 
nuclear reactors, fuels, moderators, control rods, coolant, reflectors and structural materials. Fabrication of fuel and 
cladding materials. Radiation Effects: Effect of radiation on reactor materials, Radiation hazards, safety and shielding, 
disposal of radioactive wastes. Production of Nuclear Materials: Atomic minerals, their occurrence in India, General 
methods of their processing. Production metallurgy of nuclear grade uranium, thorium beryllium and zirconium; 
Production of enriched uranium; Processing of spent fuel. Indian reactors and atomic energy program in India. Use of 
nanomaterials for nuclear application. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. Stephenson, Introduction to Nuclear Engineering, Mcgraw-Hill. 
2. H. S. Ray, R. Sridhar and K. P. Abraham, Extraction of Non ferrous Metals, Affliated East-West Press Private Limited. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
351
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. Glasstone and A. Sesonke, Nuclear Reactor Engineering, Van Nostrand
MM 352 MATERIAL	CHARACTERIZATION	TECHNIQUES 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Chemical bonding, Fundamentals of crystallography, Reciprocal lattice, Structures in metals, Inorganic compounds, 
Polymers, Silicate glasses, Stereographic projection. Properties of materials; physical, chemical, electrical, optical 
and magnetic properties. Microscopic and diffraction techniques: Abbe’s criteria, Resolution and resolving 
power of microscope, Rayleigh’s criteria of resolution, Optical microscope, Aberrations, Electron interaction with 
materials. Electron diffraction, Electron microscope, SEM: principle of operation, mode of operation. TEM: principle 
of operation, sample preparation, mode of operation, advanced microscopic techniques: AFM, STM, EELS. X-ray 
diffraction: Principle of X-ray diffraction, Bragg’s law, structure determination. Thermal characterization techniques: 
Theory, Thermo Gravimetric Analysis (TGA), Instrumentation, Applications; Differential Thermal analysis (DTA), 
Apparatus, Methodology, Applications; Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), Applications; Dilatometer. Chemical 
characterization techniques: Principle underlying techniques, Infrared spectroscopy (IR), Raman spectroscopy, 
Mossbauer spectroscopy, Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), Emission spectroscopy (Chromatography 
techniques). 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Ruth E. Whan, Material Characterization, Metals Handbook, Vol 10, ASM, 1986. 
2. Elton N Kaufmann, Characterization of Materials, Willey Publishers, 2003. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. J. Grundy and G. A. Jones, The structure and properties of solids, Edward Arnold, 1975. 
2. B. D. Cullity, Elements of X-ray diffraction, Addison-Wesley publishing company, 2002. 
3. B. M. Rao, Chemical characterization of materials, Himalaya publishing house, 2000. 
4. J. I. Goldsetin,, C E. Lyman, D. E. newbury, E. Lifshin, P. Echlin, L. Sawyer, D. C. Joy, j. R. Michael,, Scanning electron microscopy 
and X-ray microanalysis, 2003. Springer
MM 356 POLLUTION	IN	METALLURGICAL	INDUSTRIES	AND	ITS	CONTROL 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Review of various types of pollutions; air pollution, water pollution, solid waste pollution and noise pollution; 
Environmental impact assessment in metallurgical industries; Emissions from integrated iron and steel plants and 
suggestion of equipments for their control; Environmental aspects of sponge iron plants and their effective control; 
Pollutant emissions from other alternative iron and steelmaking processes and their control. Management of wastes 
from iron and steelmaking operations; Environmental pollutant emissions from Al, Zn Cu and lead industries; Preventive 
measures to reduce the atmospheric pollutions from these non-ferrous industries. Environmental legislations related 
to metallurgical industries. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. C. S. Rao, Environmental Pollution Control Engineering, Willey Eastern Ltd., 1991. 
2. G. N. Pandey & G. C. Carney, Environmental Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company, 1989. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Proceedings of International Conference on Environmental Management in Metallurgical Industries EMMI-2000, Allied 
Publisher, Calcutta. 
2. Proceeds of International Workshop on Environmental and Waste Management in Iron and Steel Industries, Dec 2 – 3, 1999, 
NML Jamshedpur. 
MM 357 CORROSION	AND	DEGRADATION	OF	MATERIALS	AND	THEIR	PREVENTION 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Degradation of materials: Oxidation, Corrosion and wear, Basics of thermodynamics and kinetics of oxidation and 
corrosion, Pourbaix diagram, Polarization, Mixed potential theory, Passivity, Characteristics of passivation, Degradation 
of composites. Corrosion: Fundamentals of corrosion studies. Different types of corrosion; Atmospheric, galvanic, 
Pitting, Crevice corrosion, Intergranular and de-alloying, Stress corrosion cracking, Season cracking, Hydrogen damage 
and radiation damage, Hydrogen embrittlement, Corrosion rate measurement, Weld-decay and knife line attack, 
Taffel’s extrapolation, Oxidation and hot corrosion of materials at high temperature, Kinetics of oxidation, Pilling-
Bed worth ratio. Prevention of degradation: Alloying environment, Environmental conditioning, Design modification, 
Cathodic and anodic protection, Organic and inorganic coating, Inhibitors and passivators, Wear resistant coating. 
Environmental degradation of composite. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
352
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Fontana & N. D Greens, Corrosion Engineering-M. G, . Mc Graw Hill publishing company, (2006). 
2. H. H. Uhlig, John Wiley & Sons, (2000), Corrosion & Corrosion control. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. N. Banerjee, An introduction to science of corrosion & its inhibition, Oxonian Press Pvt. Ltd., India, (1985). 
MM 358 EXPERIMENTAL	TECHNIQUES	IN	MATERIALS	ENGINEERING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Optical Microscopy and Image analyzer: Understanding of image formation, resolution, numerical aperture, 
magnification, depth of field and depth of focus of a microscope. Quantitative and phase analysis (inclusion, size 
distribution etc. ). X-ray diffraction and analysis: Production and properties of X-rays, X-ray diffraction, Structure 
factor and intensity calculations. Effect of texture, particle size, micro strain on diffraction lines. Indexing of powder 
photographs. X-rays florescence: basics and applications in materials science. SEM and FESEM: Principle and 
applications, Modes of operation, Image formation - plane and fractured surfaces. Microanalysis (EDX, WDS etc. 
) TEM: Principle and operation. Bright field and dark field images, Sample preparation techniques. Selected area 
diffraction, Reciprocal lattice and Ewald sphere construction, Indexing of selected area diffraction patterns. Advanced 
Characterization Techniques: STEM, AFM, Nanoindentation Testing, EELS- Principle and applications. DTA/DSC-TG: 
Scope and applications in materials science. 
Essential	Readings:	
1. B. D. Cullity, Elements of X-ray Diffraction (II edition), Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. Reading, USA, 1978. 
2. P. J. Goodhew and F. J. Humphreys, Taylor and Francis, Electron Microscopy and Analysis, London, 2001(ISBN-0-7484-0968-8). 
Supplementary Readings: 
1. S. H. Cohen and Marcia L. Lightbody (Editors), Atomic Force Microscopy / Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Plenum Press, New 
York, 1994. 
2. P. J. Haines (Editor), Principles of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC), Cambridge, 2002. 
3. G. F. Vander Voort, Metallography: Principles and Practice ASM International, Materials Park, USA, 1984
4. S. Amelinckx, D. van Dyck, J. van Landuyt and G. van Tendeloo (Editors), Electron Microscopy: Principles And Fundamentals, 
VCH, Weinheim, 1997. 
5. C. Suryanarayana and M. Norton, X-ray Diffraction, A Practical Approach, Plenum Press, New York, (1998). 
6. Metallography and Microstructures, Metals Handbook, Volume 9, 9th edition, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio, 
1986. 
7. Materials Characterization, Metals Handbook, Volume 10, 9th edition, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio, 1986. 
MM 359 ENGINEERING	POLYMERS	AND	COMPOSITES 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Polymers : Classification of polymerization reaction, semi-crystalline and amorphous polymers, Elastomers, Additives, 
Fillers, Viscoelasticity, Molecular theory for viscoelasticity, Glass and rubbery states, Glass transition temperature, 
Crystallinity, Deformation, Mechanical response, High temperature specialty polymers, Polymer liquid crystals; 
Composites : Classification of polymer matrix composites, metal matrix composites, ceramic matrix composites. 
Determination of Engineering Elastic Constants, Stiffness of composites; Fabrication of composites: PMC; Injection 
moulding and Liquid resin impregnation route. MMC; Squeeze infiltration and Physical vapour deposition. CMC; 
Powder based route and reaction processing; Matrix deformation, Interfacial debonding, Effect of microstructure, 
Interfacial fracture and crack deflection. Fatigue Failure, Stress Corrosion Cracking, Creep, Selection of polymers for 
design applications of mechanical components. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. Hull and T. W. Clyne, An introduction to composite material, Cambridge University press. 
2. Nelson Thomes, Young and Lovell, Introduction to Polymers. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. E. Nelsen, Mechanical properties of polymer and composite, Publisher CRC, 1993. 
2. William W. Callister, Materials Science and Engineering, John Wilely and Sons, 6th Edittion, 2002. 
3. S. Suresh, A. Mortensen and A. Needleman, Fundamentals of Metal Matrix Composites, Butterworth- Heinemann. 
MM 370 FUEL	TESTING	LAB.	 Credits [0- 0- 3]
General introduction of solid fuels; To determination % moisture and volatile matter contents in coal; To determine 
the % ash and fixed carbon contents in coal; To determine calorific value of coal; To determine bulk density of coal – 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
353
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
study of the effects of size and moisture addition; To determine apparent density and apparent porosity of coal/coke; 
To determine true density and true porosity of coal; To determine caking index of coal; To determine the % yield of 
char on carbonization of non – coking coal. 
MM 371 THERMODYNAMICS	AND	KINETICS	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
To determine the tumbler and abrasion indices of lump iron ore; To determine the micuum indices of coke; To study 
the decomposition of calcium carbonate and determination of equilibrium constant and free energy change; To 
determine the partial molal volume of each component in a solution of water and methanol; To determine the 
equilibrium constant and free energy change for the C + CO2 ═ 2 CO reaction; To study the effect of temperature on 
% reduction of iron ore pellet; To study the effect of time on % reduction of iron ore pellet; Pelletization of iron ore 
fines, firing of pellets and measurement of their crushing strengths. 
MM 372 THERMAL	ANALYSIS	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
To carry out the thermal analysis of Al sample using TG – DSC technique (Melting point and oxidation study); 
Dilatometric study of given Al plate sample; Thermal analysis of 0. 2% C steel using DSC – TG technique to study 
Microstructural changes with temperature; Thermal analysis of epoxy polymer using DSC technique (glass transition 
temperature); Thermal analysis of 0. 2% C steel using DSC – TG technique during (a) heating (b) cooling (c) isothermal 
holding; Thermal analysis of 0. 8%C cut eutectoid steel sample during heating and to compare it with behaviour shown 
by 0. 2%C steel during heating; To study the thermal behaviour of Calcite on heating by using DSC – TG technique. 
MM 373 MECHANICAL	TESTING	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Hardness measurement of metallic materials using Vicker, Rockwell and Brinell hardness testing machines; 
Microhardness testing of two and / or multiphase alloy systems; Tensile tests of low carbon steel (annealed), high 
carbon steel (annealed) and a non ferrous alloy; To draw true stress – true strain diagram/s using above data and 
determination of strain hardening exponent; Compression testing of ceramics, powder metallurgy specimens; Three 
– point bend test of non – metallic materials; Impact testing of steels / non – ferrous alloys / non – metallic materials; 
Wear studies of different carbon steels; To develop S – N curve of a metallic specimen; KIC tests of a brittle material. 
MM 374 STRUCTURE	PROPERTY	CORRELATION	PROJECT 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Heat Treatment, Microstructure examination, mechanical characterization and fractography of medium carbon steel; 
Study the age hardening behaviour of 2XXX / 7XXX aluminium alloy; Annealing of cold worked metal and study the 
changes in microstructures, mechanical properties and fractographic features; Effect of inter-critical annealing on 
tensile behaviour of low carbon steel. 
MM 376 COMPUTATIONAL	TECHNIQUE	IN	MATERIALS	ENGG.	LAB.	 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Basics of numerical mathematics, Concept of physical domain and computational domain numerical, Integration, 
Initial value problems, assumptions and limitations in numerical solutions, simulation, instrumentation and data 
acquisition systems.; To draw a circle using MATLAB; To solve a system of linear equations using MATLAB; To solve an 
ODE using MATLAB; To find out the standard deviation of a given set of values using MATLAB; Curve fitting techniques 
using regression and interpolation. Using MATLAB fit a linear curve for given set of data; To draw a sphere using 
MATLAB and extend the program to draw FCC and BCC crystal structures; To find out the lattice parameter from the 
XRD data of an element belonging to the cubic system using MATLAB; To create your own design using MATLAB codes. 
MM 408 ENERGY,	ENVIRONMENT	&	RECYCLING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction and potentials of world energy resources: Fossil fuels, Nuclear energy, Biomass energy, Solar energy, 
Wind energy, Geothermal energy, etc.; Present day energy scenario in the world and India in particular; Consumption 
of fossil fuels in chemical, metallurgical and power industries and automobiles; Various types of pollutants and their 
harmful effects; Pollutant emissions from major fossil fuel consuming industries / sectors and their local and global 
effects; Renewable energy sources – their potentials, possible applications and impact on environmental pollution; 
World-wide approach in abatement of pollution emissions and conservation of fossil fuels; Solid, liquid and gas wastes 
generated from metallurgical industries – their recycling, reuse and management; Municipal wastes and their energy 
potentials; Waste heat recovery; Environmental legislations related to Metallurgical, Chemical and Power industries. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Prof. R. C. Gupta (Editor), Proceedings of the International Conference on Environmental Management in Metallurgical 
Industries, 14 – 16th Dec. 2000, Allied Publishers Ltd., New Delhi. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
354
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
2. Larry L. Anderson and David A. Tillman, Fuels from Wastes, Academic Press, New York, 1977
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Perry Nowacki (Ed. ), Health Hazards and Pollution Control in Synthetic Liquid Fuel Conversation, Noyes Data Corporation, New 
Jersey, 1980. 
2. C. N. Sawyer and P L Mccarty, Chemistry for Environmental Engineering, 3rdEdn., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1978. 
MM 416 COMPLEX	FERROUS	AND	NON-FERROUS	ALLOYS 3 credit [3-0-0]
Ferrous alloys: Introduction, Important alloy steels, High speed steels, Stainless steels, Maraging steels, TRIP steels; 
Alloyed Cast irons, Ni-Hard cast iron, Ni-resist cast iron, High Cr cast iron, High Si cast iron, Austenitic cast irons, 
Cast irons for high temperature uses.; Non-ferrous alloys: Zinc-based die casting alloys, Ni-Cr-high temperature 
alloys, Bearing materials; Super alloys: Ni, Co, and Fe based super alloys, Heat treatment important properties and 
applications of super alloys. 
Course Care-taker: Dr. S. Sen
MM 426 SECONDARY	STEELMAKING 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Objectives and techniques adopted in Secondary Steelmaking like vacuum degassing processes: ladle degassing 
processes (VOD, VAD), steam degassing processes, circulation degassing processes (RH, DH). Inert gas purging, ladle 
furnace, etc. Role of slag and powders in inclusion control; Desulphurization; Dephosphorisation; Modifications of 
inclusion morphologies, production of ultra low carbon, ultra low sulphur, ultra low phosphorus and inclusion free 
steels; Powder injection system. Production of stainless steels through VOD, AOD and CLU processes. Production 
of ultraclean steel through post solidification treatments (VAR, ESR processes); Refractories used in secondary 
steelmaking furnaces, their properties and selection criteria. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. Ghosh, Secondary Steelmaking – Principle & Applications, CRC Press – 2001. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. Ghosh, Principles of Secondary Processing and Casting of liquid steel, Oxford & IBH Publication. 
2. Ahindra Ghosh and Amit Chatterjee, Ironmaking and Steelmaking Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, 
2008
MM 427 SPONGE	IRON	TECHNOLOGY 3 credit [3-0-0]
Care	taker:	Dr.	M.	Kumar
Present and future of sponge iron industries in India; Classification of DR processes; Mechanism of Iron ore reduction 
in coal- based and gas-based DR processes; Salient features of coal- based (rotary kilns) DR processes; Characteristics 
of raw materials for use in rotary kilns; Coal-based; processes using reactors other than rotary kilns; Salient features 
of gas-based DR processes; Strengths and weaknesses of different DR processes particularly in context to India; 
Properties and usage of DRI; Pollution issues in the Indian DR industries. 
MM 428 ADVANCES	IN	STEELMAKING 4 Credits [3-1-0]
A critical appraisal of hybrid blowing process, UHP electric arc and induction furnaces with respect to raw materials, 
energy consumption, productivity and product quality; Special grade steels; Development of secondary steelmaking 
and their importance under Indian conditions; Sources of inclusions; sulphur, phosphorus and gases in steel; 
Secondary steelmaking technologies; Inert gas purging; Vacuum degassing – RH/DH, VOD, VAD, Ladle furnace; Powder 
injection system – powder dispenser, lance, etc.; Physicochemical and fluid dynamic aspects of powder injection and 
stirring processes; Role of slag and powders in inclusion control; Desulphurization; Cored wire feeding; Production of 
ultra low sulphur, ultra low phosphorus and inclusion free steels, ultra-low carbon steels; modification of inclusion 
morphologies; Production of stainless steel through VOD, AOD, CLU, processes. Production of ultra clean steel 
through post solidification treatments (VAR, ESR processes); Selection and properties of refractories for secondary 
steel technology-slide gate, porous plug, ladle lining, etc. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. Ghosh, Secondary Steelmaking – Principle & Applications, CRC Press – 2001. 
2. Richard J. Fruehan (ed. ), The Making, Shaping and Treating of Steel (Steeelmaking Volume), The AISE Steel Foundation, 2004. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
355
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Ahindra Ghosh and Amit Chatterjee, Ironmaking and Steelmaking Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, 
2008
2. R. G. Ward, Physical Chemistry of iron & steel making, ELBS and Edward Arnold, 1962. 
3. F. P. Edneral, Electrometallurgy of Steel and Ferro-Alloys, Vol. 1 Mir Publishers, 1979 
4. Pre-requisite: MM – 321 Ironmaking and MM – 324 Steelmaking
MM 431 MECHANICAL	BEHAVIOUR	OF	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Tensile Behaviour of Metals: True stress-true strain curve, Strain hardening coefficient, Instability in tension, Effect of 
strain rate and temperature on flow properties. Fracture: Theoretical cohesive strength of metals, Griffith’s theory 
of brittle fracture, Mechanism of brittle and ductile fracture, Fractographic aspects of fracture, Notch effects. Impact 
Behaviour: Notched bar impact test, Transition temperature phenomenon, Factors affecting transition temperature; 
Fracture Mechanics: Strain energy release rate, Stress intensity factor, Plane strain fracture toughness, Design 
approach; Fatigue: Micromechanisms of crack initiation and growth, Stress and strain approaches of fatigue, Fracture 
mechanics approach, Fatigue crack growth; Environmental Assisted Cracking: Stress corrosion cracking, Hydrogen 
embrittlement, Corrosion fatigue. Creep: Creep curves, Mechanisms of creep, Stress rapture test, Life prediction, High 
temperature alloys. Composites: Fracture and fatigue of composites. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. G E Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy –McGraw – Hill Publication (1988). 
2. R W Hertzberg, Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering Materials, John Wiley & Sons Publication (1995). 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R E Reed, Physical Metallurgy Principals ––Hill Litton Education Publication (2004). 
2. W. Soboyejo, Mechanical Properties of Engineering Materials –Marcel Dekker Publication (2003). 
MM 435 FRACTURE	MECHANICS	AND	FATIGUE	OF	METALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Griffith’s crack theory, Strain energy release rate, Stress analysis of cracks and linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM), 
Crack tip plastic zone, Fracture mode transition: plane strain and plane stress fracture toughness, Plane strain fracture 
toughness determination, Plane stress fracture toughness determination, Fracture toughness determination using 
J-integral approach. Microstructural aspect of fracture toughness, Optimizing microstructure and alloy cleanliness 
to enhance fracture toughness. Design approach; Cyclic stress controlled fatigue, Cyclic strain controlled fatigue, 
Ratcheting behavior of materials; Mechanism of fatigue crack nucleation and propagation, Subcritical crack growth 
in cyclic loading, Factors affecting fatigue crack growth rate, influence of load interaction and environment. Fatigue 
crack growth models and life estimation, Short fatigue crack. Failure Analysis and case studies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. L. Anderson, Fracture Mechanics fundamental and application, (CRC Bess) 3rd Ed (2005)
2. R. W. Hertzberg, Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering Materials, (John Wiley & Sons Pub. ). 4th Ed. (1995)
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. E. Dieter, Mechanical Metallurgy Mc-Graw Hill (1988). 
2. D. Broek, Elementary Fracture Mechanics, Martinus Nijho Publisher. 
3. Metal Handbook, Failure Analysis & Prevention (Vol. - XI) (ASM Pub. )
4. Metal Handbook, Fractography (Vol – XII) (ASM Pub. )
MM 442 ADVANCED	MATERIALS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Electronic Polymers, Organic electronics, Melanin, Organic semiconductor, Printed electronics, Organic LED. 
Nanostructures, Nanomaterials, Nanocomposites. Biomaterials: Metallic biomaterials like 316L stainless steel, Co-Cr 
Alloys, Titanium Ti6Al4V, Ceramic biomaterials like Alumina, Zirconia, Carbon Hydroxyapatite, Polymeric biomaterials 
likeUltra high molecular weight polyethylene, Polyurethane. Smart Materials: Piezoelectric materials, Shape memory 
alloys and shape memory polymers. High Performance Alloys: Nickel super alloys, Ti alloys, Al-Li alloys, Hastelloy, 
Inconel, Monel, Nitronic, Cobalt based alloys and commercially available pure nickel alloys. Functional and Engineering 
Ceramics: diverse applications as cutting tools, mobile phone microwave devices, polycrystalline diamond and fuel 
cells. Hybrid Materials: Design, Synthesis and Properties of hybrid materials created by blending disparate materials 
such as plastics with metals. Processing of Advanced Materials: Superplastic, spray forming, rapid solidification. 
Materials selection and design. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
356
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Mark J. Hampden-Smith Wiley-VCH, Chemistry of Advanced Materials: An Overview Leonard V. Interrante, 1st edition (1997) 
ISBN-10: 0471185906 ISBN-13: 978-0471185901. 
2. R E Smallman, A. H. W., Butterworth-Heinemann, Physical Metallurgy and Advanced Materials, Seventh Edition, 2007, ISBN: 
0750669063. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Meyers, M Sarikaya, R. Ritchie, Elsevier, Nano and Microstructural Design of Advanced Materials, 2003, ISBN-13: 978-0-08-
044373-7, ISBN-10: 0-08-044373-7. 
MM 446 COMPOSITE	MATERIALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to Composites, Matrices, Reinforcements, Classifications, Applications, Advantages, Fundamental 
concept of reinforcement, review of current developments; design & fabrication and economic considerations. Basic 
mechanics of reinforcement, Stiffness of parallel arrays of fibres in a matrix. Discontinuous and particulate reinforcement. 
Fibres and resin materials. Rule of Mixtures, Critical Fiber Length, Short and Continuous Fibers, Fiber Orientation 
Matrix and Reinforcement Materials, Polymeric Matrices, Metallic Matrices, Ceramic Matrices, Particulates, Flakes, 
Whiskers, Fibers: C, B, Glass, Aramid, Al2O3, SiC, Nature and manufacture of glass, carbon and aramid fibres. Review 
of the principal thermosetting and thermoplastic polymer matrix systems for composites. Polymer Matrix Composites 
(PMCs), Metal Matrix Composites (MMCs), Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs), CFRP & Carbon/Carbon Composites 
(CCCs). Types, Manufacturing, Processing methods, Interfaces, Properties, Applications, Toughening Mechanisms, 
Fiber Forms, Prepregs, Molding Compounds-Processes, Lay-Ups, Filament Winding, Pultrusion, Recycling. Matrix–
Reinforcement Interface, Wettability, Interactions at Interface, Interfacial Bonding Types, Interfacial Strength Tests, 
The role of the interface. The nature of fiber surfaces, wetting and adhesion. Strength, Stiffness, Fracture, Toughness 
and toughening mechanisms of composites. Strengths of unidirectional composites. Multiple fracture in laminates. 
Macroscopic fracture and energy dissipating processes. Application of fracture mechanics to composite materials. 
Fracture Mechanics and Fracture Toughness in Composites, Linear Elastic fracture mechanics, Toughness, Fiber matrix 
de-bonding, Fiber Pullout Buckling and Post-Buckling. Failure criteria, Fatigue and Creep in composites, Environmental 
effects in Composites, Green composites. Synthesis and Properties of Nanocomposites. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Chawla, Composite Materials: Science and Engineering, Springer, 2ndEd. 1998. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Matthews & Rawlings, Composite Materials: Engineering and Science, Chapman & Hall, 1994. 
2. Hull, An Introduction to Composite Materials, Cambridge, 2nd Edt. 1997. 
MM 448 ADVANCED	ENGINEERING	MATERIALS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Electronic Polymers, Organic electronics, Melanin, Organic semiconductor, Printed electronics, Organic LED. 
Nanostructures, Nanomaterials, Nanocomposites. Biomaterials: Metallic biomaterials like 316L stainless steel, Co-Cr 
Alloys, Titanium Ti6Al4V, Ceramic biomaterials like Alumina, Zirconia, Carbon Hydroxyapatite, Polymeric biomaterials 
like Ultra high molecular weight polyethylene, Polyurethane. Smart Materials: Piezoelectric materials, Shape 
memory alloys and shape memory polymers. High Performance Alloys, Nickel super alloys, Ti alloys, Al-Li alloys, 
Hastelloy, Inconel, Monel, Nitronic, Cobalt based alloys and commercially available pure nickel alloys. Functional 
and Engineering Ceramics: diverse applications as cutting tools, mobile phone microwave devices, polycrystalline 
diamond and fuel cells. Hybrid Materials: Design, Synthesis and Properties of hybrid materials created by blending 
disparate materials such as plastics with metals. Processing of Advanced Materials, Superplastic, spray forming, rapid 
solidification. Materials selection and design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Overview Leonard V. Interrante, Mark J. Hampden-Smith Wiley, Chemistry of Advanced Materials, An -VCH; 1st edition (1997) 
ISBN-10: 0471185906 ISBN-13: 978-0471185901. 
2. R E Smallman, A. H. W. Ngan, Butterworth-Heinemann, Physical Metallurgy and Advanced Materials, Seventh Edition, 2007, 
ISBN: 0750669063. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Meyers, M Sarikaya, R. Ritchie, Elsevier, Nano and Microstructural Design of Advanced Materials 2003, ISBN-13: 978-0-08-
044373-7, ISBN-10: 0-08-044373-7. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
357
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 449 NANOSTRUCTURED	MATERIALS 3 Credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Types of nanomaterials, Emergence and challenges in nanotechnology. Synthesis routes for 
nanomaterials: Bottom-up and top-down approaches, Solid, Liquid, Gas phase synthesis, Hybrid Phase synthesis. 
Synthesis of bulk Nanostructured materials: Approaches and challenges. Properties of nanomaterials: Stability of 
nanomaterials, Mechanical properties, Optical, Electrical and Magnetic properties, nano-diffusion. Characterization 
of nanomaterails: Structural characterization by XRD, SEM, TEM, SPM, Chemical characterization by spectroscopy 
techniques, Characterization of mechanical properties by nanoindentation, Hot compression testing, Fracture 
analysis. Application of nanomaterials: Electronics and optoelectronics applications, Nanobots, Biological applications, 
Catalytic applications, Quantum devices, Application of carbon nanotubes, Nanofluids. Future of Nanotechnology. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Yuri Gagotsi (Ed. ), Taylor and Francis, Nanomaterails Handbook, 2006. 
2. G. Cao, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials, Imperial College Press, 2006. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. D. Booker and E. Boysen, Nanotechnology for Dummies, Dummies Publishing, 2005. 
2. C. Delerue and M. Lannoo, Nanostructures, Springer, 2004. 
3. C. P Poole and F. T. Owee, Introduction to Nanotechnology, Willey Press, 2003. 
MM 468 JOINING	OF	METALS 4 Credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Principle, Theory and Classification of welding and other joining processes. Manual metal arc (MMA): 
Equipment requirement, electrodes for welding of structural steels, coating constituents and their functions, types of 
coatings, current and voltage selection for electrodes, Arc welding power sources; Conventional welding transformers, 
rectifiers and current and voltage. The influence of these power sources on welding. Metal transfer. Submerged arc 
welding (SAW): Process details, consumables such as fluxes and wires for welding mild steel, Variations in submerged 
arc welding process. Gas metal arc welding (GMAW) or MIG/ MAG welding: Process details, shielding gases, electrode 
wires, their sizes, and welding current ranges. TIG welding: Process details, power sources requirements, electrode 
sizes and materials, current carrying capacities of different electrodes, shielding gases, application of process. 
Resistance welding: General principle of heat generation in resistance welding, application of resistance welding 
processes. Process details and working principle of spot, seam, and. projection welding, electrode materials, shapes of 
electrodes, electrode cooling, selection of welding currents, voltages. Welding metallurgy of carbon and alloy steels, 
Cast irons, Stainless steels, Al- and Cu-based alloys. Weldability and Heat affected zones (HAZ). Welding defects and 
detection techniques. Soldering and brazing: Difference between both the processes, consumables used, methods of 
brazing, fluxes used, their purposes and flux residue treatment. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J F Lancaster, Allen and Unwin, Metallurgy of Welding. 
2. R L Little, Welding and Welding Technology, TMH. 
Further Reading: 
1. J Norrish, Woodhead, Advanced Welding Processes. 
2. K Weman, Woodhead. Welding Processes Hadbook. 
MM 471 COMPOSITE	MATERIALS	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Fabrication of FRP composite specimen in the laboratory by hand laying method using epoxy resin and e-glass fibers; 
Cutting out the test specimen using diamond cutter from FRP composite sheets and determination of the moisture 
intake by test specimen during atmospheric curing; 3-point bend test of the FRP composite test specimen fabricated 
in the laboratory using Instron – 1195; Post-curing effect (Temperature, UV radiation) on mechanical properties of 
FRP composite by 3-point bend test; Fabricated of MMC (Al-SiC) composite specimen in the laboratory with varying 
fraction of reinforced particle by powder metallurgy route (minimum 3 compositions); Effect of variation of reinforced 
phase fraction on microstructure and mechanical properties (hardness/microhardness etc. ) of MMC; Study of 
microstructure and mechanical properties (hardness/microhardness etc. ) of MMC produced by casting route and 
comparison with that produced my powder metallurgy route; Study of fracture surface of MMC/CMC by scanning 
electron microscopy and analysis of fracture mechanism. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
358
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MM 472 MODELING	OF	MATERIALS	PROCESSES 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Modeling of experimental data from literature based on process Metallurgy; Modeling of data from literature based 
on physical Metallurgy and/ or mechanical metallurgy; Modeling of data from literature on non-metallic materials
MM 473 DESIGN	&	CALCULATION	LAB.	 2 Credits [0- 0- 3]
Design of Blast Furnace; Blast Furnace charge calculation; Heat balance of Iron Blast Furnace; Heat balance of Blast 
Furnace Stove; RAFT (Raceway Adiabatic Flame Temperature) Calculation; Design of a L. D. Vessel; Heat balance of 
a Composite Steel Slab Reheating Furnace; Calculation the thickness of the solidified shell at the mould exit in a 
Continuous Casting Unit. 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering
Detail Syllabi
359
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
DEPARTMENT	OF	MINING	ENGINEERING
DETAILED	SYLLABI	OF	COURSES
MN 201 Mine Development 3-1-0 4
MN 202 Mine Surveying 3-1-0 4
MN 203 Basic Surveying 3-0-0 3
MN 204 Mining Machinery 3-0-0 3
MN 205 Mineral Exploration 3-0-0 3
MN 206 Introductory Mining Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 207 Mining Geology 3-0-0 3
MN 208 Geostatistics 3-0-0 3
MN 232 Solid fuel Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 271 Mine Surveying Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 273 Mining Geology & Exploration Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 274 Mining Machinery Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 301 System Engineering 3-0-0 3
MN 302 Mine Economics 3-1-0 4
MN 303 Material Handling Systems 3-0-0 3
MN 304 Computer Application in Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 305 Mineral Processing Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 311 Surface Mining Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 313 Underground Mining Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 321 Rock Mechanics 3-1-0 4
MN 322 Geomechanics 3-1-0 4
MN 323 Rock Engineering 3-0-0 3
MN 324 Strata Control Technology 3-1-0 4
MN 325 Ground Control Instrumentation 3-1-0 4
MN 330 Mine Ventilation 3-1-0 4
MN 331 Solid Fuel Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 332 Remote Sensing and Its Application 3-1-0 4
MN 336 Solid Fuels and Clean Coal Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 370 Mine Ventilation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 371 Rock Mechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 372 Computer Application in Mining Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 373 Mineral Processing Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 374 Geomechanics Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 375 Material Handling Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 376 Model Preparation Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 377 Solid Fuel Technology Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 400 Mine Planning 3-1-0 4
MN 410 Tunneling 3-1-0 4
MN 411 Advanced Surface Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 412 Mining of Deep Seated Deposits 3-1-0 4
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
360
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MN 413 Advanced Coal Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 414 Rock Mechanics Application to Environmental Problems 3-0-0 3
MN 415 Advanced Metaliferrous Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 421 Rock Slope Technology 3-0-0 3
MN 431 Mine Environmental Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 433 Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 3
MN 435 Eco-friendly Mining 3-1-0 4
MN 436 Environmental Pollution and Control in Mines 3-1-0 4
MN 438 Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3
MN 441 Mine Legislation and Safety Engineering 3-1-0 4
MN 442 Mine Fires and Spontaneous Heating 3-1-0 4
MN 451 Mine Management 3-1-0 4
MN 471 Mine Environmental Engineering Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 472 Mine Planning and Design Laboratory 0-0-3 2
MN 473 Simulation and Modeling of Mining Systems Laboratory 0-0-3 2
For	B.	Tech	Courses	(3	or	4	level)	please	refer	to	the	B.	Tech	Curriculum	and	Syllabi,	for	M.	Tech	Courses	(6	level)	
please refer to M. Tech Curriculum and Syllabi. 
MN 201 MINE	DEVELOPMENT 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Distributions of mineral deposits in India and other countries, mining contributions to civilization, mining 
terminology, stages in the life of the mine - prospecting, exploration, development, exploitation and reclamation, 
access to mineral deposit- selection, location, size and shape (incline, shaft and adit), brief overview of underground 
and surface mining methods.; Drilling: Types of drills, drilling methods, electric, pneumatic and hydraulic drills, 
drill steels and bits, drilling rigs, and jumbos.; Explosives: Classification, composition, properties and tests, fuses, 
detonators, blasting devices and accessories, substitutes for explosives, handling and storage, transportation of 
explosives.; Rock blasting: Mechanism of rock blasting, blasting procedure, and pattern of shot holes.; Shaft sinking: 
Ordinary and special methods, problems, and precautions, shaft supports and lining. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. P. Pal, A. A. Balkema, Rock blasting effect and operation, 1st Ed, 2005. 
2. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of mining technology, Vol. 1, Central Techno Publications, Nagpur, 7th Ed, 2001
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. H. Gary, Blasting operations, Mc-graw Hill, 1st ed, 1981. 
2. R. P. Pal, Blasting in ground excavations and mines, Oxford and IBH, 1st Ed, 1993. 
3. C. P. Chugh, Drilling technology handbook, Oxford and IBH, 1st Ed, 1977. 
4. R. D. Singh, Principles and practices of modern coal mining, New age international, 1st Ed, 1997. 
5. S. K. Das, Explosive and blasting practices in mines, Lovely prakashan, 1st Ed, 1993. 
6. P. K. Rajameny, A Joshi, and S. Bhandari, Blast design and Practice, Himanshu Publications, Udaypur, 2006. 
MN 202 MINE	SURVEYING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Linear measurement, Compass surveying – use of prismatic compass, bearing of a line, dial traverse and adjustments, 
local attractions and correction of bearings, Theodolites- seconds theodolites, micro-optic theodolites, electronic 
theodolites, measurement of horizontal angles by repetition method and re-iteration method and measurement 
of vertical angles by general method; Traversing – surface and underground including boundary surveys and joint 
surveys, survey errors and their adjustments, co-ordinate calculations. . Leveling- use of dumpy levels, quick setting 
levels, digital levels and leveling staff, temporary adjustments of levels, ordinary and precise leveling, reduction 
of levels by height of instrument method and rise and fall method, reciprocal leveling, profile leveling, differential 
leveling; Triangulation: Classification of Triangulation systems, Triangulation figures, Base line measurements; 
Correlation of surface and underground surveys: Verticality of shafts, measurement of depth of shafts, setting out 
curves – surface and underground. Special Mine Surveys: Surveys for connecting national grid, survey of installations 
of mine structures, EDM and its application, Surveying by Modern instruments by using GPS & Total Station. 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
361
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. Schofield and M. Breach, Engineering Surveying, Sixth edition, 2007, ELSEVIER, B & H. 
2. B. C. Punmia, Surveying, Vol - I, II, III, Laxmi Publication, New Delhi, 12th Edition, 1990. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. Maslov, Geodetic Surveying, Mir Publication, Moscow, Revised edition, 1980. 
2. Fedorov, Elementary Plane and Mine Surveying, Mir Publication, Moscow, Revised Edition, 1986. 
3. V. Natarajan, Advanced Surveying, B. I. Publication, Bombay, First edition, 1976. 
4. T. P. Kanetkar, Surveying and Levelling, Pune Vidyarthi Griha Prakashan, Reprints, 1995. 
5. S. K. Roy, Fundamentals of Surveying, Printice Hall of India Pvt., New Delhi, Third Printing, 2004. 
MN 203 BASIC	SURVEYING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Linear measurements and chain surveying: Errors due to incorrect chain, tape corrections, Compass surveying: 
Use of prismatic compass – dial traverse and adjustments, bearing of a line, local attractions and corrections for 
bearings, Theodolites: Seconds theodolites, micro-optic theodolites, electronic theodolites, temporary adjustments, 
Measurement of horizontal angles by repetition method and re-iteration method, measurement of vertical angles by 
general method, Traverse surveying: close traverse and open traverse, checks in closed traverse and open traverse, 
plotting a traverse surveying, consecutive co-ordinates: latitudes and departures, closing error, balancing a traverse, 
Omitted measurements, Leveling: Use of dumpy levels, micro-optic levels, quick setting levels, digital levels and 
leveling staff, temporary adjustments of levels, Reduction of levels by height of instrument method, and rise and fall 
method, ordinary and precise leveling, differential leveling, profile leveling, reciprocal leveling, Survey errors and their 
adjustments, Co-ordinate Calculations; Triangulation: Classification of Triangulation systems, Triangulation figures, 
Base line measurements; EDM and its application, Surveying by Modern instruments such as GPS & Total Station. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. C. Punmia, Surveying, Vol- I, II, III, Laxmi Publication, New Delhi, 12th Edition, 1990. 
2. W. Schofield and M. Breach, Engineering Surveying, sixth edition, ELSEVIER, B & H. 2007, 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. Maslov, Geodetic Surveying, Mir Publication, Moscow, Revised edition, 1980. 
2. Fedorov, Elementary plane and mine surveying, Mir Publication, Moscow, Revised edition, 1986. 
3. V. Natarajan, Advanced Surveying, B. I. Publication, Bombay, First edition, 1976. 
4. T. P. Kanetkar, Surveying and Levelling, Pune vidyarthi Griha Prakashan, Reprints, 1995. 
5. S. K. Roy, Fundamentals of Sueveying, Prentice Hall of India Pvt., New Delhi, Third Printing, 2004. 
MN 204 MINING MACHINERY 3 credits [3-0-0]
General: Mechanical transmission of power in mining machinery, shafts, pulleys, gears, and gear/trains, belt drives, 
chain drives, couplings and clutches, brakes.; Wire ropes: Constructions, examinations, listing and maintenance.; 
Rope and Locomotive haulages: Direct, main and tail, balanced double drum and endless haulage, gravity haulage, 
constructional features, power calculation, selection of haulage ropes, haulage tracks and safety appliances, tubs 
and mine cars, diesel, battery and trolley wire locomotives, tractive effort, ideal gradient, power calculations, 
exhaust conditioners.; Compressor and pumps: Generation, distribution and use of compressed air in mines, mine 
pumps, pumping ranges, and fittings, elements of pipe line transportation.; Hydraulics and mining machines: Power 
hydraulics, hydraulic circuits, actuators, hydraulic fluids, control of hydraulic power, cutting and mining machines for 
coal, surface coal/ore handling plant. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of mining technology, Vol. 3, Vidyasewa, 3rd ed, 1989. 
2. N. T. Karlein, Mine transport, Orient Longman, 1st ed, 1967. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. F. Statham, Coal mining practice, Caxton Eastern, 1st Ed, 1960. 
2. R. D. Singh, Principles and practices of modern coal mining, New age international, 1st ed, 1997. 
3. S. K. Das, Modern coal mining technology, Lovely prakashan, 2nd Ed, 1994. 
4. M. P. Alexandrov, Material handling equipment, MIR, 1st ed, 1981. 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
362
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MN 205 MINERAL	EXPLORATION 3 credits [3-0-0]
Classification of ore reserves: proved, probable, and geologist’s ore. Geological aspects of drilling borehole location, 
planning of drilling operations, borehole surveys, correction of deviated boreholes and directional drilling, core-
sampling and assaying; Economic classification of mineral resources: calculation of in-situ reserves from borehole 
data. Underground sampling and calculation of blocked reserves; Exploration: Theory and application of various 
methods in mineral exploration, Seismic, Gravity and Magnetic methods Principles and methods of gravity and 
magnetic prospecting, instrumentation, data processing, interpretation with case studies, Fundamentals of remote 
sensing and its application in large scale mineral exploration. Exploration for oil and natural gas. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. W. C. Peters, Exploration and Mining Geology, Wiley, 2 editions, 1987. 
2. P, Kearey, M. Brooks and I. Hill, An Introduction to Geophysical Exploration, Wiley-Blackwell; 3rd edition, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. C. J. Moon, M. K. G. Whateley, A. M. Evans and W. L. Barrett, Introduction to Mineral exploration, Blackwell Publishing, 2006. 
2. R. E. Sheriff and L. P. Geldart, Exploration Sysmology, Cambridge University Press; 2 edition, 1995. 
3. H. L. Hartman, SME Mining Engineering Handbook, Society of Mining and Metallurgy and Exploration (US), 1992, 2394 pages. 
4. R. Marjoribanks, Geological methods in Mineral exploration and Mining, Springer; 1st edition, 1997. 
MN 206 INTRODUCTORY	MINING	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Distributions of mineral deposits in India and other countries, mining contributions to civilization, mining 
terminology, stages in the life of the mine - prospecting, exploration, development, exploitation and reclamation, 
access to mineral deposit- selection, location, size and shape (incline, shaft and adit), brief overview of underground 
and surface mining methods.; Drilling: Types of drills, drilling methods, electric, pneumatic and hydraulic drills, 
drill steels and bits, drilling rigs, and jumbos.; Explosives: Classification, composition, properties and tests, fuses, 
detonators, blasting devices and accessories, substitutes for explosives, handling and storage, transportation of 
explosives.; Rock blasting: Mechanism of rock blasting, blasting procedure, and pattern of shot holes.; Shaft sinking: 
Ordinary and special methods, problems, and precautions, shaft supports and lining. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. P. Pal, Rock blasting effect and operation, A. A. Balkema, 1st Ed, 2005. 
2. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of mining technology, Vol. 1, Central techno, 7th ed, 2001
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. H. Gary, Blasting operations, Mc-graw Hill, 1st Ed, 1981. 
2. R. P. Pal, Blasting in ground excavations and mines, Oxford and IBH, 1st Ed, 1993. 
3. C. P. Chugh, Drilling technology handbook, Oxford and IBH, 1st Ed, 1977. 
4. R. D. Singh, Principles and practices of modern coal mining, New age international, 1st Ed, 1997. 
5. S. K. Das, Explosive and blasting practices in mines, Lovely prakashan, 1st Ed, 1993. 
MN 207 MINING	GEOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to Geology: its scope and application to engineering problems, Physical Geology, Mineralogy - 
Determinative properties and occurrence of common rock forming minerals in India, Petrology - Igneous, Sedimentary 
and Metamorphic rocks; Structural Geology: Elementary knowledge of rock deformation and structural characteristics 
of deformed rocks, strike, dip, folds and faults, their description, classification, Joints, Un-conformities/simple forms 
of igneous rocks, Dykes, sills, etc., Geological maps and their interpretation, Stratigraphy - Principles of Stratigraphy, 
Standard Stratigraphic Scale, Indian Stratigraphy; Economic minerals: their classification, origin, mode of occurrence, 
geographical and geological distribution, physical properties and industrial uses and distribution of major metallic 
and non-metallic mineral deposits of India. Origin and distribution of natural fuels - Coal, Petroleum and natural gas, 
nuclear fuels
Essential	Reading:	
1. P. K. Mukherjee, A Text Book of Geology, The World Press Pvt. Ltd., 9th Edition, 1982. 
2. H. H. Read, Rutley’s Elements of Mineralogy, CBS Publishers and Distributors, 26th Edition, 1984
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. B. Marland, Structural Geology, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 3rd Edition, 1990. 
2. D. E. Salisbury & W. E. Ford, A Text Book of Mineralogy, Wiley Eastern Limited, 4th Edition, 1992. 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
363
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. G. W. Tyrrel, The Principles of Petrology, B. I. Publications Pvt. Ltd., 1989. 
4. G. B. Mahapatra, Text Book of Physical Geology, CBS Publishers and Distributors, 1st Edition, 1990. 
5. R. Kumar, Fundamentals of Historical Geology and Stratigraphy of India, Wiley Eastern Limited, 1992. 
MN 208 Geostatistics 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction to geostatistics, Univariate description: Frequency Tables and Histograms, Normal and lognormal 
Probability plots, Summary of statistics, Measure of Spread, Measure of Shape; Bivariate description: Comparing of 
two distribution, Scatter plots, Correlation, Linear regression, Conditional Expectation; Spatial Description: Contour 
maps, Indicator maps, Moving window statistics, Proportional effect, Spatial continuity, h-scatter plots, correlation 
functions, covariance function and variograms, cross h-scatter plots; Random function, From statistics to Geostatistics, 
Modeling sample variograms, Regionalised variables; Global estimation: Polygonal declustering, cell declustering, 
comparison of declustering methods; Point estimation: Polygon, triangulation, inverse distance methods, search 
neighbourhoods; Kriging: Ordinary kriging, simple kriging; Block Kriging; Search strategy; crossvalidation; Variance 
volume relationships, change of support: Practical importance of support effects, effect of support on summery 
statistics, correcting for support effect, transforming from one distribution to another, affine correction, indirect 
lognormal correction, dispersion variance, estimating dispersion variance from a variogram model; assessing 
uncertainty; Multivariate geostatistics, Geostatistics for quality control, grade tonnage curve, Basics of non-parametric 
geostatistics, Indicator Kriging, Brief idea about geostatistical simulation, Introduction to GEOEAS/ GSLIB/SURPAC 
software. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. E. H. Isaaks and R. M. Srivastava, An Introduction to Applied Geostatistics, Oxford University Press, USA, 1990. 
2. J. M. Rendu, An Introduction to Geostatistical Methods of Mineral Evaluation (Geostatistics), South African Institute of Mining 
and Metallurgy, 1978. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. J. Sinclair and G. H. Blackwell, Applied Mineral Inventory Estimation, Cambridge University publication, 2002. 
2. B, D. Ripley, Spatial Statistics (Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics), Wiley-Interscience, New edition, 2004. 
3. P. Goovaerts, Geostatistics for Natural Resources Evaluation, Oxford University Press, 1997. 
MN 271 MINE	SURVEYING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Prismatic Compass Surveying: (a) Bearing of the lines (b) Traversing; Levelling: (a) Precise Levelling (b) Profile 
Levelling; Plane Table Surveying: (a) Intersection Methods (b) Radiation Method; Theodolite Traversing; Theodolite: 
(a) Horizontal angle measurement (b) Vertical angle measurement; Signs and Conventions used by the GSI, MMR and 
CMR; Triangulation Survey: (a) By 1” Theodolite (b) By Electronic Theodolite; Triangulation Survey (a) By EDM (b) By 
Total Station; Distance Measurement: (a) By EDM  (b) By Total Station; Coordinate Measurement: (a) By Total 
Station (b) By GPS; Traversing and Recording Position of points by GPS; Special Mine Surveys – Surveys for connecting 
National Grid, Survey of installations of Mine Structures
MN 273 MINING	GEOLOGY	&	EXPLORATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Identification of common rocks; Identification of common Minerals; Study of physical properties of minerals; 
Determination of strike and dip; Identification and stereographic plotting of joints; Study of topographic maps; 
Drawing of geological section; Geological maps with folds and faults; Study of geophysical exploration equipment - 
resistivity meter; Study of aquameter; Study of magnetometer; Geological field trips
MN 274 MINING	MACHINERY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of jack hammer drill; Study of different types of wire rope & their uses; Study of different types of rope clips; 
Study of reliance rope capel; Study of different types of roof bolts; Study of Sylvester prop withdrawal; Study of 
different types of brakes; Study of different types of Clutches; Study of different parts & functions of an electric coal 
drill; Study of direct rope haulage; Study of endless rope haulage; Study of main & tail rope haulage. 
MN 301 System Engineering 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Concept of system engineering, General model selection; Data collection: Data collection methods, 
time study, work sampling, sample number calculation; System analytical techniques: Statistical methods, control 
charts – X bar chart, R chart, S chart; Mathematical methods for loading and hauling; Stochastic models: Monte Carlo 
simulation, Activity oriented simulation, process oriented simulation; Reliability: Concepts of reliability, concept of 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
364
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
different distribution: Normal, exponential, Beta, Gamma, Binomial, lognormal etc.; fitting a distribution to data, 
reliability of series and parallel systems, reliability analysis of a combined series parallel system; Optimization and 
design: Heuristic technique, Dynamic programming, network flow theory, Graph theory; Programming: Linear 
programming, transportation and assignment problems, Mixed integer linear programming, queuing theory, network 
analysis, inventory control and simulation techniques.; Analysis: Analysis of exploration and mining systems using 
mathematical programming, simulation techniques and network models; stochastic model simulation; Concept of 
Artificial Intelligence: Natural language understanding, Machine vision, robotics, expert system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Bernel & Krako, Introduction to System Analysis, A. A. Balkema, 2004. 
2. N. Deo, System Simulation by Digital Computers, Prentice Hall of India, 2005
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. Donald Boyd, System analysis and modeling, Academic Press, 2001. 
MN 302 MINE ECONOMICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Examination of Mineral properties, Mine sampling, estimation of reserves and grades, Impurities and quality control, 
commercial uses of minerals and ores; Mine valuation. Depreciation methods; decision trees, Mineral Industry of 
India,; National Mineral Policies, conservation, taxation, trading, mining entrepreneurship, Principles of company 
law, shares and debentures; joint stock company and public company; partnership business, capital formation, Cost-
Volume-Profit analysis and break-even analysis, budgetary control, wages and incentives, purchases, stores and 
inventory control, sales and despatches. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. T. Deshmukh, Mineral and Mine Economics, Myra Publ., Nagpur, 1986
2. R. K. Sinha and N. L. Sharma, Mineral Economics, Oxford & IBH Pub., 3rd ed, 1970
Supplementary Reading: 
1. O. P. Khanna, Industrial Engineering and Management, Dhanpat Rai Delhi, 1993
2. R. N. P. Arogyaswamy, Courses in Mining Geology, Oxford and IBH Pub., 2nd ed, 1973
3. S. Krishnaswamy, India’s Mineral Resources, Oxford & IBH pub., 2nd ed, 1972
4. P. K. Jain, Financial management, Tata McGraw Hill, 1981
MN 303 MATERIAL	HANDLING	SYSTEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Mine hoist: Drum and koepe winders, constructional features, kinematics, torque and power calculation, speed 
control, safety contrivances, selection of mine winders, cages, skip, suspension gears, headgear structures, cage 
guides, pit top and pit bottom circuits and layouts; Conveyors: Belt conveyor, chain conveyor, cable belt conveyor, 
shaker conveyor, vibratory conveyor, constructional features and power calculations, selection and application; Aerial 
Ropeway: Mono-cable, bi-cable, twin-cable ropeway, constructional features and power calculations, selection and 
application; Scraper Haulage: Constructional features, applicability, advantages and disadvantages; Men and material 
transportation: Trackless vehicle loaders, shuttle cars, SDL and LHD, special men and materials transport in mines, 
men riding systems in mines.; 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. A. Ramlu, Mine hoisting, Oxford and IBH, 1st ed, 1996. 
2. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of mining technology, Vol-III, Vidyasewa, 3rd ed, 1989
Supplementary Reading: 
1. N. T. Karlein, Mine transport, Orient Longman, 1st ed, 1967
2. S. C. Walker, Mine winding and transport (Advances in mining science and technology), Elsevier Science Publishing Company, 
1st ed, 1988
3. N. Mukherjee, Materials handling in mines, Technology mining society IIT Kharagpur, Vol- XI, 1sted, 1979-80
4. B. Norman, Mechanics of bulk material handling, London Butterworths, 1st ed, 1971
5. M. P. Alexandrov, Material handling equipment, MIR, 1st ed, 1981
MN 304 COMPUTER	APPLICATION	IN	MINING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction to structure terminology and peripherals, algorithms, flow charts, programs, dedicated systems.; 
Application in Mining: Exploration, rock topographic models, bore hole compositing, compositing, ore reserve 
calculation, interpolation and geostastical models.; Open pit design: Ultimate pit design, introductory process 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
365
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
control, underground mine design: Production scheduling; Operation Simulation: Introduction, Simulation overview, 
objective, understand the role of modeling, Understanding the basic concept in simulation; Example of simulation in 
mining aspects: Simulation of machine repair problems, Concepts of variability and prediction, Example with dumping 
time problem, fitting distribution with chi-square test; Random number generation: Methods of random number 
generation, Properties of random number, pseudorandom number; Random variates generation: Methods of random 
variates generation, inverse transformed method, acceptance rejection method, composition method, empirical 
method and rectangular approximation; Simulation languages: GPSS, SLAM; Logical flow diagram of different mining 
activities, Coding with GPSS and SLAM of different mining problems; Computer Control: Remote control, automatic 
control, application and limitations of control. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. C. Bartee, Digital Computer Fundamentals, Mc GRAW HILL, 4th Ed., 1984. 
2. P. Malvino and D. P. Leach, Digital principles and application, McGraw-Hill, 5th Ed., 1994
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. V. Ramani, Application of computer methods in the mineral industry. 
MN 305 MINERAL	PROCESSING	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
General Principle: Mineral Beneficiation and its role in mineral exploitation.; Comminution and Liberation : Theory 
and practice of crushing and grinding, performance and choice of crushers and grinding mills. Laboratory techniques, 
interpretation and plotting of date, Industrial screens and screening efficiency; concentration: Theory and practice 
of classification, classifiers- Their performance and choice, Picking and washing techniques. Theory and application 
of sink and float, jigging and flowing film concentration- methods and equipment used; Froth Flotation: Physico-
chemical principles, flotation reagents, flotation machines and circuits, application to common sulphides, oxides and 
oxidized minerals. Electrostatic and Electro-magnetic Separation - Principles, operations and fields of applications.; 
Flow Sheets: Simplified flow sheets for the beneficiation of beach sand, coal and typical ores of copper, lead, zinc and 
manganese with special reference to Indian deposits. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. A. M. Gaudin, Principles of Mineral Dressing, Tata McGraw & Hill, 1939
2. R. H. Richard and C. E. Locky, A text Book on Ore Dressing, A A Balkema, 2004
Supplementary Reading: 
1. F. Taggart, Mineral Dressing Handbook, P & H, 2000
2. B. A. Wills, Mineral Processing Technology, Willy & Sons, 2005
3. G. C. Lowrison, Crushing & Grinding, Maxwell and MacMillan, 2002
4. L. Svalovsky, Solid Liquid Separation, Tata McGraw & Hill Inc., 2003
MN 311 SURFACE	MINING	TECHNOLOGY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Applicability and limitations, Stripping Ratio, Preliminary evaluation of surface mining projects.; Surface 
Mining Methods: Development of Mineral deposits by opencast mining, design and layout of opencast mines. 
Methods of stripping, Bench geometry, Bench slope. Drilling, blasting, loading and transportation in opencast mines, 
Equipment used for different operations, Choice and their application.; Placer Mining and Sea bed Mining: Ground 
sluicing, Hydraulicking and Dredging. Exploitation systems of ocean mineral resources. Relevant provisions of coal 
mines and metalliferous mines regulations.; Environmental problems due to surface mining and their remedial 
measures, Recent developments in the deployment of heavy earth moving machineries in the surface mines.  
Essential	Reading:	
1. G. B Mishra, Surface Mining, Lovely prakashan Dhanbad, 2nd ed, 2006. 
2. K Raj. Singhal, Mine Planning and Equipment Selection, A. A. Balkema Rotterdam, 1st ed, 1995. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. K. Das, Surface Mining Technology, Lovely prakashan Dhanbad, 1st ed, 1994. 
2. V. V. Rzhevsky, Opencast Mining Unit operations, Mir Pub., Mascow, 1985. 
3. W. Hustrulid and M. Kuchta, Open pit mine planning and Design, Vol-I, A. A. Balkema Rotterdam, 1st ed, 1995. 
4. Rozgonyi, G Tibor, Continuous surface Mining, A. A. Balkema Rotterdam, 1st ed, 1988. 
5. Crawford, T. John, Open pit mine planning and Design, American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers, 
1979. 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
366
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MN 313 UNDERGROUND	MINING	TECHNOLOGY 4 credits [3-1-0]
Development of Stratified Deposits: Choice of mine size, methods of entry and primary development.; Underground 
Coal Mining Methods: Classification and choice, Bord and Pillar mining, development and extraction, Long-wall mining, 
face mechanization, production equipment and face machinery used, viz. coal cutting machines, drills, mechanical 
loaders, LHDS, shuttle car etc. – their performance and choice. Special coal mining methods.; Underground Metal 
Mining Methods: General Development of property level, crosscuts, raises and winzes, drifting and tunneling, U/g 
metalliferrous mining methods – their classification and choice. Stoping of ore bodies, supporting and development of 
stopes Special techniques of mining mechanization. Mining equipment and production machine used below ground. 
Provision of MMR 1961.; Supports: Roadway and face supports, supports for junctions and special conditions, setting 
and withdrawal of supports, roof bolting, roof stitching, systematic supporting, protective of pillars.; Stowing and 
Filling Methods, gathering and transportation arrangements, stowing plants and layout. Provision of CMR 1957. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. N. Singh, Underground winning of Coal, Oxford and IBH New Delhi, 1992
2. Y. P. Chacharkar, A study of Metalliferous Mining Methods, Lovely prakshan Dhanbad, 1994
Supplementary Reading: 
1. I. C. F. Statham, Coal Mining Practice, Caxton eastern agencies, Calcutta, Reprint, 1964
2. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of Mining Technology, Vol - I & II, EMDEE publishers Ranchi, Revised edition, 2000
3. S. K. Das, Modern Coal Mining Technology, Lovely prakshan Dhanbad, 1992
4. R. D. Singh, Principles & Practices of Modern Coal Mining, New age international New Delhi, 1997
5. B. C. Arthur, SME Mining EngineersHand Book, American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers New York, 
1973
MN 321 ROCK MECHANICS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Structural Features of rock material and rock mass; Physico mechanical properties: Physical and 
mechanical properties including swelling potential, different strength parameters and their determination, Hydraulic 
properties of rocks and determination; Elastic and Time dependent properties of rock: Rock Deformability and 
its measurement. Elastic and non-elastic behavior, influence of time on rock properties; Theories of rock failure: 
Rock Strength, Analysis of Stress-Strain Curve, Rock failure and different failure criteria. Effect of anisotropy on rock 
strength; Stress: Fundamentals of stress and strain in two and three dimension, Stress-Strain relationships, Mohr’s 
circle, Rock mass classification Systems and their interpretation, Rock Support and Design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. E. Goodman, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1980
2. V. S. Vutukuri and K. Katsuyama, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, Industrial Publishing & Consulting Inc., Tokyo, 1994
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. H. G. Brady and E. T. Brown, Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1992
2. J. C. Jeager and N. G. W. Cook, Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics, Chapman and Hall, 1979
3. L. Hartman, Mining Engineering Handbook, Society for Mining, Mettalurgy and Exploration Inc., USA, 1992
4. J. A. Hudson and J. P. Harrison, Engineering Rock Mehcanics, Pergamon Press, UK, 2000
MN 322 GEOMECHANICS 4 credits [3-1-0]
Rock Stress: Stresses around mine openings of different cross-sections, Insitu Stress- Determination of insitu rock mass 
properties, insitu testing methods and instrumentations.; Design of underground workings: Pillar Design including 
applicability of Wilson’s approach, Safety factors; Slope Stability: Slope failure types, mechanisms and theories.; 
Rock Reinforcement and Support: Mechanisms of failure in rock structures-intact and anisotropy, Rock Load and 
stability, Supporting and reinforcement members, Design of support and reinforcement systems; Mine Subsidence: 
Subsidence mechanisms and control measures, Basics of numerical methods in geomechanics and applications
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. E. Goodman, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1980
2. V. S. Vutukuri and K. Katsuyama, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, Industrial Publishing & Consulting Inc., Tokyo, 1994
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. H. G. Brady and E. T. Brown, Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1992
2. J. C. Jeager and N. G. W. Cook, Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics, Chapman and Hall, 1979
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
367
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
3. L. Hartman, Mining Engineering Handbook, Society for Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration Inc., USA, 1992
4. E. Hoek and J. Bray, Rock Slope Engineering, 3rd Ed., Inst. Of Mining and Metallurgy, London, 1980
5. J. A. Hudson, Comprehensive Rock Engineering, Pergamon Press, UK, 2000
MN 323 ROCK ENGINEERING 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Importance of rock mechanics, rock working, judgment and approximation; Ground Characterisation: 
Character of rock materials, rock mass, ground water, stress, site investigation; Measurement, Prediction and 
Monitoring of Rock Behaviour: Design Methods, Strength, Deformability, viscous, thermal and swelling behaviour, 
Behaviour of discontinuities, monitoring; Rock Excavation and Stabilisation: Blasting, drilling, breaking and cutting, 
rock reinforcement, support and lining systems, drainage and grouting
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. A. Franklin and M. B. Dusseault, Rock Engineering, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991
2. R. E. Goodman, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1980
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. Hartman, Mining Engineering Handbook, Society for Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration Inc., USA, 1992
2. V. S. Vutukuri and K. Katsuyama, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, Industrial Publishing & Consulting Inc., Tokyo, 1994
3. B. H. G. Brady and E. T. Brown, Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1992
4. J. C. Jeager and N. G. W. Cook, Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics, Chapman and Hall, 1979
5. J. A. Franklin & M. B. Dusseault, Rock Engineering Applications, Mc Graw Hill, 1991. 
MN 324 STRATA	CONTROL	TECHNOLOGY	 4 credits [3-1-0]
Geomining conditions: Geological factors contributing to strata control problems in mines, Geomechanics 
classification of rocks; Safety status: Status of safety in coal mines vis-à-vis strata control problems, Assessing the 
risk from the hazards of roof & side falls; Design of support system: Design of support system for development and 
depillaring workings, Design of support system for long wall workings, Application of modeling techniques to strata 
control problems; Strata behaviour studies: Instrumentation for evaluation of strata condition in coal mines, Strata 
control techniques and its application to coal mining industry, Case studies on geotechnical instrumentation and 
strata control in coal mines, Demonstration of geotechnical instrumentation and computer softwares; Organization of 
strata control cell: strata control cell in mines, Training needs of the first line supervisors for effective implementation 
of the latest strata control technologies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. L. Jeremic, Strata Mechanics In Coal Mining, A A Balkema, Rotterdam, Taylor and Francis, 1985, 566p
2. T., Bieniawski Ziti, Strata Control in Mineral Engineering,  New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1 Feb 1987. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. T. N. Singh, Underground winning of Coal, Oxford and IBH New Delhi, 1992
2. B. H. G. Brady and E. T. Brown, Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1992
3. J. A. Hudson, Comprehensive Rock Engineering, Pergamon Press, UK, 2000
4. Z. T. Bieniawski Engineering Rock Mass Classifications. Wiley, New York. 251, 1989. 
5. S S Peng and H S Chiang, Longwall mining, Wiley; New York, 708p. 
MN 325 GROUND	CONTROL	INSTRUMENTATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Deformation and Strain Measuring Instruments: Convergence meters, convergence recorders, tape extensometers, 
bore hole deformation, gauge, multipoint borehole extensometers and bore hole camera; Load and Pressure 
Measuring Instruments: Load cells, pressure measuring instruments – stress capsules, stress meters, borehole 
pressure, cells and flat jacks. Strain gauges and transducers, readout units, sensors, transmitters and data acquisition 
systems; Testing Equipment: UTM, MTS and acoustic emission equipment. Rock bolt pull tester, Monitoring and 
interpretation of the data; Applications: Mining Engineering applications: Instrumentation in underground mines and 
opencast mines; Civil Engineering applications; Instrumentation in Hydro electric projects and Tunnels, case studies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. A. Hudson, Comprehensive Rock Engineering, Pergamon Press, UK, 2000
2. M. L. Jeremic, Strata Mechanics in coal mining, A A Balkema, Rotterdam, Taylor and Francis, 1985, 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
368
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Z. T. Bieniawski, Strata Control in Mineral Engineering,  New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1987. 
2. B. H. G. Brady and E. T. Brown, Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1992
3. Z. T. Bieniawski, Engineering Rock Mass Classifications. Wiley, New York, 1989
MN 330 MINE	VENTILATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Composition of mine air, Mine gases: properties, origin, occurrence, physiological effects, detection, monitoring and 
control, Methane layering, Degasification of coal seams. Production, assessment, physiological effects and control 
of mine dusts; Thermal environment and psychrometry: Sources of heat load sources in mines, Effect of heat and 
humidity on miners. Psychrometry, Cooling power of mine air, Methods of improving of cooling power of mine air, 
Air Conditioning - basic vapour cycle; Mechanics of air flow through mine openings, Resistance of airways, Equivalent 
orifice, distribution of air current, control devices in ventilation systems, Natural ventilation: Calculation of NVP, 
Thermodynamic aspects, Artificial aids to natural ventilation; Mechanical ventilation: Principal types of mine fans, 
Installation, operation, characteristics and selection of mine fans, Fan testing and Out put Control, Fan laws and fan 
drives, Evasees, Diffusers, Booster fans, Auxiliary ventilation. Reversal of air currents and controlled recirculation; 
Ventilation Survey: Quantity and Pressure survey; Planning and Design of Ventilation Systems: mine ventilation design 
criteria and ventilation design factors, ventilation standards, Ascensional, descensional, homotropal, antitropal, 
central and boundary ventilations systems, Ventilation layouts for coal and metal mining, Network analysis : Hardy-
Cross method, Computer application in mine ventilation. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. J. McPherson, Subsurface Ventilation and Environmental Engineering, Chapman & Hall, 1993
2. G. B. Mishra, Mine Environment and Ventilation, Oxford University Press, Fifth Impression, 1993
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. L. Hartman, Mine Ventilation and Air Conditioning, John Wiley, Paperback edition, 1989. 
2. H. L. Hartman, J. M. Mutmansky, R. V. Ramani and Y. J. Wang, Mine Ventilation And Air Conditioning, Wiley-interscience, 3rd 
Edition, 1997
3. S. P. Banerjee, Mine Ventilation, Lovely Prakashan, 1st Edition, 2003
4. M. A. Ramlu, Mine Disaster and Mine Rescue, Oxford & IBH, 1991
MN 331 Solid Fuel Technology 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Processes of formation of coal, Theories of origin of coal, Eras of coal formation, Indian Coalfields and 
its subsidiaries: Occurrence and distribution, coal bearing formations, coal type and rank variation, Characteristics of 
major coalfields, Coal production from different sectors.; Coal petrography: Macro and micro lithotypes, Composition 
of macerals, application of coal petrography, Mineral matter in coal: Origin and chemical composition, Impact of 
mineral matter in coal process industry; Coal properties and their evaluation: proximate and ultimate analysis, 
calorific value, crossing and ignition point temperature, plastic properties(free swelling index, Caking index, Gray King 
Low Temperature Assay, Roga index, plastometry, dilatometry), physical properties like specific gravity, hard groove 
grindability index, heat of wetting, Crossing point temperature of coal, Behaviour of coal at elevated temperatures 
and products of thermal decomposition, Classification of coal - International and Indian classification, grading of 
Indian coals; Coal Washing: Principles, objectives, coal preparation, washability characteristics; Selection, testing, 
storage and utilization of coking and non-coking coal, Use of coal by different industries
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Sarkar, Fuels and Combustion, Orient Longman Private Ltd., 2nd edition, 1990. 
2. O. P. Gupta, Elements of Fuels, Furnaces and Refractories, Khanna Publication, 3rd Edition, 1996. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. A. Elliot, Chemistry of Coal Utilization, Wiley, 1981. 
2. N. Berkowitz, An Introduction to Coal Technology, Elsevier, 1993. 
3. D. Chandra, R. M. Singh, and M. P. Singh, Text Book of Coal, Tara Book Agency, 2000. 
4. G. G. Sarkar, An Introduction to Coal Preparation Practice, Oxford and IBH, 1986. 
5. S. P. Mathur, Mine Planning for Coal, M. G. Consultants, Bilaspur, 1993. 
MN 332 Remote	sensing	and	ITS	APPLICATION 4 credits [3-1-0]
Elements of photogrammetry, Stereoscopic Vision, Photo interpretation techniques, Definition and components of 
remote sensing, Electromagnetic waves and radiation principles, Multiconcept remote sensing, interaction of EMW 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
369
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
with various ground components: vegetation, water, snow, soil and minerals; Sensors and platforms, False color 
composite, Digital image processing: geometric and radiometric correction, image enhancement, band ratio, edge 
detection, filtering, principal component analysis, and image classification, Normalized difference vegetation index, 
Application of remote sensing in hydrology, mineral exploration, natural hazards like landslide, flood, and earthquake, 
Identification of surface feature, drainage pattern, structural patterns. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. T. M. Lillesand, R. W. Kiefer, J. W. Chipman, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, John Wiley and Sons, 2004. 
2. R. C. Gonzalez, R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1992. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. N Pandey, Principle and Application of Photogeology, Wiley Eastern Limited, 1987. 
2. R. P Gupta, Remote Sensing Geology, Springer, 2003. 
3. S. A. Drury, A Guide to Remote Sensing: Interpreting Images of the Earth,  Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990. 
4. B. Tso, P. M Mather, Classification Methods for Remotely Sensed Data, Taylor & Francis, 2001. 
MN 336 SOLID	FuelS	AND	CLEAN	COAL	Technology 3 credits [3-0-0]
Introduction: Processes of formation of coal, Theories of origin of coal, Eras of coal formation, Indian Coalfields and 
its subsidiaries: Occurrence and distribution, coal bearing formations, coal type and rank variation, Characteristics of 
major coalfields, Coal production from different sectors.; Coal petrography: Macro and micro lithotypes, Composition 
of macerals, application of coal petrography, Mineral matter in coal: Origin and chemical composition, Impact of 
mineral matter in coal process industry; Coal properties and their evaluation: proximate and ultimate analysis, 
calorific value, crossing and ignition point temperature, plastic properties(free swelling index, Caking index, Gray King 
Low Temperature Assay, Roga index, plastometry, dilatometry), physical properties like specific gravity, hard groove 
grindability index, heat of wetting, Crossing point temperature of coal, Behaviour of coal at elevated temperatures 
and products of thermal decomposition; Classification of coal: International and Indian classification, grading of 
Indian coals; Coal Washing: Principles, objectives, coal preparation, washability characteristics; Selection, testing, 
storage and utilization of coking and non-coking coal, Use of coal by different industries; Clean Coal Technology: 
Introduction, Pre-combuction, Combustion and Post combustion clean coal technology, Conversion 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. Sarkar, Fuels and Combustion, Orient Longman Private Ltd., 2nd edition, 1990
2. O. P. Gupta, Elements of Fuels, Furnaces and Refractories, Khanna Publication, 3rd Edition, 1996
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. A. Elliot (ed. ), Chemistry of Coal Utilization, Wiley, 1981
2. N. Berkowitz, An Introduction to Coal Technology, Elsevier, 1993
3. D. Chandra, R. M. Singh and M. P. Singh, Text Book of Coal, Tara Book Agency, 2000
4. G. G. Sarkar, An Introduction to Coal Preparation Practice, Oxford and IBH, 1986
5. S. P. Mathur, Mine Planning for Coal, M. G. Consultants, Bilaspur, 1993
MN 370 MINE	VENTILATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of Relative Humidity of Mine air with Fixed/stationary Hygrometer, and Whirling Hygrometer; 
Determination of Relative Humidity of air using Assman Psychrometer; Determination of cooling power of air using 
Kata Thermometer; Determination of CO% by MSA CO detector; Determination of percentage of CO and CO2 by 
Drager Multi Gas Detector (Model 21/31); Determination of Methane % by MSA D-6 Methanometer; Study of the 
construction and working of Flame Safety Lamp (VELOX GL-50, GL-60 and MSA type); Gas Testing by Flame Safety 
Lamp in a Gas Testing Chamber; Measurement of Air Velocity by (i) Vane Anemometer (ii) Electric Analog Velometer; 
Study of Pitot Static Tube & measuring of Air Velocity in a ventilation duct in combination with an Inclined Manometer; 
Measurement of dust concentration by (i) Gravimetric Dust Sampler, (II). Personal Dust Sampler; Measurement of 
dust concentration by High Volume Sampler; Measurement of Noise Level by Integrating Sound Level Meter ( CEL-
283)
MN 371 ROCK	MECHANICS	LAB 2 credits [0-0-3]
Preparation of Rock Specimens for various testing purposes; Study of Compressive Testing Machine; Determination of 
Protodyakonov Strength Index; Determination of Impact Strength Index; Determination of the Uni-axial Compressive 
Strength of rock materials; To Determine the Tensile Strength of a rock specimen by an Indirect Method (Brazilian Test); 
Determination of Point Load Strength Index; Determination of Shear Strength by Direct Shear Test; Determination of 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
370
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Modulus of Elasticity and Poission’s ratio of rock samples; Determination of Slake Durability Index of rock samples; 
Determination of Slake Durability Index of coal samples; Determination of Permeability of rock; Determination of C – 
φ by using Tri-axial Cell Unit; Determination of Index Parameter using Schmidth Hammer
MN 372 COMPUTER	APPLICATION	IN	MINING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Ore body modeling using SURPAC; Application of SURPAC for mine scheduling; Study of stress distribution around 
single opening using FLAC –2D; Study of stress distribution around single opening using FLAC –3D; Study of stress 
distribution around single opening using UDEC; Study of stress distribution around circular opening; Stress distribution 
around rectangular opening; Study of stress distribution around multiple openings; Study of deformation around 
circular opening; Study of deformation around single opening using FLAC –2D; Study of deformation around single 
opening using UDEC; Study of deformation around multiple openings
MN 373 MINERAL	PROCESSING	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Particle size analysis of different rocks and minerals; Study of Jaw Crusher and determination of its Actual Capacity; 
Finding out Reduction Ratio using jaw crusher; Verification of Rettinger’s Law using jaw crusher; Study of Hammer Mill 
and determination of its Actual Capacity; Finding out Reduction Ratio using Hammer Mill; Verification of Kick’s’ Law 
using Hammer Mill; Study of Rod Mill and determination of its Actual Capacity; Study of the effect of Ball Load and 
time on Grinding using Ball Mill; Study of Vibrating Screen and Determination of its Effectiveness; Study of Magnetic 
Separator and Determination of its Efficiency; Study of Baum Jig and Determination of its Efficiency. 
MN 374 GEOMECHANICS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of Universal Testing Machine; Evaluation of ground vibration using Blastmate; Determination of Explosive 
Strength by V. O. D. Monitor; Determination of rock hardness by Hardness Tester; Determination of Rock In-situ Stress 
by Flat Jack Unit; Determination of the relation between the moisture content and the dry density of the loose rock 
materials using light compaction; Study of Bore hole stress meter; To study the Permeability characteristics of coal 
specimens; Determination of crushing strength of rock, slag, aggregate gravel by using LOS Abrasion Testing Machine; 
Determination of Aggregate impact value of rock/ concrete by using Aggregate Impact Test Apparatus; Determination 
of Impact Strength with Pendulum Impact Tester; Introduction to a few numerical modeling software’s etc. 
MN 375 MATERIAL	HANDLING	SYSTEMS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of bi-cable aerial rope-way; Study of headgear and pulleys; Study of cage & skip; Study of different types of 
keps; Study of scraper chain conveyor; Study of belt conveyor; Study of gate end box; Study of king detaching safety 
hook; Study of mechanism of shaft sinking; Study of winding shaft; Study of safety devices in haulage; Study of cage 
attachment to winding rope
MN 376 MODEL	PREPARATION	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Preparation of surface mining models; Preparation of underground coal mining models; Preparation of underground 
metal mining models; Preparation of underground mine ventilation models; Preparation of underground transport 
models; Preparation of underground excavation models; Preparation of underground man riding models; Preparation 
of underground support models; Preparation of opencast bench models; Preparation of reclamation models; 
Preparation of models on blasting in opencast mines; Preparation of models on blasting in underground mines
MN 377 SOLID	FUEL	TECHNOLOGY	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Determination of Moisture Content of Coal; Determination of volatile matter content of coal sample; Determination 
of ash content of coal sample; Determination of the true and bulk density of supplied coal sample; Determination of 
caking index of coal; Determination of free swelling index of coal; Determination of washability characteristics of coal 
sample by float and sink analysis; Determination of calorific value of coal using bomb calorimeter; Determination of 
Hardgroove Grindability index of coal; Determination of Crossing point temperature of coal; Determination of Critical 
Air Blast value coal; Assessment of spontaneous heating susceptibility of coal using DTA.; Assessment of spontaneous 
heating susceptibility of coal using wet oxidation potential analysis. 
MN 400 MINE	PLANNING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Principles of Mine Planning: Mining industry in comparison to other industries, Planning for mineral policy, Plans to be 
maintained in the mineral industry, Stages of planning of new mines, requirements of planning, Master Plan, Feasibility 
Report, Detailed project report; Technical considerations in Planning: Selection of method of mining, opening up of 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
371
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
open cast mines and underground mines, development of open cast mines and underground mines, Division of mine 
lease area into mining Units, location of entries, Surface layouts, pit bottom layout, Ventilation planning; Planning of 
mine workings and systems: infrastructure planning, production planning, Mineral handling plant, optimal planning, 
Planning of special methods of Coal and metal mines, Placer Mining, Sea bed Mining; Socio-Economic considerations: 
Social aspects, Environment Management Plan, estimation of mining costs and profits, Restructuring planning, Issues 
and challenges of Mine planning in the future, Mine Closure plan; Computer applications in mine planning & design. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. P. Mathur, Mine Planning for Coal, M. G. Consultants, Bilaspur, 1993
2. J. Bhattacharya, Principles of Mine Planning, Allied Publishers Pvt Limited, New Delhi, 2003
Supplementary Reading: 
1. W. Hustrulid and M. Kuchta, Open Pit Mine Planning and Design, A. A. Balkema Rotterdam, 1995
2. B. M. Vorobjev and R. T. Desmukh, Advanced Coal Mining Vol-II, Asia Publishing houseBombay, revised edition, 1966
3. PWJ Van Rensbarg, Planning Open-pit mines, AA Balkema Cape Town, 1970
4. A. A. Myasnikov, Principle of Coal Mine Ventilation Planning, N. T. I. S., 1981. 
5. R D Singh, Principles and Practices of Modern Coal Mining, New age International Pvt limited Publishers, New Delhi, 1997. 
6. H. L. Hartmanetal, SME Mining Engineering Handbook, Vol. I & II, SME, USA, 1992. 
MN 410 Tunneling 4 credits [3-1-0]
Design of tunnels: Rock mass classification, stability analysis of tunnels, elastic and plastic deformation; Ground 
control: stress conditions, behavior of ground, Geomechanics instrumentation, design of supports; Equipments, 
Tunnel Boring Machines, ventilation, tunnel economics. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. Richard E Bullock, Tunneling and Underground Construction Techniques, SME Publication, 2002
2. Stack Barbara, Hand book of Mining & Tunneling Machinery, John Wiley and Sons. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. V. Proctor, Rock Tunneling with Steel Supports
2. F. O. Franciss, Weak rock tunneling, Taylor and Francis, 1994
3. J. Johansen, Modern trends in tunneling and blast design, Taylor and Francis, 2000
4. F. D. Davidson, Tunneling and Transport, Elsevier APPLIED Science, 1987
5. Bieniawski Z. T, Rock Mechanics Design in Mining & Tunneling
6. Edi Bickel J. O., T. R. Kuesel & E. H. King, Tunnel Engineering Handbook
MN 411 ADVANCED	SURFACE	MINING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction, Indian context of advance surface mines, Advancement in mine unit operation.; Planning of surface 
mines viz, Procedural steps of planning, Ore body description, Mining Systems, Ultimate pit configuration. Design of 
surface mines, Feasibility Report & Detailed Project Report, Modern surface mining equipments.; Legislations related 
to surface mining, Mine Closure Planning. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. T. Desmukh, Opencast Mining, Lovely prakashan Dhanbad, 1st ed, 1990. 
2. S. K. Das, Surface Mining Technology, Lovely prakashan Dhanbad, 1st ed, 1994. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. G. B. Mishra, Surface Mining, Lovely Prakashan Dhanbad, 1st ed, 1971. 
2. E. Hoek and J. Bray, Rock Slope Engineering, 3rd Ed., Inst. Of Mining and Metallurgy, London, 1980
3. W. Hustrulid and M. Kuchta, Open pit mine planning and Design, Vol - I, A. A. Balkema Rotterdam, 1st ed, 1995. 
4. B. Cummins Arthur, SME Mining Engineers Hand Book, American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers 
New York, 1973
MN 412 MINING	OF	DEEP	SEATED	DEPOSITS	 4 credits [3-1-0]
Exploration: Modern Exploration Techniques to Identify the Complex Coal Deposits; Classification: Classification 
of Coal Deposits Lying under Typical Geo-mining Conditions; Challenges: Challenges to improve Production and 
Productivity from Deep Seated Deposits, Challenges in Liquidation of Locked-up Pillars; Experimental trials: Innovative 
Technologies for Stability Analysis, Design and Development of Deep Seated Deposits; Modern techniques: Application 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
372
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
of Numerical Modeling Techniques to Control Ground Problems of Complex Deposits, Use of Modern Instruments 
for Strata Control of deep seated deposits, In-situ Gasification and Mineral Biotechnology for Complex Coal Deposits. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. D. Singh, Principles & Practices of Modern Coal Mining, New age international New Delhi, 1997
2. T. N. Singh, Underground winning of Coal, Oxford and IBH New Delhi, 1992
Supplementary Reading: 
1. S. S. Peng and H S Chiang, Longwall mining, Wiley; New York, 708p. 
2. S. K. Das, Modern Coal Mining Technology, Lovely prakashan Dhanbad, 1992
3. D. Prasad and S Rakesh, Legislation in Indian Mines-A critical Appraisal, Niskam Press, New Delhi, 1883p. 
4. S. P. Mathur, Coal Mining in India, M. S. Enterprises Bilaspur, 1999
MN 413 ADVANCED	COAL	MINING  4 credits [3-1-0]
Extraction of thick seams: Problems and issues, recent experimental trials Chirimiri caving Method, Blasting Gallery 
Method, Integral Caving method, Sublevel caving method, Hydraulic Mining, Shield Mining; Extraction underneath 
surface features: Non-Effective width (NEW), Back filling methods, Wide stall mining.; Extraction of multiple seams: 
Problems and issues, recent experimental trials, Parting failures and control, design of workings; Extraction of locked 
up pillars: Status of Bord and pillar mining in India, techniques of extraction and future requirements; Support systems: 
Strata behavior at greater depths, problems of strata control in high horizontal stress fields, design of support system. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. D. Singh, Principles & Practices of Modern Coal Mining, New age international New Delhi, 1997
2. T. N. Singh, Underground winning of Coal, Oxford and IBH New Delhi, 1992
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of Mining Technology, Vol - I, EMDEE publishers Ranchi, Revised edition, 2000. 
2. S. K. Das, Modern Coal Mining Technology, Lovely prakashan Dhanbad, 1992
3. S. P. Mathur, Coal Mining in India, M. S. Enterprises Bilaspur, 1999
MN 414 ROCK	MECHANICS	APPLICATION	TO	ENVIRONMENTAL	PROBLEMS 3 credits [3-0-0]
Classification of Rock for specific engineering purposes- Underground, Surface, etc. Mechanical properties of 
discontinues rocks – Planes of discontinuity in rocks, characteristics and orientation of Joints; Measurement of 
rock mass deformability- Insitu Testing; Applications - Opencast mining and slope stability, Underground mining 
and excavation, - massive rocks, layered rocks, weak rocks; Application to waste disposal and underground storage, 
application to earthquakes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. J. A. Franklin and M. B. Dusseault, Rock Engineering, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991
2. R. E. Goodman, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1980
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. Hartman et al, Mining Engineering Handbook, Society for Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration Inc., USA, 1992
2. V. S. Vutukuri and K. Katsuyama, Introduction to Rock Mechanics, Industrial Publishing & Consulting Inc., Tokyo, 1994
3. B. H. G. Brady and E. T. Brown, Rock Mechanics for Underground Mining, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1992
4. J. C. Jeager and N. G. W. Cook, Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics, Chapman and Hall, 1979
5. E. Hoek and J. Bray, Rock Slope Engineering, 3rd Ed., Inst. Of Mining and Metallurgy, London, 1980
6. J. A. Hudson, Comprehensive Rock Engineering, Pergamon Press, UK, 2000
7. J. A. Franklin and M. B. Dusseault, Rock Engineering Applications, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991. 
MN 415 ADVANCED	METALIFERROUS	MINING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Methods: Techno-economic analysis on choice of stoping methods, high productivity methods: blasthole stoping, 
vertical retreat method of mining, block caving, raise stoping, underground bench blasting, stope design and 
production planning in the various methods of stopping; Special underground excavations: shaft pockets, ore bins, 
ore transfer, ramp, decline, step mining methods, stope fills: preparation, transportation and filling operation, stope 
design and production planning, methods of pillar extraction, solution mining: in situ leaching, underground retorting, 
under-sea mining, introduction to novel mining methods, Special underground excavation and system of supports; 
Pillar extraction: methods of pillar extraction, salt, potash and sulphur mining- their special problems. 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
373
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Essential	Reading:	
1. Y. P. Chacharkar, A study of Metalliferous Mining Methods, Lovely prakshan Dhanbad, 1994
2. K. S. Stout, Mining Methods and Equipment, McGraw hill New York, 1980
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. C. Arthur, SME Mining Engineers Hand Book, American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers New York, 
1973. 
2. D. J. Deshmukh, Elements of Mining Technology, Vol - II, Central Techno Publications, Nagpur, 2001
3. Metal Mines Regulations-1961, Lovely Prakashan
MN 421 ROCK	SLOPE	TECHNOLOGY 3 credits [3-0-0]
Types and Mechanics of Slope Failure: Site investigation for slope assessment. Geological appraisal of slope behaviour, 
Types of slope failure, falls, slides and flows. Mechanics of slope failure; Factors Affecting Slope Stability: Geological 
factors, slope geometry, ground water, equipment loading, dynamic loading and effect of time; Slope Stability Analysis: 
Failure mechanisms, shear strength of soil and rock masses. Influence of groundwater. Evaluation of stability and risk. 
Earth dams, stability analysis, numerical models, empirical models; slope Mass Rating System, Slope instrumentation. 
Remedial measures; Design of Waste Dumps and Tailings Dams: stability analysis of opencast high walls and benches, 
overburden dumps, case studies. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. R. N. Chowdury, Slope Analysis, Elseveir, 1978
2. E. Hoek and J. Bray, Rock Slope Engineering, The Inst. of Mining & Metallurgy, London, pp. 358, 1981
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. F. Walker and R. Fell, Soil slope instability and stabilisation, A A Balkema, 1987
2. E. N. Bromhead, Stability of slopes, Wiley, London
3. M. L. Jeremic, Strata Mechanics In Coal Mining, A A Balkema, Rotterdam, Taylor and Francis, 1985, 566p
4. J. A. Hudson, Comprehensive Rock Engineering, Pergamon Press, UK, 2000
5. Z. T. Bieniawski, Engineering Rock Mass Classifications. Wiley, New York, 1989. 
MN 431 MINE	ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Spontaneous Heating and Mine Fires: Spontaneous Heating : Causes, incubation period, detection, remedial 
measures. Mine Fires -Classification, causes, preventive measures, dealing with mine fires – direct and indirect 
methods, reopening of scaled off areas.; Explosion: Fire-damp Explosion - Limits of inflammability of methane, causes 
of ignition, nature of fire damp explosion, propagation and prevention. Coal-dust Explosion - Index of inflammability, 
factors affecting explosibility of coal dust, causes and safeguards. Propagation of coal dust explosions, Investigation 
after an explosion.; Mine Illumination: Its effects on safety, efficiency and health, Flame and electric safety lamps- 
their uses and lamp-room – lay out and organization, standards of illumination in mines, lighting from the mains, 
photometric illumination survey, Miners’ diseases 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. A. Ramlu, Mine Disaster and Mine Rescue, Oxford & IBH, New Delhi, 1991
2. S. C. Banerjee, Prevention and Combating Mine Fires, Oxford & IBH, New Delhi, 2000. 
3. B. K. Kejriwal, Safety in Mines, Lovely Prakashan, Dhanbad. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. A. T. Donalad, The lighting of Underground Mines, Trans Tech Switzerland, 1982
2. R. Mcadam and D. Davidson, Mine Rescue Work, Oliver and Boyd, London, 2000
MN 433 ENVIRONMENTAL	IMPACT	ASSESSMENT 3 credits [3-0-0]
INTRODUCTION: Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) – Environmental Impact Statement – EIA in Project Cycle – 
Legal and Regulatory aspects in India according to Ministry of Environment and Forests – Types and limitations of EIA 
– Cross sectoral issues and terms of reference in EIA –Participation of Public and Non-Governmental Organizations in 
environmental decision making; COMPONENTS AND METHODS: Components of EIA - Processes – screening – scoping 
- setting – analysis – mitigation. Matrices – Networks – Checklists – Connections and combinations of processes - 
Cost benefit analysis – Analysis of alternatives – Software packages for EIA – Expert systems in EIA; PREDICTION, 
ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS AND REPORTING:  Prediction tools for EIA – Mathematical modeling for impact prediction 
– Assessment of impacts – air – water – soil – noise – biological – socio-cultural environments – Cumulative Impact 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
374
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Assessment – Documentation of EIA findings – planning – organization of information and visual display materials – 
Report preparation; ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN : Environmental Management Plan - preparation, 
implementation and review – Mitigation and Rehabilitation Plans – Policy and guidelines for planning and monitoring 
programmes – Post project audit – Ethical and Quality aspects of Environmental Impact Assessment; CASE STUDIES: 
Case studies related to the following sectors - Infrastructure - Mining – Industrial - Thermal Power - River valley and 
Hydroelectric - Nuclear Power. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. D. P. Lawrence, Environmental Impact Assessment – Practical Solutions to recurrent Problems, Wiley-Interscience, New Jersey. 
2003
2. J. Petts, Handbook of Environmental Impact Assessment, Vol., I and II, Blackwell Science London. 1999. 
3. R. Therivel, J. Glasson & A. Chadwick, Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment, 3rd Edition, Routledge, 2005. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. W. Canter, Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw-Hill, New York. 1996. 
2. A. K. Biswas, and S. B. C. Agarwala, Environmental Impact Assessment for Developing Countries, Butterworth Heinemann, 
London. 1994
3. The World Bank Group, Environmental Assessment Source Book Vol. I, II and III. The World Bank, Washington. 1991. 
MN 435 ECO-FRIENDLY	MINING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Overview: Basic concept of eco-friendly mining. Selection of eco-friendly equipment and exploitation operations, 
Environmental Parameters: Water quality – physical, chemical, biological, criteria and standards. Classification 
andchemistry of major air pollutants. Soil chemistry – nature and importance of soil, soilproperties, soil amendments, 
Waste Management: Waste water management – sources characteristics, techniques of treatment. Acid minedrainage 
– occurrence, effects and treatment techniques. Solid waste management for minespoils, Mine Reclamation & Mine 
Closure: Mine Reclamation strategies, Principles, planning, financial provisions, implementation, standards for closure 
criteria, systems approach for mine closure and development of closure plan, Socio-economic Aspects of Mining. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. H. S. Peavy, D. R. Rowe and G. Tchobanoglous, Environmental Engineering, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.; 7th Rev Ed edition, 2000. 
2. C. J. Barrow, Environmental Management: Principles and Practice (Routledge Environmental Management Series) Routledge, 
1st edition, 1999. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. G. Hutchison, and R. D. Ellison, Mine Waste Management, CRC Press, 1st edition, 1992
2. G. Burke, B. R. Singh and L. Theodore, Handbook of Environmental Management and Technology, Wiley-Interscience, 2nd 
edition, 2000. 
3. N. C Saxena, Mining Environment Management Manual, Scientific Publishers (India), 2004
4. M. J. Hammer, Water and Wastewater Technology, Prentice Hall, 6th edition, 2007. 
MN 436 ENVIRONMENTAL	POLLUTION	AND	CONTROL	IN	MINES 4 credits [3-1-0]
General: Environmental issues in Mineral Industry- National and Global, Environmental impacts of Mineral exploitation 
- in underground and opencast mining.; Land Environment: Subsidence, visual impacts, landscape pollution, land 
degradation, land reclamation, land use, landscape planning, ecology.; Societal Development: Socio-economic 
impacts, sustainable development, concept of carrying capacity based planning; Pollution: Water - Availability, quality, 
pollution and treatment, Liquid effluents: Quality, treatment and disposal. Solid Wastes - Generation, treatment 
and disposal, hazardous waste management and planning. Tailings disposal & treatment systems. Air: Pollution, 
monitoring and Control. Noise and Ground vibration - Causes, precautions, prevention and reduction.; Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP), Environmental Impact Statement (Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Environmental 
Legislation in India. Environmental Audit of Mining EIS) projects. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. Sengupta, Environmental Impacts of Mining, Lewis Publishers, CRC Press, NY, 1993. 
2. G. M. Masters, Introduction to Environmental Science & Engineering, PHI, 2004. 
3. N. C, Saxena, G. Singh & R. Ghosh, Environmental Management in Mining Areas, Scientific Publishers(I), Jodhpur, 2002. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. B. Dhar and D. N. Thakur, Proceedings of the first World Mining Environment Congress, Taylor and Francis, 1996. 
2. R. G. A. Boland, Environmental Management training, Sterling publishers New Delhi, 1986. 
3. D. P. Tripathy, Noise Pollution, APH Publishers, New Delhi, 2009. 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
375
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
MN 438 Solid Waste Management 3 credits [3-0-0]
Classification & characterization of waste, collection, Handling of Industrial (Mining, Thermal, Chemical, Radioactive, 
Biomedical, etc. ) and Domestic Waste, Utilisation of wastes,; Federal and State regulations on Waste Management, 
Recycling, Recovery and Reuse of Wastes, Optimisation of waste Disposal System.; Global Scenario in Waste 
Management. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. M. L. Davis and W. A. Eornwell, Introduction to Environmental Engineering, McGrow Hill Publishing Co, NY
2. G. N. Pandey & G. C. Carney, Environmental Engineering, 1st edn. Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, India
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Hazarding waste Rules, 1989
2. James H. Saling, W Andson, Y. S Fertiman, Radioactive Waste Management, Tayler & Francis Group 2nd edition
MN 441 MINE	LEGISLATION	AND	SAFETY	ENGINEERING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mine Legislation: General principles of Mining Law, Principal Provisions of Mines Act, Mines and Minerals (Regulation 
and Development) Act, Mineral Concession Rules, Mines Rules 1955, Electricity Rules, Industrial Disputes Act. 
1947, Mine Rescue Rules.; Mine Safety : Accidents- Their causes and prevention, accident statistics, rates of 
accidents, relation between accidents and efficiency, accident reports, cost of accidents.; Safety risk assessment 
and management, Safety Audit, Occupational health and safety in mines. Mine safety management systems, Safety 
education and training. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. B. K. Kejriwal, Safety in Mines, Lovely Prakshan Dhanbad, 2002
2. Rakesh and S. D. Prasad, Legislation in Indian Mines: A critical appraisal, Vol- I & II, Mrs Asha Lata Varnasi, 5th ed, 1990
Supplementary Reading: 
1. V. K. Malhotra, Mineral Concession Rules-1960, Malhotra Bros., Patna, Supplementary Ed., 1993
2. A. K. Ghosh, S. K. Ray and A. K. Patra, Proceeding of the National Seminar on Policies, Statutes & Legislation in Mines, CIMFR, 
Dhanbad, India, 2008
3. R. S. Rao, Law of Mines and Minerals, S. N. Hussainy (Revised), Asia Law House, 8th Eds, 1996. 
MN 442 MINE	FIRES	AND	SPONTANEOUS	HEATING 4 credits [3-1-0]
Mine Fires: Accidental Fires – it causes and precautions, Survey of various causes of mine fires with statistical data 
of Indian mines. Physical and chemical factors governing proneness to fire in coal and metaliferrous mines. Various 
methods adopted to combat fires and their advantages and disadvantages. Advances in fire fighting techniques 
and equipments, rescue operations in fire-zones.; Spontaneous Heating: Various causes of spontaneous heating 
and statistical data in Indian mines, Theories of spontaneous heating of coal, Geological, Mining and Seam factors 
governing spontaneous heating. Intrinsic and extrinsic properties of various substances e.g. -porosity, permeability, 
pore distribution Moisture etc. on spontaneous heating; Different experimental techniques including modern 
techniques like DTA/TGA and DSC to measure liability indices and relative proneness of spontaneous heating; use of 
clean coal technology and neural network to detect spontaneous tendency, effect of microwave treatment and pyrite 
removal on spontaneous heating; Sampling of mine atmosphere, Interpretation of mine air analyzing data, fire risk 
management, environmental indices, Different methods to seal off fire areas; Reopening of sealed off fire areas; Early 
detection of spontaneous heating in mines and stacks, recent trends to eliminate recurrence of spontaneous heating. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. S. C. Banerjee, Coal and Mine Fire, Oxford and IBH, 2004
2. Albert Edward, McGraw hill publishing House, USA. 2008. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. L. C. Kaku, Fires in Coal Mines, Oriental Publishers, 2nd Edition, 1985
MN 451 MINE MANAGEMENT 4 credits [3-1-0]
Introduction: Evolution of management; theory and practice; principles of scientific management; elements 
of management function; planning; organization and control; structure and design of organization for mining 
enterprises. Personal Management: Selection; training and development of human resources for mining enterprises; 
leadership; study of traditional leader hehaviour; autocratic; democratic and Laissez-Faire behaviours; Production 
Department of Mining Engineering
Detail Syllabi
376
NI
T 
Ro
ur
ke
la
Management: Determination of norms and standards of operations by work study; analysis of mine capacities and 
capability; production planning; scheduling and control; short term and long term planning; productivity; concepts and 
measurements; application of Ergonomics in mine operation. Financial Management: Capital budgeting; technicques 
for mining project; project evaluation; payback period and IRR; methods of cost analysis and cost control; breakeven 
charts; working capital management. Materials Management: ABC Analysis, Inventory Management; Purchase 
policies, P and Q system, inventory control, Review period, lead time. Behavioural Sciences for Management: Conflict 
management; conflict in organization; sources of conflict; dealing with conflict; organizing for conflict resolution; 
conflict and growth; Individual motivation; two way personal communication. Maintenance Management: 
Definition, Classifying Reliability, Types of Maintenance; Break-down, scheduled, preventive, predictive, protective 
and lean maintenance. Marketing Management: Strategic planning & marketing management processes, marketing 
environment, marketing information systems, market management and forecasting; New product development 
processes. 
Essential	Reading:	
1. I M Pandey, Financial Management, Vikash Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
2. P. Gopalakrishnan & M. Sundaresam, Materials Management- An Integrate Approach, Prentice Hall India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
3. SC Saksena, Business Administration and Management, Sahitya Bhawan, Agra. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. P. Kstler, Marketing Management, Prentice Hall India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi
2. M. Telsang, Industrial Engineering and Production Management, S. Chand & Co. Ltd., New Delhi
3. Lee & Dobbler, Purchasing and Materials Management, Tata Mc-Grand Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. New Delhi
MN 471 MINE	ENVIRONMENTAL	ENGINEERING	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Study of MSA type Gas mask (Model: “SW”, Air purifying filter), (i) Filter type apparatus and (ii) Self Rescuer; 
Assessing spontaneous heating susceptibility of coal using DTA / wet oxidation apparatus; Study of Self Contained 
Breathing Apparatus. (i) Drager BG-174, (ii) By Travox-120; Study of Drager Pulmotor (Model: PT-60); Estimation of 
SPM concentration in air using high volume samplers; Study the construction and working of Explosion Proof Fire 
Stoppings; Determination of susceptibility of coal by chemical method or by puff temperature method; Determination 
of water quality parameters using water analyser kit; Determination of flammability temperature of coal by using 
inflammability index apparatus; Determination of nutrient status in soil using soil test kit; Measurement of Noise 
Level by Integrated Sound Level Meter (Model: CEL-283EX) and B & K sound level meter; Measurement of Lux by 
Light Meter
MN 472 MINE	PLANNING	AND	DESIGN	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Preparation of data base for mine evaluation; Create a geological data base and import all data files; Performing 
data compositing and statistical analysis; Create digital terrain model and surface contouring; Create section and 
digitization of individual sections; Create solid model using sections; Perform volume and area calculation of solid 
model, Union and intersection of different sections; Create block model; estimation of block models using inverse 
distance and polygonal method; Performing variogram analysis, fitting variogram, checking anisotropy; Intersection 
of block model and solid model; resource evaluation using ordinary kriging technique; Blast design using SURPAC 
software; Mine design using SURPAC software; Ultimate pit limit calculation; Determination of Grade tonnage curve 
and study the conditional biased in estimation
MN 473 SIMULATION	AND	MODELING	OF	MINING	SYSTEMS	LABORATORY 2 credits [0-0-3]
Simulation of underground openings-2D continuum models; Simulation of underground openings-3D continuum 
models; Simulation of underground openings- discontinuum models; Study of stability of underground opening 
– Mohr-Coulomb model; Study of stability of underground opening – Hoek-Brown model; Simulation of opencast 
workings; Study of stability of slopes – 2D continuum models; Study of stability of slopes – 3D continuum models; 
Study of stability of slopes – 2D discontinuum models; Design of supports for underground openings; Simulation of 
thick seam workings; Simulation of multiple seam workk
Department of Mining Engineering
 
Curricula and Syllabi  
 Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch) 
 
 
 
2014-15 onwards 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Planning and Architecture 
National Institute of Technology Rourkela 
May 2014 
12 
 
DETAILED SYLLABI OF COURSES 
Semester: 1 
PA 111  Architectural Design – I   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Elementary forms, envelopes; exploration of relationship between form and space; understanding 
aesthetics with 2D and 3D forms; principles of design; study of lines, colour, texture, volume of 
objects with respect to contrast, harmony, balance, proportion; techniques of graphic expression to 
represent design ideas; appraisal of spatial, volumetric implications due to transformation of forms 
and spaces; 2D and 3D compositions, signage design, sculpture, thematic murals, etc. 
Essential Reading: 
D. K. Ching, From, Space and Order, Wiley 
Supplementary Reading: 
Von Meiss Pieree, Elements of Architecture, Taylor and Francis 
 
PA 121  Architectural Graphics – I   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction to IS code of engineering drawing (dimensioning, labelling, sheet formatting); concept 
of scale; curves and conic sections (ogee curves, parabola, ellipse, hyperbola, cycloid, trochoid, 
involutes); projection of points; projection of lines (traces and true lengths); projection of planes and 
solids (cube, prism, pyramid, cylinder, sphere, cones); projection of auxiliary planes;  
Essential Reading: 
L. Warren J., D. Jon M., Fundamentals of Engineering Drawing – with an introduction to interactive 
computer graphics for design and production, Prentice Hall 
Supplementary Reading: 
N. D. Bhatt, Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House Pvt. Ltd. 
 
PA 161  Principle of Architectural Design 3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Architecture as a profession and role of an architect- Contribution towards culture and the society, 
the building process and the Architect’s role: How projects get built, need, site, financing, design and 
design approvals, Architectural services rendered by an architects and disciplines needed to learn by 
him/her 
13 
 
The structure of Architectural Education- Curricular content, Design, The Design Studio, History and 
Theory, Technology, Structures, Materials and Methods of Construction, Environmental Controls, 
Computer aided Design, Management, Electives. 
Design Elements- Understanding Architectural Aesthetics - Exercises to understand the visual 
properties of two dimensional forms of both geometric and non-geometric surfaces. Basic design 
elements and their incorporation in visual art and architecture such Line and Shape, Color and 
Texture, Form and Size, Value, Light. 
Design Principles- Principles such as Balance, Symmetrical, Asymmetrical, Proportion and Scale, 
Studies of Principles of Organization of Form & Space, Principles of three-dimensional Compositions. 
Module and its application in design- Types of Common Grids – Orthogonal and Radial, Brief 
Introduction to History of Modular Construction in Architecture, (Industrial Revolution and Pre-
fabrication of Iron, Steel, Glass and Concrete units), “Building as Machine” concept of Corbusier and 
Le Modular. 
Factors influencing architecture of a region - Climate, material, technology and socio-cultural forces; 
Defining and Conceptualizing Architecture - Different concept in the field through time, Concepts 
and philosophy of some leading architects; Introduction to few architectural projects (India and 
Global), Development of Architecture over ages 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. Francis D.K. Ching, Architecture Form Space and Order, 3rd Edition, Wiley 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Roger K. Lewis, Architect: A Candid Guide to the Profession,  
2. Leland M. Roth, Understanding Architecture: Its Elements, History, and Meaning, Westview 
Press Place publication. 
 
PA 171  History of Architecture - I   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Mesopotamian architecture and its context (social, religious, economic and geographic background), 
building materials used, building types (temples, forts) and town planning (Babylonia); Egyptian 
architecture and its context, major building types – temples (cult and mortuary), tombs (mastabas 
and pyramids), influences of natural elements in built form; Greek architecture and its context, 
major building types – temples (their nomenclature as per the arrangement of columns), public 
buildings; Roman architecture and its context, major building types – temples (Pantheon) and public 
buildings,   innovation in building materials and structural systems and their usage; Early Christian 
and Romanesque architecture and its context, influence of Roman architecture and its 
manifestation, building types (churches) and their different interpretations across Europe; Byzantine 
architecture and its context, major building types (churches), innovation in structural system 
(pendentives) and space planning; Gothic architecture and its context – the evolution of 
architectural forms and influences; Renaissance architecture and its context  – revival of classical 
architecture, influences in arts and architecture, phases of Renaissance architecture and its context, 
14 
 
new structural systems (ribbed dome, lantern dome); Baroque and Rococo architecture and its 
interpretations across Europe and their colonies. 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. Sir Banister Fletcher, A History of Architecture, Ed. Dan Cruickshank, 20th Edition, CBS Publishers 
and Distributors Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. D. K. Ching, Architecture Form Space and Order, 3rd Edition, Wiley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Semester: 2 
PA 112  Architectural Design – II   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Transformation of forms to built spaces and incorporation of concepts of anthropometry and 
ergonomics; application of principles of design to design simple building elements (e.g. grills, 
windows, doors); taxonomy of spaces through classification of activities; appraisal of design 
requirements based on climatic factors, behavioural inputs, safety and security aspects and aesthetic 
criteria 
Typical assignments – guard room/ bus stand/public toilet/small specialized shop (florists/cafe) 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
2. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data, TMH 
Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Neufert’s, Architect’s Data, Blackwell Publishers 
 
PA 122  Architectural Graphics –II   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: Architectural Graphics – I 
Projection of solids; section of solids – true shape of section using auxiliary planes; intersection of 
solid objects;  surface development (preparation of physical models using surface development); 
axonometric projection; isometric projection 
 
Essential Reading: 
L. Warren J., D. Jon M., Fundamentals of Engineering Drawing – with an introduction to interactive 
computer graphics for design and production, Prentice Hall 
Supplementary Reading: 
N. D. Bhatt, Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House Pvt. Ltd. 
 
PA 132  Building Construction - I 3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction to various building components from foundation to roof and their function; 
introduction to load transmission in load bearing & framed structures, their advantages, 
disadvantages and suitability; various types of load bearing and framed structures, their advantages, 
16 
 
disadvantages and suitability; brick construction – types of brick, their dimensions and definitions, 
types of bonds in brickwork, foundations, plasters, buttresses, arches and lintels; stone construction 
– types of walls, bonds, arches and lintels; foundation – functions of foundations, types of 
foundations, simple load bearing foundations in brick and stone; concrete blocks – hollow and solid, 
stabilised mud blocks; timber work- simple carpentry joineries, different types of doors and 
windows, fixing details of frame, style, rail, panel, glazing including fixtures and fastenings 
Essential Reading: 
1. W.B. Mackay, Building Construction - Metric Volume-1, Pearson 
2. W.B. Mackay, Building Construction - Metric Volume-2, Pearson 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chudley, Construction Technology, 5th Edition, Pearson Publication Oxford Heinemann 
2. S. Emmitt and C. A. Gorse, Barry’s Introduction to Construction of Buildings, Wiley 
3. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication Ltd. 
 
PA 134  Building Construction Studio - I 2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: Building Construction - I 
Preparation of drawings on following –  
Brick construction – types of brick, their dimensions and definitions, types of bonds in brickwork, 
foundations, plasters, buttresses, arches and lintels; stone construction – types of walls, bonds, 
arches and lintels; foundation – functions of foundations, types of foundations, simple load bearing 
foundations in brick and stone; concrete blocks – hollow and solid, stabilised mud blocks; timber 
work- simple carpentry joineries, different types of doors and windows, fixing details of frame, style, 
rail, panel, glazing including fixtures and fastenings 
Essential Reading: 
1. W.B. Mackay, Building Construction - Metric Volume-1, Pearson 
2. W.B. Mackay, Building Construction - Metric Volume-2, Pearson 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chudley, Construction Technology, 5th Edition, Pearson Publication Oxford Heinemann 
2. S. Emmitt and C. A. Gorse, Barry’s Introduction to Construction of Buildings, Wiley 
3. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication Ltd. 
 
PA 142  Building Materials – I   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Brick - composition, sizes, properties and classification of bricks, tests for bricks; introduction of 
brickworks: masonry bonding & ornamental bonding, substitutes for bricks; stones - classification of 
17 
 
stones; common building stones used in India; characteristics and use of stones; dressing of stone; 
artificial stones; introduction to stonework: rubble and ashlars masonry; metals- pig iron, cast iron, 
wrought iron – types, properties, steel – properties, types, market form of steel and uses of steel in 
construction, properties of mild steel and hard steel, defects in steel; timber - qualities of timber for 
construction; seasoning, storage and preservation of timber; use of different types wood in various 
parts of building; industrial timber: veneers, plywood, fibreboard, etc; lime - classification of lime. fat 
and hydraulic lime – properties and use; cement: composition of ordinary cement; function of 
cementing ingredients;  properties of cement – fineness, soundness, setting times, etc; grades of 
cement and different types of cements used in construction; storage of cement in site; sand - 
sources of sand, classification, test of sand; grades of sand and their uses; mortar - types of mortar – 
lime mortar, mud mortar, lime-surkhi mortar, cement mortar; different grades of mortar, their 
compositions and properties; preparation of cement mortar; use and selection of mortar for 
different construction work; concrete - compositions and grades of concrete; various steps in 
concrete construction – batching, mixing, transporting, compacting, curing, shuttering, jointing. tests 
and quality control of concrete; design mix of concrete. 
Essential Reading: 
1. S. K. Duggal, Building Materials, New Age International  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Bindra & Arora, The Textbook of Building Construction, Dhanpat Rai Publications 
2. W.B. Mckay, Building Construction: Metric Vol. 1-2-3, Pearson  
 
PA 162  Visual Arts – I   3 Credits (0-1-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Sketching and free hand drawing (line, form, texture, scale, proportion); study of light and shade 
pattern; two dimensional and three dimensional compositions; rendering techniques (pencil, pen 
and ink, water colour, mixed media); graphic design (interpretation of different 
emotions/activities/ideas through visual or graphic representation); Introduction to visual cognition, 
psychological responses to art and art appreciation. 
Essential Reading: 
1. R. G. Gill, Rendering with pen and ink, Thames and Hudson Ltd. 
2. Wucius Wong, Principles of three Dimensional Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Wucius Wong, Principles of Form and Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
2. Wucius Wong, Principles of Two Dimensional Design, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
3. Wucius Wong, Principles of Color Deisgn: Designing with Electronic Color, John Wiley and Sons 
Inc. 
 
18 
 
PA 172  History of Architecture – II   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Prehistoric architecture – Indus valley civilization and its context (social, religious, economic and 
geographic background), building materials and construction techniques adopted, town planning 
principles, later Vedic settlements; Buddhist architecture and its context, rock cut architecture and 
building types and other architectural features (rock cut caves, stupas, viharas ,chaityas etc); Hindu 
temple architecture and its key elements, evolution of temple form, classification of Hindu temples – 
North Indian temple architecture (Nagara architecture of Khajuraho temples, Orissan temple 
architecture, Māru-Gurjara temple architecture  of Gujarat), Dravidian architecture of Pallavas, 
Cholas, Chalukyas, Pandyas, Madura and Vijaynagar dynasties; Indo-Islamic architecture and its 
context, major building types (tombs and mosques) and their structural systems (vaults, domes, 
pendentives etc) and architectural features (jaalis, surface articulation using stones, metal and 
wood), site planning and landscape features,  classification of Indo-Islamic architecture of Sultanate 
period (Slave, Tughlaq and Lodhi) and Mughal period (Babar, Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir and Shah 
Jahan) 
Essential Reading: 
1. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Buddhist Hindu) Vol. I, Taraporevala and Sons 
2. Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Islamic Period) Vol. II, Taraporevala and Sons, Bombay 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. J. A. Fergusson, A history of Indian and Eastern Architecture (Vol. I and II), Cambridge University 
Press, London  
 
PA 182  Field Study - I 2 Credits (0-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Field study tour of historical buildings with emphasis on measured drawing; report submission on 
historical buildings visited with detailed presentation and model of measured drawing exercise 
Essential Reading: 
As per tour plan 
Supplementary Reading: 
As per tour plan 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
Semester: 3 
PA 211  Architectural Design – III   4 Credits (0-0-6) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction of design methodology – area programming, site analysis (using various attributes like 
climatic conditions, site constraints like privacy, noise, visual connectivity etc), site zoning, bubble 
diagram, proximity analysis;  
Typical assignments – Residence design for a given professional (students would be expected to 
frame the requirements based on user profile); primary school/guest house; time problem 
(memorial with landscaping/creche) 
Essential Reading: 
1. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
2. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data, TMH 
Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Neufert’s, Architect’s Data, Blackwell Publishers 
 
PA 221  Architectural Graphics – III   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Perspective views of simple and complex geometrical forms (one point, multi-point perspective); 
views of buildings and objects from different viewing angles; sciography of geometrical and 
architectural objects – shades and shadows on the surfaces; using the concepts of perspective and 
sciography to draw internal and external architectural spaces 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. R. W. Gill, Perspective – From Basic to Creative, Thames and Hudson Ltd. 
2. E. L. Koller,Light, Shade and Shadow, Dover Publications 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Barrington Barber, Essential Guide to Drawing: Perspective and Composition, Arcturus 
Publishing Ltd. 
 
 
 
20 
 
PA 231  Building Construction – II   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Roof trusses - timber and steel trusses, types, fixing details showing purlin, rafter, tie, strut, cleat etc. 
different types of roof coverings: for flat and sloped roof with fixing details; timber floors - general 
idea of timber floors in relation to span, load transmission, Jack arch and composite floors; 
requirements of staircase, types of staircases, construction methods of – masonry staircase, timber 
staircase, RCC staircase, steel staircase and composite staircase; study of fire escape staircase; study 
of principles and methods of construction of RCC foundations and columns, types of foundations – 
raft foundations, grillage foundations and combination; pile foundation – precast piles, cast-in-situ 
piles, types of piles, method of driving piles, pile caps etc., 
Essential Reading: 
1. W.B. Mckay, Building Construction: Metric Vol. 1-2-3, Pearson  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chudley, Construction Technology, 5th Edition, Pearson Publication Oxford Heinemann 
2. S. Emmitt and C. A. Gorse, Barry’s Introduction to Construction of Buildings, Wiley 
3. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication Ltd. 
 
PA 233  Building Construction Studio – II   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: Building Construction - II 
Preparation of drawings and plates on followings –  
Roof trusses - timber and steel trusses, types, fixing details showing purlin, rafter, tie, strut, cleat etc. 
Different types of roof coverings: for flat and sloped roof with fixing details; timber floors - general 
idea of timber floors in relation to span, load transmission, Jack arch and composite floors; 
requirements of staircase, types of staircases, construction methods of – masonry staircase, timber 
staircase, RCC staircase, steel staircase and composite staircase, study of fire escape staircase; study 
of principles and methods of construction of RCC foundations and columns, types of foundations – 
Raft foundations, Grillage foundations and combination; pile foundation – precast piles, cast-in-situ 
piles, types of piles, method of driving piles, pile caps etc; typical section through a load bearing wall 
showing foundation, plinth, window or door sill, lintel with chajja, roof slab, cornice and parapet 
details etc. 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. W.B. Mckay, Building Construction: Metric Vol. 1-2-3, Pearson  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chudley, Construction Technology, 5th Edition, Pearson Publication Oxford Heinemann 
21 
 
2. S. Emmitt and C. A. Gorse, Barry’s Introduction to Construction of Buildings, Wiley 
3. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication Ltd. 
 
PA 241  Building Materials – II   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Non Ferrous Metal- Aluminium, Copper, & important alloys like brass, bronze, etc – brief description 
of uses, corrosion of both ferrous and nonferrous metals – types and preventive measures; clay 
products - tiles, their properties and use - terra-cotta, earthenware, stoneware, porcelain, vitreous; 
special concrete - water repellent, waterproofing compounds, accelerators, air entraining agents, 
hardeners, plasticizer, Fly ash, their availability and uses, light weight concrete, ready-mix concrete, 
and precast concrete; wall & floor tiles - general character and construction process of traditional 
flooring like: IPS flooring, terrazzo flooring, sizes, classification & properties of tiles used in wall and 
flooring, selection criteria & methods of fixing various types of tiles; varnishes, paints, distempers- 
characteristics and process of varnishing, type and compositions of paints, types of painting system: 
aluminium paints, cement-based paints, oil emulsion paints, enamel paints, their selection criteria; 
plastics and polymers - types and use of plastic in building construction, properties of plastic; use of 
various polymer materials in building industry, use of nano-paints; miscellaneous materials - glass, 
fibre glass, cork, rubber, gypsum, sealants, asbestos, heat and sound insulating materials, their trade 
name and uses. 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. S. K. Duggal, Building Materials, New Age International  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Bindra & Arora, The Textbook of Building Construction, Dhanpat Rai Publications 
2. W.B. Mckay, Building Construction: Metric Vol. 1-2-3, Pearson  
3. Arthur Lyons, Materials for Architects and Builders – An Introduction, Arnold, London 
 
PA 261  Visual Arts – II   3 Credits (0-1-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Exposure to life and works for famous artists, art forms and movements; photography exercises – 
still photography (introduction to the concepts of lens types, framing, aperture, depth of field, focus, 
exposure, light conditions, introduction to architectural photography); basic of movie making; 
exercises on some common mediums used in visual arts – posters, comics, graffiti, murals, collage, 
glass painting 
Essential Reading: 
1. G. Berryman, Notes on Graphic Design and Visual Communication, Crisp Learning Pub. 
22 
 
2. Keith P. F. Moxey, Moxey Keith, Art History, Aesthetics, Visual Studies, Clark Art Institute 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. H. Honour, J. Fleming, A World History of Art, Laurence King Pub. 
2. Clark Studies in Visual Arts, The Meaning of Photography, Yale Univ. Press 
3. Harrison, Philosophy and the Visual Arts: Seeing and Abstracting, Springer 
 
 
PA 271  History of Architecture – III   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Industrial revolution and its manifestation in architecture (in reference to manufacturing of steel and 
use of Ferro-concrete), Great Exhibitions; New Art and Architecture and its context (works of Victor 
Horta); Chicago School of architecture (H.H Richardson, Louis Sullivan); Prairie style and Organic 
Architecture of F.L Wright; Responses to mechanisation – Deutscher Werkbund and Futurism; De 
Stijl and Amsterdam School; Functionalism in architecture - Bauhaus Style and Le Corbusier,  
International Style (Mies Van der Rohe, Philip Johnson, Louis Kahn), 20th century World Architecture 
of Japan, China, Scandinavian countries and Latin America (Eero Saarinen, Alvar Aalto, Oscar 
Niemeyer, Richard Neutra, Norman Foster, Antonio Gaudi, Frank O. Gehry, I. M. Pei, Kenzo Tange); 
Introduction to Postmodern Architecture 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture, 4th Edition, Thames and Hudson Ltd.  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Siegfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition, 5th Edition, 
Harvard University Press 
 
PA 281  Climate Responsive Architecture   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction - climate and weather, elements of climate, classification of tropical climates, climate 
balanced architecture; Bio-climatic approach - human comfort, thermal comfort factors, bioclimatic 
requirements, relation of climatic elements to comfort, the Bio-Climatic chart; environment and 
building forms - impact of external forces on building, site & building design, site selection, site 
planning, building orientation and placement, effect of landscaping; sun & building design - basic 
principles of heat transfer, day-lighting, solar control, thermal insulation; wind & building design- 
wind effect and air flow pattern, ventilation techniques, air movement around the buildings, stack 
effect and thermally induced air currents; architectural application - shelter for warm-humid 
climates, shelter for hot-dry climates, shelter for composite climate 
 
23 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. O.H. Koenigsberger and others, Manual of Tropical Housing and Building – Part I – Climatic 
Design, Longmans  
 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Carl-eric Hagentoft, An Introduction to Building Physics, Professional Pub. Service 
2. M. Evans, Housing Climate & Comfort, Architectural Press, London 
3. B. Givoni, Man, Climate and Architecture, Applied Science, Banking Essex 
4. Donald Watson and Kenneth Labs, Climatic Design, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York  
 
 
PA 283 Non-graphic Computer Application 2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Microsoft Word - formatting, paragraph, table of contents, footnote, citation, caption, table of 
figures, page setup; Microsoft Excel - formula, formatting, conditional formatting, sort & filter, page 
layout; Microsoft PowerPoint - design of slide, slide transition, drawing objects, animation 
Essential Reading: 
1. Ron Mansfield, Working in Microsoft Office, Tata McGRAW HILL 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Vermaat, Shelly, Microsoft Office 2013 Advanced, Cashman Series 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
Semester: 4 
PA 212  Architectural Design – IV   4 Credits (0-0-6) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Design theory and their application; application of climatic data, social and structural considerations 
in more complex design problems such as community centre, students’ dormitory, secondary school 
etc; analysis of a given design (landmarks in architecture and buildings in India); design emphasizing 
forms.  
Typical assignments – design of a resort/small hotel based on field study; community centre; 
secondary school; time problem (temporary exhibition/ neighbourhood level commercial complex) 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
2. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data, TMH 
Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Neufert’s, Architect’s Data, Blackwell Publishers 
 
PA 222  Computer aided Design & 
Simulation – I   
2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
AutoCAD 2D Basic- Drawing tools, modifying tools, array, working in layers, line type, line thickness, 
line type scale, colouring, hatching, block making, annotation, dimensioning; AutoCAD 2D Advanced- 
Viewports, UCS icon, Paper space& model space, sheet layout, micros, customized interface, 
customized line-type, customized hatch pattern; Digitization of hand drafted sheets of previous 
semester; AutoCAD 3D Basic- Basic objects, extrude, sweep, revolve, changing UCS, working in 
various views; AutoCAD 3D Advanced- Materials, Lights, Sun, Rendering; Developing of 3D models in 
AutoCAD of previous semester design project 
Essential Reading: 
1. George Omura, Mastering AutoCAD 2014 and AutoCAD LT 2014, Wiley 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Ghassan Aouad, Song Wu, Angela Lee, Timothy Onyenobi, Computer Aided Design Guide for 
Architecture, Engineering and Construction, Taylor and Francis 
 
 
25 
 
PA 232  Building Construction – III   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: Building Construction – II 
Study of principles and methods of construction of RCC, beams including cantilever beams, columns, 
one way, two way slabs-cantilever slabs, sloping RCC roof, vaults, domes including form-work 
techniques and reinforcement details; expansion joints - construction details at foundation, walls, 
floors and roof level for both concrete and brick work, water proofing at flat roof and damp proofing 
at basement; flooring – in mud, murrum, stones – marble, granite, tandur/kota stone, mosaic, 
terrazzo, ceramic tiles and wooden flooring; paving – cast in situ concrete, concrete tiles, 
interlocking blocks, clay tiles, brick and stone; plaster – method of plastering –  
a) Internal (use of various finishes viz., lime, cement, plaster of Paris, puffing etc 
b) External – smooth, rough, textured, grit plaster 
Aluminium composite panel cladding; mild steel and aluminium doors and windows and partitions-
wooden/steel/aluminium sliding and folding doors and partitions, steel doors for garages and 
workshops, collapsible gate and rolling shutters, remote control systems of doors and gates, fixing 
details of steel and aluminium sections at jamb, sill, head / lintel, details of mullion and transom 
including hardware details; structural glazing, PVC & FRP, frameless glass doors and windows and 
partitions; fire resistive construction for different components of a building; introduction to Cost Effective 
Construction Technologies (CECT) in building construction - stub foundation (foundation), rat – trap 
bond (walls), brick arches (at lintel level), filler Slab (roof), use of ferro-cement  
Essential Reading: 
1. W.B. Mckay, Building Construction: Metric Vol. 1-2-3, Pearson  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chudley, Construction Technology, 5th Edition, Pearson Publication Oxford Heinemann 
2. S. Emmitt and C. A. Gorse, Barry’s Introduction to Construction of Buildings, Wiley 
3. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication Ltd. 
 
PA 234  Building Construction Studio – III   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: Building Construction Studio - II 
Preparation of drawings and plates on followings –  
Methods of construction of RCC, beams including cantilever beams, columns, one way, two way 
slabs-cantilever slabs, sloping RCC roof, vaults, domes including form-work techniques and 
reinforcement details; expansion joints - construction details at foundation, walls, floors and roof 
level for both concrete and brick work, water proofing at flat roof and damp proofing at basement; 
flooring – in mud, murrum, stones – marble, granite, tandur/kota stone, mosaic, terrazzo, ceramic 
tiles and wooden flooring; paving – cast in situ concrete, concrete tiles, interlocking blocks, clay tiles, 
brick and stone; plaster – method of plastering  
a) Internal (use of various finishes viz., lime, cement, plaster of Paris, puffing etc.  
b) External – smooth, rough, textured, grit plaster;  
Aluminium composite panel cladding; mild steel and aluminium doors and windows and partitions- 
wooden/steel/aluminium sliding and folding doors and partitions, steel doors for garages and 
26 
 
workshops, collapsible gate and rolling shutters, remote control systems of doors and gates, fixing 
details of steel and aluminium sections at jamb, sill, head / lintel, details of mullion and transom 
including hardware details; structural glazing, PVC & FRP, frameless glass doors and windows and 
partitions; fire resistive construction for different components of a building; Cost Effective Construction 
Technologies (CECT) in building construction - stub Foundation (foundation), rat – trap bond (walls), 
brick arches (at lintel level), filler slab (roof), use of ferro cement 
Essential Reading: 
1. W.B. Mckay, Building Construction: Metric Vol. 1-2-3, Pearson  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. R. Chudley, Construction Technology, 5th Edition, Pearson Publication Oxford Heinemann 
2. S. Emmitt and C. A. Gorse, Barry’s Introduction to Construction of Buildings, Wiley 
3. B. C. Punmia, Building Construction, Laxmi Publication Ltd. 
 
PA 272  History of Architecture – IV   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Architecture post industrial revolution in India; Colonialism and its manifestation on architecture in 
India – British, Portuguese, French, Danish; architecture of nationalism, regionalism and revivalism in 
India; Modernism in India with reference to International styles (Baroque, Neo-classical and Art 
Deco, etc) and Indo-Saracenic architecture with their context; industrial functionalism; architecture 
after independence in India; Modern architecture in India after independence and its context (1947 
– 1990); architecture post liberalisation in India (1990 onwards) 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. Jon Lang, M. Desai, Architecture and Independence: Search for Identity - India, 1880 to 1980, 
Oxford University Press 
2. R. Mehrotra, Architecture in India since 1990, Pictor Publishing Pvt. Ltd. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Jon Lang, A Concise History of Modern Architecture in India, Permanent Black Publishers 
 
PA 282  Building Bye Laws and Codes of Practices   3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction to professional practice, codes, ethics and guidelines for professional fees and charges; 
exposure to skills and techniques of handling and management of a particular project; acquaintance 
to the concepts of project management, contractual obligations and legal practices; study 
27 
 
development control guidelines, municipal byelaws, IS codes of practice pertinent to design , 
drawing and procedure for submission to regulatory bodies; guidelines and regulations pertaining to 
fire prevention, safety measures and other ancillary services 
Essential Reading: 
1. BIS, National Building Code, 2005,  
Supplementary Reading: 
 
PA 284  Model Making Workshop   2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Making of three dimensional forms such as cubes, pyramids, cones etc. using different types of 
materials such as paper, card board, mount board, balsa wood, wax, plaster of Paris etc; joints –  
different  types  of  joints,  joinery  details  (which  are  commonly  used  in  timber construction  and  
interiors); application of veneers/laminates  on  different  types  of  timber surfaces i.e., teak and 
commercial woods viz. ply, block boards, particle boards, engraving and carving, polishing and 
painting, clay work, brick, cob, wattle and daub, rammed earth; masonry construction – walls, arches 
and corbel; marking of geometrical forms on the ground; wall painting, sculpture making exercises 
Essential Reading: 
NA 
Supplementary Reading: 
 
PA 286  Field Study - II   2 Credits (0-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Field study tour for historical and modern buildings; selection of site and study of its features for 
design assignment (V
th
 semester); report submission on the critical appraisal of relevant 
contemporary buildings visited during field study 
 
Essential Reading: 
As per tour plan 
Supplementary Reading: 
As per tour plan 
 
 
28 
 
Semester: 5 
PA 311  Architectural Design - V 6 Credits (0-0-9) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Formulation of design criterions and socio-economic information, climatic data, structural 
considerations and behavioural aspects; design of medium/high rise buildings with complex 
functional relationship and intricate structural and building services 
Typical assignments – Motel/ museum/office building (based on field study in previous semester); 
health centre; mixed use development – multi-storied residential development with commercial 
space; time problem (club house/small library) 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
2. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data, TMH 
Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Neufert’s, Architect’s Data, Blackwell Publishers 
 
PA 321 Computer Aided Design and Simulation-II 2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Autodesk Revit Architecture - Introduction to interface, working in Revit, schedule, sheets, family 
creation, rendering, walkthrough; 3Ds Max Design- Basic commands of 3Ds Max, import of 3D model 
from CAD environment, material, light, rendering, walkthrough, animation; Google Sketch Up- Basic 
drafting, materials, rendering; Photoshop - Basic commands, image editing in Photoshop, sheet 
rendering in Photoshop; Corel Draw - Basic commands, sheet composition in Corel Draw 
Essential Reading: 
1. James Vandezande, Eddy Krygiel, Phil Read, Mastering Autodesk Revit Architecture 2014, Wiley 
India  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Daniel John Stine, Commercial Design Using Autodesk Revit Architecture 2013, SDC Publication  
 
 
 
29 
 
PA 331  Working Drawing - I 2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: Building Construction Studio (I/II/III) 
Introduction to the concept of professional working drawing practices; detail construction drawing 
as per contract documents with proper dimensioning and labelling; the residential design 
assignment in IIIrd semester Architectural Design to be utilized for this assignment 
Layout plan of a residential building showing details of internal roads, services, excavation plan, 
foundation plan, details of internal finishes of all the floors, terrace plan showing roof drainage, 
elevations of the building showing all details on the external surface (with labels), minimum two 
sections through toilets and staircases and also showing any level differences and an additional skin 
section showing details, door window schedule  
 
Essential Reading: 
1. C. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
 
PA 351 Building Services – I 3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Water Supply - sources of water supply, standards of purity and treatment of water, qualities of 
potable water, domestic water demand, capacity of over head tanks and calculation of water 
consumption; domestic water piping systems - water distribution networks, cold and hot water 
distribution within the building, specifications and sketches of various plumbing fittings for buildings, 
uses of valves, taps, and their different types, house/service connection, layout of water supply lines 
in a domestic house; sanitation - basic principles of sanitation and disposal of waste matter from 
building, brief description of various systems of sewage disposal and their principles, details of a 
septic tank and capacity calculation; sewer system - quantity of sewage and storm water, infiltration, 
runoff calculation, Manning’s formulae, partial flow diagram, design of sewers, shapes of sewers, 
factors affecting the design of sewers, materials, bend , pipe joints used in sewer systems; sewer 
appurtenances - manholes, sub drains, culverts, ditches and gutters, drop inlets and catch basins 
roads and pavements, storm overflow/regulators, intercepting chambers, inspection chambers and 
their proper location and ventilation of sewers, laying and testing of sewer, gradient used in laying of 
drains and sewers, and respective sizes; sewage treatment - the process of self purification, disposal 
of sewage from isolated building (septic tank, Imhoff tank), sewage breakdown, plumbing definitions 
and related terms, plumbing systems (one pipe, two pipe; etc), house drainage system and sanitary 
appliances and traps; design considerations on drainage scheme - preparation of plan, planning of 
bathrooms, lavatory blocks and kitchen in domestic and multi-storeyed buildings, Indian standards 
for sanitary convenience, model bye laws regarding sanitation of buildings 
 
 
30 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. S.C. Rangwala, Water Supply and Sanitary Engineering, Charter Publishing House, Anand 
2. G. S. Birdie, Water Supply and Sanitary Engineering, Dhanpat Rai & Sons. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. B. C. Punmia, Water Supply Engineering, Laxmi Publication, New Delhi 
2. S. K. Garg, Water Supply Engineering, Khanna Publishers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
Semester: 6  
PA 312  Architectural Design - VI 6 Credits (0-0-9) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Site planning exercises incorporating climatology, solar architecture, landscaping, environmental 
behaviour; assignments to incorporate higher level of intricacies in terms of regulations, building 
services, structural engineering, building materials and detail;  
Typical assignments – hospitals; star hotels; cultural centres with auditorium; shopping malls with 
multiplex; time problem (site planning exercise – layout of amusement park) 
Essential Reading: 
1. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
2. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data, TMH 
Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Neufert’s, Architect’s Data, Blackwell Publishers 
 
PA 322 Computer Aided Design and Simulation-III 2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Ecotect Analysis - Study of weather file, Simulation of small design project of previous semester in 
Ecotect Analysis, Study of reports generated; Naviswork - Navigation, clash detective, timeliner, 
animator, presenter 
Essential Reading: 
1. Jason Dodds, Scott Johnson, Mastering Autodesk Navisworks 2013, Sybex 
2. Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston, BIM Handbook: A Guide to 
Building Information Modeling for Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers, and Contractors, 
by John Wiley and Sons 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Deepak Maini, Up and Running with Autodesk Navisworks 2014, Createspace 
 
PA 332 Working Drawing – II  4 Credits (0-0-6) 
Pre-requisites: Working Drawing – I; Building Construction Studio 
Building construction drawings to be prepared as per contract documents and following proper 
nomenclatures of dimensioning and labelling; in continuation to Working Drawing – I and the same 
design assignment used thereof 
32 
 
Details of toilets (plan, section, elevation, fixture/joinery details); details of kitchen (plan, section, 
elevation, fixture/joinery details); layout of plumbing and sanitary lines and their connection to 
septic tank/main service lines; designing and detailing of a septic tank with soak pit; electric layout of 
all floors with specification of fixtures; details of flooring and internal finishes; additional details e.g. 
carpentry details/ metal finish detail; municipal submission drawings 
 
Essential Reading: 
NA 
Supplementary Reading: 
 
PA 352 Building Services – II 3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Refuse disposal - sources types collection, storage and transport, provisions for refuse disposal at 
individual building level, refuse chutes; solid waste treatment; storm water drainage - collection and 
disposal; electrical services - various wiring systems, calculation and distribution of load, electrical 
fittings and appliances, telephone and television services, detailed layout of electrical, telephone 
and television services in a residence; hot water supply in high rise building, boiler, furnaces, solar 
water heaters, computing special demands of water for swimming pools, air-conditioning plants, fire 
fighting, street washing, fountains and gardens etc, their schematic layout 
Essential Reading: 
1. S.C. Rangwala, Water Supply and Sanitary Engineering, Charter Publishing House, Anand 
2. G. S. Birdie, Water Supply and Sanitary Engineering, Dhanpat Rai & Sons. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. William. K. Y. Tao, Mechanical and electrical Systems in Buildings, Pearsons 
 
PA 382 Theory of Design 4 Credits (3-1-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Design process – design as a process, different school of thoughts and processes, philosophies and 
approaches to design and its methodology, KISS principles (Kelly Johnson), Use-centered design 
(John Flach and Cynthia Dominguez), User-centered design, challenges of designer; history of design; 
stages of design (divergence, transformation and convergence); systematic search (decision system 
approach, logical certainty); selection of strategies (linear, cyclic, branching, adaptive) and design 
methods  
 
33 
 
Essential Reading: 
John Chris Jones, Design Methods, Wiley 
Supplementary Reading: 
Kari Jormakka, Basic Design Methods, 3rd Edition, Marston House Publishers 
 
PA 384 Human Settlement & 
Vernacular Architecture 
3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Evolution of human settlement and pattern of early cities; industrial revolution and town planning 
concepts; different philosophies and ideas for designing cities; conservation and development of old 
city – concepts of regeneration, revitalization, redevelopment; participatory planning process 
Introduction to vernacular architecture – definition, scope, context; building materials and 
construction techniques in traditional vernacular architecture; vernacular architecture in India 
(Rajasthan, Gujarat, Kerala, Bengal, North-Eastern hills of India); post-modern vernacular 
architecture 
Essential Reading: 
1. Peter Hall, Cities of Tomorrow – An Intellectual History of Urban Planning and Design in 20th 
century, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell 
2. Dawson and I. Cooper, Traditional Building of India, Thames and Hudson Ltd. 
3. L. Asquith, Vernacular Architecture in the 21st century, Taylor and Francis 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. John May and Anthony Reid, Handmade Houses and Other Buildings – The World of Vernacular 
Architecture, Thames and Hudson Ltd. 
2. Arthur Gallion, Urban Pattern – City Planning and Design, CBS Publishers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
Semester: 7 
PA 411  Architectural Design - VII   8 Credits (0-0-12) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction of advanced site planning exercises (scale of urban design projects); computing design 
requirements and space programming based on climatic data, behavioural considerations, economic 
analyses; considerations of building services as well as higher order infrastructure services as 
required in site planning exercises (accessibility/drainage/sewerage/water supply/power etc) 
Typical assignments – urban transport facilities; group housing; educational campus; stadium; CBD; 
time problem (any one not covered in class) 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Building Types, TMH Education 
2. D. Joseph and Callender John, Time Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data, TMH 
Education 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Neufert’s, Architect’s Data, Blackwell Publishers 
 
PA 431 Advanced Building Construction 
Studio 
2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Introduction to space structures, possibilities in different materials, types of space structures and 
possibilities in different materials to cover large spans; general study of shell structures and folded 
plate structures in concrete, their types, construction aspects, merits and demerits etc; general 
study of grid structures and skeletal structures, space frames, domes etc. in steel, their types, 
construction aspects, merits and demerits etc; precast concrete - design considerations and 
constraints, advantages over cast in situ construction, construction technique, joinery details and 
application; modular coordination, RCC fabricated roofing system to cover large span with or 
without north light, construction of basement in R.C.C; study of pre-stressed concrete, principles and 
methods of pre-stressing, systems of pre-stressing, advantages, disadvantages and applications; 
temporary structures - materials and techniques used, constructional aspects using timber and steel; 
general study of construction techniques to cover large spans using short length timber and 
laminated timber materials, lamella roofing, portal frames, solid beams and web beams; general 
study of suspension structures & catenary structures; membrane structures and pneumatic 
structures - types, materials used, merits, demerits and examples; high-rise building - foundation, 
structural systems and architectural design considerations; earthquakes and its effect on buildings, 
earthquake zones in India, architectural design considerations and constructional detailing for 
earthquake resistance. 
35 
 
Essential Reading: 
1. Mitchell, Advanced Building Construction,  
Supplementary Reading: 
1. M. Salvadorri,  Structures in Architecture,  
2. L.S. Beedle,  Advances in Tall Buildings,  
3. R. Barry, The Construction of Buildings, Vol.1-5, Orient Longman Ltd. 
4. Chudley, Construction Technology, Vol. 1-4, British Library Cataloguing 
5. M. S. Shetty, Concrete Technology, S. Chand & Co. 
6. Explanatory Handbook on Codes for Earthquake Engineering, IS-1893-1975 & IS-4326-1976, 
Bureau of Indian Standards 
7. Mohiuddin Ali Khan, Earthquake- Resistant Structures Design, Build, and Retrofit, Elsevier B/H 
 
PA 441 Advanced Building Materials 3 Credits (3-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Plastics- General properties of plastics, fillers and plasicizers, molding and fabricating methods for 
plastics, thermosetting plastics, thermoplastics resins, elastomers or synthetic rubbers, combination 
of plastic and other materials; Metals- Steel and steel alloy, aluminium and aluminium based alloys, 
copper and copper-based alloys, Lead and lead-based alloys, nickel and nickel-based alloys; Synthetic 
boards; Porcelain-enameled products; Asphalt and bituminous products; Composite panels 
Essential Reading: 
1. Frederick S. Merritt and Jonathan T. Ricketts, Building Design and Construction Handbook, 
McGraw Hill 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. Stephan Engelsmann, Valerie Spalding and Stefan Peters, Plastics in Architecture and 
Construction, Birkh User Architecture 
 
PA 451 Advanced Building Services 2 Credits (0-0-3) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Mechanical ventilation - study of Air Conditioning systems and their applicability, components of 
AC’s systems such as chilling plants, cooling towers, air handling units, calculation of AC loads, air 
distribution systems, ducts and ducting layouts; vertical transportation - study of elevators, various 
components of elevators, standard space requirements, various types of elevators and architectural 
implications, study of escalators, their components, arrangements and functioning, space 
requirement, construction detailing; fire safety- Introduction to fire safety in building, causes of fire 
in buildings, types of fire, spread of fire, production of smoke and poisonous gases, fire safety and 
preventive measures, fire fighting regulations with reference to National Building Code, fire escape, 
36 
 
stairways and escape routes, dry and wet risers, water demand for fire fighting, storage tanks, fire 
hydrants, etc, study of fire detection systems, smoke detectors, heat detectors, fire alarms, fire 
fighting extinguishing systems, automatic sprinkler systems 
Essential Reading: 
1. P. N. Ananthanarayan, Basic Refrigeration and Air Conditioning, TMH Pvt. Ltd. 
2. Rodney R. Adler, Vertical Transportation for Buildings, American Elsevier Pub. Co. 
Supplementary Reading: 
1. National Building Code, 2005, BIS 
2. Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Association, USA 
3. D. Nield, Mitchell’s Advanced Building Construction ( Components, Services & Finishes), Allied 
Publishers 
4. C. P. Arora, Refrigeration & Air conditioning, TMH Education 
5. F. Hall, Building Services and Equipments - Vol. I - II, Longman Group Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
Semester: 8 
PA 412  Research Project – II (Thesis)   12 Credits (0-0-0) 
Pre-requisites: NIL 
Based on topic selected and dissertation in previous semester detail design proposal for the chosen 
project like cultural centre, educational campus, religious complex, industrial centre, recreational 
complex, civic centre, television studio, cinema studio, aquarium, zoological park, airport terminal, 
hotel or hospitals 
Design proposal with construction and service details, interior layout. Presentation with complete 
rendered drawings, model and perspectives 
 
Essential Reading: 
As per thesis topic 
Supplementary Reading: 
As per thesis topic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National	Institute	of	Technology,	Rourkela
Kantajhar, Rourkela-769008
Phone: 0661-2462031
Fax: 0661-2462033
email:ar-acad@nitrkl.ac.in
www.nitrkl.ac.in

