Bull World Health Organ 2017;95:87 | doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.16.189126
Editorials
87
Realizing the health-related sustainable 
development goals (SDGs) requires inte-
grated action on system-wide challenges. 
To address gaps in health service delivery, 
we need evidence on which government 
agencies, research institutions, donors 
and civil society can act.1 Unless research 
is relevant to specific health systems, the 
evidence that it generates can be dismissed 
by policy-makers.2 For example, there is 
plenty of evidence for the effectiveness 
of standard interventions to prevent 
maternal and child deaths, but countries 
vary widely in the degree to which these 
interventions have been implemented.3
We argue that embedding of research 
in real world policy, practice and imple-
mentation is needed to strengthen health 
systems worldwide. Embedded research 
conducted in partnership with policy-
makers and implementers, integrated in 
different health system settings and that 
takes into account context-specific fac-
tors can ensure greater relevance in policy 
priority-setting and decision-making.4 
Collaboration between researchers, 
implementers and policy-makers has 
been shown to improve uptake of health 
systems research.5 However, in many 
places, prioritization and conduct of re-
search is often done solely by academics.6 
Health research is also largely focused 
on biomedical and clinical interventions, 
while health systems and implementation 
research remains underfunded globally.7 
Often, knowledge translation is an add-on 
activity after the completion of research 
projects.
The World Health Organization’s 
report, Changing mindsets: strategy on 
health policy and systems research, called 
for the embedding of research into 
health systems processes.6 This report 
explained that when embedding hap-
pens, researchers and decision-makers 
are linked through a system in which 
the need for evidence to inform policy is 
understood by decision-makers. The Al-
liance for Health Policy and Systems Re-
search (AHPSR) and the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) developed a 
model for implementation research that 
addresses research priorities identified 
by decision-makers and specific chal-
lenges of local health systems.8 In this 
model, policy-makers and implementers 
at different levels in the health system are 
engaged as co-investigators and are in-
volved in all phases of a research project. 
The approach is meant to enhance policy-
makers’ and implementers’ ownership of 
health systems and policy research. The 
collaboration is designed to prioritize 
research on empirical questions of local 
relevance, generate feasible recommenda-
tions and integrate evidence into policy-
making and health system strengthening.
Policy-makers, implementers and 
researchers are increasingly keen to col-
laborate on the design and conduct of 
research to ensure that it contributes 
to health policy-making.9,10 Since 2013, 
AHPSR, UNICEF and Gavi, the Vaccine 
Alliance, have supported 26 embedded 
research projects in 15 low- and middle-
income countries. These projects aim to 
foster a better understanding of health 
systems implementation issues linked 
to maternal, newborn and child health 
policies and programmes.11 Through its 
African Health Initiative, the Doris Duke 
Charitable Foundation is also supporting 
embedded research that aims to enhance 
the performance of health systems in 
Africa.12 In these contexts, embedding 
research in local health systems helped 
address real concerns of implementers and 
supports action to alleviate implementa-
tion barriers.
Our experience is consistent with 
evidence showing that embedded research 
facilitates the integration of scientific 
findings in policy implementation and 
health systems strengthening.13 However, 
few resources are available to support this 
approach. We advocate for the embedding 
of locally-relevant and demand-driven 
research in health systems worldwide to 
improve the implementation and scale-
up of health policies, thus contributing 
to achievement of the health-related 
SDGs. ■
1. Peters DH, Adam T, Alonge O, Agyepong IA, 
Tran N. Implementation research: what it is and 
how to do it. BMJ. 2013 Nov 20;347:f6753. 
2. Sheldon TA. Making evidence synthesis more 
useful for management and policy-making. J 
Health Serv Res Policy. 2005 Jul;10 Suppl 1:1–5. 
3. Whitworth J, Sewankambo NK, Snewin 
VA. Improving implementation: building 
research capacity in maternal, neonatal, and 
child health in Africa. PLoS Med. 2010 July 
06;7(7):e1000299. 
4. Kitson AL, Rycroft-Malone J, Harvey G, 
McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A. Evaluating 
the successful implementation of evidence 
into practice using the PARiHS framework: 
theoretical and practical challenges. 
Implement Sci. 2008 Jan 07;3(1):1. 
5. Oliver K, Innvar S, Lorenc T, Woodman J, 
Thomas J. A systematic review of barriers 
to and facilitators of the use of evidence by 
policymakers. BMC Health Serv Res. 2014 Jan 
03;14(1):2. 
6. Changing mindsets: strategy on health policy 
and systems research. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2012. 
7. Leroy JL, Habicht J-P, Pelto G, Bertozzi SM. 
Current priorities in health research funding 
and lack of impact on the number of child 
deaths per year. Am J Public Health. 2007 
Feb;97(2):219–23. 
8. Aarons GA, Hurlburt M, Horwitz SM. Advancing 
a conceptual model of evidence-based 
practice implementation in public service 
sectors. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2011 
Jan;38(1):4–23. 
9. Langlois EV, Becerril Montekio V, Young T, 
Song K, Alcalde-Rabanal J, Tran N. Enhancing 
evidence informed policymaking in complex 
health systems: lessons from multi-site 
collaborative approaches. Health Res Policy 
Syst. 2016 Mar 17;14(1):20. 
10. Oliver K, Lorenc T, Innvær S. New directions 
in evidence-based policy research: a critical 
analysis of the literature. Health Res Policy Syst. 
2014 July 14;12(1):34. 
11. Hasnida A, Borst RA, Johnson AM, Rahmani 
NR, van Elsland SL, Kok MO. Making health 
systems research work: time to shift funding to 
locally-led research in the South. Lancet Glob 
Health. 2017 Jan;5(1):e22–4. 
12. African Health Initiative. PHIT Partnership 
Implementation Research Framework. New 
York: Doris Duke Charitable Foundation; 2016. 
13. Vindrola-Padros C, Pape T, Utley M, Fulop NJ. 
The role of embedded research in quality 
improvement: a narrative review. BMJ Qual 
Saf. 2017 Jan;26(1):70–80. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877 PMID: 
27129492
Strengthening health systems through embedded research
Abdul Ghaffar,a Etienne V Langlois,a Kumanan Rasanathan,b Stefan Peterson,b Lola Adedokunc & Nhan T Trana
References
a Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research, World Health Organization, avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland.
b Health Section, United Nations Children’s Fund, New York, United States of America (USA).
c African Health Initiative, Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, New York, USA.
Correspondence to Abdul Ghaffar (email: ghaffara@who.int).

