State of Art in Robotics and Embedded Systems: 
Bangladesh Perspective 
 
Md. Khalilur Rhaman, Sabbir Ahmed Khan, and Shifur Rahman Shakil 
BRAC University, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 66 Mohakhali, Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh 
Email: {khalilur, khan.sabbir, shifur.rahman}@bracu.ac.bd 
 
 
 
Abstract—The Embedded Systems are everywhere and 
everyone is very curious about robots and their autonomous 
activities. These two topics are very integrated with each 
other. This discussion focuses on robotics: their evolution, 
applications, recent development and their future. The 
reconciliation day is coming where very high performance 
robot will work and communicate with human with the help 
of their sensory and human-machine interaction capacity. 
This article surveys the current state of art in robotics and 
embedded systems. Some innovative researches are 
identified in robotics and embedded systems with their 
architecture, communication, motor action, sensors and 
intelligent control system. Considering the latest trend and 
innovations in the world we will highlight the importance 
and uses of robotic applications in developing countries like 
Bangladesh. Since these researches are highly integrated 
with natural science, engineering application and also with 
renewable energy, we conclude our survey by identifying 
several additional open research issues in Robotics and 
embedded systems.  
 
Index Terms—autonomous, rescue robots, Agrobots  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Engineers and researchers of developing countries like 
Bangladesh are working hard to pull up their countries 
living standard. Technical innovation can be seen 
everywhere including self-educated technicians to highly 
educated academic researchers. Unfortunately, those 
researches and innovations are hardy effecting on our 
social and humanitarian developments due to the lack of 
opportunity and ability of commercialization. Hence, 
many of our vital projects are not converting to the 
industrial products and they are not using for the socio-
economic development.  
From nano chip to satellite operation, from industrial 
work to our daily use, all the way we are integrated with 
the embedded system. In fact, nowadays most of the 
industries and corporate offices of our country are 
looking for smart systems for automation where budget 
and funding is not a big issue for them. But only because 
of poor R&D, we are lagging behind to cope up with 
demand. We believe, this is the high time for electrical 
and computer engineers to target this embedded and 
robotic system market for self-employment. In this 
research, our team has put an extreme effort to investigate 
                                                          
Manuscript received October 20, 2014; revised December 18, 2014. 
the progress, problems and prospects of robotics and 
embedded system in our country. Our research includes 
deep analysis about the robotics and embedded research 
developing in Bangladesh, problems that are facing to 
meet with commercial demand as well as international 
standard and finally the necessity of R&D sectors to cope 
up future industrial collaboration in order to reduce our 
emerging unemployment ratio. After discussing the 
whole scenario this research also concludes some 
important applications of robotics and embedded system 
from our country’s perspective which is very crucial for 
engineers to find their future goal. Finally, we believe this 
research is going to be a ground breaking initiative to 
bring revolution for our engineers (especially computer 
and electrical engineers) to decline traditional job mindset 
and fetch R&D sectors in corporate with industrial 
development. 
II. EVALUATION OF AGRICULTURAL ROBOTS  
Nowadays robotics and automation systems 
extensively applied agricultural sector. Several 
motivations are behind the investment to incorporate 
robotics in agricultural sectors like decreasing labor 
forces, saving time and cope up with the high product 
demand. Apart from those, increasing food quality, 
production security and finally reducing end product cost 
are also vital parameters for automation revolution in 
agriculture. Moreover, farmers are getting exemption 
from extensive physical effort. In fact, those 
phenomenons are especially considerable and important 
for developing countries like Bangladesh. Mostly used 
agricultural robots in developing countries are: mowing 
grass, spraying pesticides and monitoring crops. This 
research represents a review on some common robotic 
technology that is used in agriculture sector of 
Bangladesh and also other developing countries.  
From several decades researches has been performed 
to develop robots for using in agriculture sector. Cherry, 
tomatoes, cucumbers, mushrooms, and other fruits are 
harvesting using different types of robots in different 
countries [1]. Moreover, in horticulture, robots have been 
introduced to harvest citrus and apples. In dairy farming, 
milking robots are currently commonplace in the 
Netherlands [2] whereas Bangladesh and other 
developing countries are still following conventional 
procedure. Example of Advance automated engineering is 
Japanese ‘‘plant factory,’’ where vegetables are grown 
59
Journal of Automation and Control Engineering Vol. 4, No. 1, February 2016
©2016 Journal of Automation and Control Engineering
doi: 10.12720/joace.4.1.59-64
hydroponically under artificial lighting [3]. Nowadays, 
Bangladesh, India, China, Thailand, Japan and others 
agricultural based countries are using rice cutter and other 
crop cutter machine in order to manage their cultivations.  
Computers and robots are used to control the process 
from out planting seedlings, to root cutting, packaging, 
and weighing, and the produce is free of any blemish, 
disease, or insect damage. The automation level in plant 
factories is so high that over time. They may become 
completely autonomous production facilities. Considering 
Agriculture aspect we have divided the scopes of robotics 
according to the Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1. Various sections of implementation of robotic system in agricultural sector 
Several advance robotic system has already been 
developed in order to fulfill the demand of agricultural 
sectors. In fact, those robots are making agricultural 
sectors more productive. Here we are going to give some 
examples of advance robots which can be incorporated in 
our agricultural sectors: The cost of UAVs has fallen 
rapidly due to the rapid growth of technology. Private 
corporations and universities all over the world are 
working on various types of UAVs to perform tasks 
which were previously done with enormous expense. The 
‘Yamaha RMAX Helicopter’ is one of the most 
innovative and commercially available UAV in the world 
right now [4]. This robot can be used to precision in 
pesticide and fertilizer delivery purpose. In addition, 
‘Casmobot’, an advance robot was developed by the 
University of Southern Denmark (during 2007-2009) as 
part of Plant Nurturing Robotics. In fact, ‘Casmobot’ is a 
contraction for Computer Assisted Slope Mowing Robot 
[5]. In recent years many universities in Bangladesh tried 
to concentrate about developing UAV resulting numbers 
of UAV project in national and international seminar and 
conference. From, early 1980 researchers were working 
on developing the principle of fruit picking robots. In fact, 
these principles have disclosed the door of new 
approaches to the harvesting of crops. However, to 
develop the fruit picking robotics technology in a notable 
level, contributions from high-tech industry, agricultural 
commodity groups and farm equipment manufacturers 
must be hunted. Vision Robotics, a San Diego company, 
is working on a pair of robots that would trundle through 
orchards plucking oranges, apples or other fruit from the 
trees. In a few years, troops of these machines could 
perform the tedious and labor-intensive task of fruit 
picking that currently employs thousands of migrant 
workers each season [6]. By developing this technology 
Bangladesh can be benefited in summer season when lots 
of labor and cost are invested order to collect the fruits. 
‘HortiBot’ robots are used in the hilly areas where 
cultivation is too much complicated and expensive [7]. 
This kind of robots can be used in hilly areas in 
Bangladesh such as Chittagong where lots of crops are 
harvesting in mountain. High-tech tools for weeding that 
at a later stage can be implemented are tools like laser, 
micro spraying and mechanical devices. 
University graduates are conducting researches to 
develop agrobots. A class of undergraduates at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has created 
a set of robots that can water, harvest and pollinate cherry 
tomato plants. Carnegie Mellon University’s Field 
Robotics Center is testing an automated utility cart 
equipped with laser range- finders to find its way through 
a Pennsylvania apple orchard, towing sensors that track 
the progress of the crop.  
BRAC University Robotics Research lab has 
developed Smart Irrigation and Soil Component Test 
which is shown in Fig. 2. The aim of the projects is to 
make an embedded system which will provide all the 
necessary information needed for the production of 
various crops in an efficient way making the whole 
process automatic, cost effective, eco-friendly and 
attaining all other environmental concern. It will also 
provide the amount of soil nutrients and following to that 
measurement, an apps database will help to find out the 
amount of fertilizer to be used in particular field. A soil 
moisture sensor with low-cost was modeled, simulated 
and tested for achieving accurate and reliable 
measurements. A high-performance pH probe is 
calibrated with linearity of the pH scale. 
60
Journal of Automation and Control Engineering Vol. 4, No. 1, February 2016
©2016 Journal of Automation and Control Engineering
 
Figure 2. Smart irrigating system integration 
An Automatic weather station (AWS) is an automated 
type of traditional weather station, either to facilitate 
measurements from remote areas or to save human labor 
which has been used in developing countries. It has been 
considered that with the advancement in modern 
technology the use of combined weather sensor is 
essential for agriculture of Bangladesh, considering the 
geographical location, climate change issues, agriculture 
based economy & weather forecast etc. Hence keeping 
this in mind a cost effective, reliable and efficient 
combined weather sensor has been developed at BRAC 
University. The major contribution of this project will be 
the acquisition of the data’s of the sensors altogether, 
which makes the weather sensing digital rather than 
manual which is shown in Fig. 3. This project is focused 
to get more accurate weather information and to make the 
system digital rather than conventional ones. 
 
 
Figure 3. Smart remote sensing weather station 
III.  EVALUATION OF ROBOTS IN MEDICAL SECTOR 
Medical robot is an emerging and relatively new field 
to assist in diagnosis and treating patient. Medical robot 
can be highly specialized and can be able to reduce 
human error. The fields of medical robot that sustain 
now-a-days are radiology/imaging system, radiation 
therapy, patient positioning and surgery. The fields of 
ongoing research of medical robots are rehabilitation, 
minimal invasive surgery and laser osteotomy. Magnetic 
Microbots are a group of tiny robots used in innumerable 
operations, such as removing plaque from a patient's 
arteries or helping with ocular conditions and disease 
screenings [8]. Microsoft Research Cambridge team built 
an augmented reality system to help brain surgeons 
visualize 3D brain scans by using their new Kinect API 
[9]. Kinect Fusion supplies 3D modeling of anything, 
which could fuel some seriously neat medical innovations. 
According to a recent article from The Wall Street 
Journal, in the next few years, thousands of 'service 
robots' are anticipated to enter the healthcare sector. As 
less than 1,000 of blue-collar robots currently roam about 
hospitals, but those numbers are anticipated to increase 
rapidly [10].  
Like many of Toyota’s Healthcare Assistants, much 
robotic advancement are used to better the day-to-day 
lives of patients, helping them eat, like the Bestic Arm, or 
helping a patient regain her ability to walk. Moreover, 
embedded system and robot are used in disease diagnosis 
for example ECG, EEG, MRI –all medical devices are 
using the latest development of embedded system and 
technology. In Bangladesh these devices are mostly 
imported from developed countries. The development of 
these instrument and devices within the county are highly 
needed for Bangladesh. Again, in case of natural 
calamities or disaster, medical robot plays an important 
role to give an initiative treatment without presence of 
human. Fig. 4 illustrates that BRAC University students 
have developed a special kind of robot called “priSha” 
that can be controlled by thinking of patient. The purpose 
of this robot is to give primary control of the robot with 
the help of thinking of patient. 
 
Figure 4. Controlling robot by human brain 
The use of medical robot in Bangladesh is very rare; 
only some of renowned hospitals take initiative to use it. 
Types of heart surgery that are performed with minimally 
invasive surgery in Bangladesh include Coronary Artery 
Bypass Graft (CABG), Atrial Septal Defect (ASD) 
closure, Mitral valve repair/ replacement. Beside normal 
heart surgery there is an approach where incision is made 
very small of about 2 inch to 3 inch long in the chest 
according to the type of surgery and heart lung machine 
is connected through a small incision in the groin [11]. 
This procedure is also done with the aid of robot in the 
developed countries now a day and gained much 
popularity. In Bangladesh, robotic heart surgery may not 
be feasible for economic constraints but with the 
61
Journal of Automation and Control Engineering Vol. 4, No. 1, February 2016
©2016 Journal of Automation and Control Engineering
development of robotics field in Bangladesh can reduce 
the cost and make it ease of access for general people. 
Few days ago, a seminar conducted by Apollo Hospitals, 
Chennai at Bangladesh opened up new perspectives in 
healthcare. Doctors including Dr. Anantha krishnan 
Sivaraman, Consultant Urologist from Apollo Hospitals, 
Chennai demonstrated the latest surgical interventions 
using Da vinci Robotic Surgery system in the event 
organized by Global Telemedicine Company, 
Representative office of Apollo Hospitals in Bangladesh 
[11]. 
IV.  EVALUATION OF AGRICULTURAL ROBOTS  
A very large numbers of heterogeneous agents in the 
hostile environment are relating with disaster rescue has 
becomes more important social issue now-a-days. For 
example, Sandia’s Gemini-Scout is used as a rescue robot 
for Mining Disaster [12]. This type of robot can be useful 
for Bangladesh in industrial hazard like “Rana Plaza 
Tragedy”. 
BRAC University Robotics Club has also developed a 
new Intelligent Military Robot (IMV) which is shown in 
Fig. 5 that can be used for this purpose also. This type of 
robot can be used for rescue and spying purpose in war 
field to make a surveillance of opposite actions. Again, 
the combination of vulnerability to earthquakes and a 
natural affinity for robotics has led to a surplus of 
Japanese rescue robots [13]. This type of robot can be 
useful in Bangladesh as it lays such area where the 
possibility of earthquake is very high. 
 
Figure 5. Intelligent Military Vehicle (IMV) 
V. EVALUATION OF INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS AND 
AUTONOMOUS TRANSPORTATION 
An industrial robot is an automatically precise, 
reprogrammable, adaptable manipulator programmable in 
three or more axes. Typical applications of industrial 
robots include welding, painting, ironing, assembly, pick 
and place, palletizing, product inspection, and testing, all 
accomplished with high endurance, speed, and precision. 
The most commonly used robot configurations for 
industrial automation are SCARA robots and gantry 
robots [14]. Most types of industrial robots would fall 
into the category of robot arms. As a pioneer in robotics 
and robotic arm technology, the KUKA Robot Group is 
one of the leading suppliers and manufacturers of robotic 
systems worldwide [15]. In Bangladesh, many industries 
and electronic companies like Walton are growing up 
rapidly so the necessity of industrial robot becomes acute 
in now-a-days. 
 For the past hundred years, innovation within the 
automotive sector has created safer, cleaner, and more 
reasonable vehicles, but progress has been incremental. 
Researchers and makers of driverless cars say the 
technology will be far harmless than people-driven 
vehicles because they eliminate volatile human errors like 
distracted or drunk driving, or poor reactions to 
emergency situations. 
As a result, in developed country the autonomous 
traffic system is very much popular and reliable. Using 
GPRS System, the traffic system can be maintained easily 
in Dhaka city and vehicle can be tracked in highway is 
also a developed project for ROBU (BRACU Robotics) 
[16]. Boston Dynamics builds advanced robots with 
remarkable behavior: mobility, agility, dexterity and 
speed. By using sensor-based controls and computation, it 
can turn to unlock the capabilities of complex 
mechanisms [17]. 
Organizations worldwide, from DARPA, the US Army, 
Navy and Marine Corps to Sony Corporation turn to 
Boston Dynamics for advice and for help creating the 
most advanced robots on Earth. BRAC University  
Robotics has developed RC copter, Quad copter 
showed in Fig. 6, and two wheels self-balanced motor car 
showed in Fig. 7a & Fig. 7b. An excavation system has 
been developed at BRAC university considering simple 
construction, light-weight and efficient enough to 
excavate and collect known as Chondrobot I & 
Chondrobot II to participate in NASA Lunabotics Mining 
Competition which can be used for beach cleaning 
purpose or sample collection purpose [18], [19] are 
shown in Fig. 8a & Fig. 8b. 
 
Figure 6. UAV (RC copter and Quad copter) 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7. (a) Proposed chassis structure (b) Side view of two wheels 
self-balanced motor car 
62
Journal of Automation and Control Engineering Vol. 4, No. 1, February 2016
©2016 Journal of Automation and Control Engineering
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8. (a) Chodrobot I (b) Chondrobot II 
VI. DISCUSSION OF ROBOTICS RESEARCH EVALUATION 
IN BANGLADESH 
The uses of robot are indispensable for every sectors of 
society as it enables the opportunity to increase the 
production, guaranteed safety and reduces time. As it 
may be a little bit concern about many people that if robot 
will replace the human in workplace then many people 
will lose their job and become jobless. But the real 
scenario is little bit different in contrast with people 
concern. Due to the increment of production by using 
robot creates an opportunity to work more people in 
manufacturing and supplier-customer chain related jobs. 
As a result there is a balance of jobs without contributing 
any effect on human labor in workplace. 
The developing countries are using robots for 
accomplishing precarious jobs for example rescue people, 
coil mining and such jobs which have a threat towards 
human lives. They have also used advanced robots in 
medical sector which saved number of human lives. As 
the prices of these robots are very high therefore it is 
almost impossible for developed countries like 
Bangladesh to buy and implement them. But some 
universities and organizations in Bangladesh are opening 
R&D sector to implement them in a small scale and in a 
cost effective way which signifies a great promise 
towards the evolution of technology. To cope up with the 
advanced world in the field of robotics, more 
concentration should be taken to get the benefit of 
robotics. 
Due to limitations of R&D sectors the products can’t 
maintain international standard. As a continuous cycle we 
are not getting international funds and resources for 
spreading our R&D. In a long run, new technical job 
sectors are narrowing down and our traditional 
technology markets (such as Mobile operator companies, 
conventional electrical power developments) are going 
through a saturation mode resulting potential engineering 
graduate students (especially electrical and electronic 
graduates) jobless. Most of those graduate students are 
either dropping out themselves from engineering and 
going to join banking sectors or going to abroad and 
never comes back. We have termed this total system as a 
potential loss of humanitarian technology development in 
our country. 
 
 
Figure 9. Situation of electronic job sector in Bangladesh 
 
Figure 10. Study of robotics
 
and embedded
 
system research in 
Bangladesh
 
Taking this situation in consideration the only 
alternative is we have to develop R&D sector and create 
our own job market. By considering this situation, we 
draw a Fig.
 
9 to show the job market
 
of electronics in 
Bangladesh. The good news is that in Bangladesh there 
are increased numbers of research about robotics and 
embedded system
 
has been practiced in recent few years. 
We make an estimation of paper
 
published about robotics 
and embedded system in Bangladesh. The result indicates 
that the number of paper about robotics and embedded 
system published
 
in conference are satisfactory and it is 
increasing day by day which is shown in Fig.
 
10.
 
63
Journal of Automation and Control Engineering Vol. 4, No. 1, February 2016
©2016 Journal of Automation and Control Engineering
REFERENCE 
[1] G. Feng, C. Qizin, and M. Masateru, “Fruit detachment and 
classification method for strawberry harvesting robot,” 
International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, vol. 5, pp. 41-
48, 2008. 
[2] E. Maltz, “Precision agriculture in dairying: Individual 
management by automatic milking systems,” in Robotic Milking: 
Proc. of the International Symposium, Lelystad, the Netherlands, 
Wageningen Press, pp. 132-142, August 2000. 
[3] M. H. Jensen and W. L. Collins, “Hydroponic vegetable 
production,” Hort. Review, vol. 7, 483-558, 1985. 
 
[5] S. X. Yang and C. Luo, “A Neural network approach to complete 
coverage path planning system,” Man and Cybernetics, vol. 31, no. 
1, 2004. 
[6] Y. Sarig, “Robotics of fruit harvesting: A state-of-the-art review,” 
Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 
265-280, April 1993. 
[7] S. Hutchinson, G. Hager, and P. Corke “A tutorial on visual servo 
control,” IEEE Trans. on Robotics and Automation, vol. 12, no. 5, 
pp. 651–670, 1996. 
[8] S. Martel, “Journey to the center of a tumor,” Spectrum, IEEE, vol. 
49, no. 10, pp. 48-53, 2012. 
[9] J. Geng, “Three-dimensional display technologies,” IEEE 
Intelligent Transportation Systems Society, 11001 Sugarbush 
Terrace, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA 
[10] G. Ritzer, “Control: Human and nonhuman robots,” Technology 
and Society, 227. 
[11] Apollo Hospitals. Chennai conducts a special seminar on Robotic 
Surgery at Bangladesh. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.apollohospitals.com/newsdetail.php?newsid=536  
[12] L. Kasprzyczak, S. Trenczek, and M. Cader, “Robot for 
monitoring hazardous environments as a mechatronic product,” 
Journal of Automation Mobile Robotics and Intelligent Systems, 
vol. 6, pp. 57-64, 2012. 
[13] J. Marshall, “A RoboCup rescue robot,” Ph.D dissertation, The 
University of Newcastle, Australia, 2004. 
 
[15] R. Bischoff, “From research to products: The development of the 
KUKA light-weight robot,” in Proc. 40th International 
Symposium on Robotics, Barcelona, Spain. 
[16] M. K. Rhaman, M. M. R Miran, N. J. Khusbu, I. Islam, K. Nahid, 
and N. B. N. Nabia, "2GCSS: Embedded car security system," in 
Proc. International Conference on Embedded Systems and 
Intelligent Technology (ICESIT), 2013.  
[17]
 
M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, and R. B. Playter, “The 
rough-terrain quadruped robot,” in Proc. the 17th World Congress,
 
pp. 10823-10825, July 2008. 
[18]
 
M.
 
K. Rhaman, S. I. Hasan, M. J. Hossain, K. M. R. Anik, M. H. 
Oyon, B. B. Bhuian, and M. M. Rahman, "Chondrobot 2: A 
simple tele-robotic lunar excavator,"
 
in Proc.
 
International 
Conference on Advanced Computer Science Applications and 
Technologies (ACSAT), vol. 31, no. 36, Nov.2012, pp. 26-28
 
[19]
 
M. K. Rhaman, S. I. Hasan, M.
 
J. Hossain, K.
 
M. R. Anik, M. H. 
Oyon, B. B. Bhuian, and M. M. Rahman, "Engineering paper on 
Chondrobot -A simple tele-robotic lunar excavator," in Proc. 
International Conference on Advanced Computer Science 
Applications and Technologies, ACSAT, Malaysia, 2012 
 
 
Dr. Md. Khalilur Rhaman
 
is an Associate 
Professor in the School of Engineering and 
Computer Science of BRAC University, 
Dhaka. He is the
 
Supervisor of BRAC 
University Robotics lab and the advisor of 
BRAC University Robotics club. The robot 
named CHONDROBT was designed and 
builds under his supervision. Different version 
of this Robot was regularly attending in 
NASA Lunabotics Mining Competitions. Dr. 
Khalil completed his Ph.D. from Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan. 
His Ph.D. Research topic was Natural Language Processing but now his 
research is diverted into Robotics and embedded systems. His research 
interest also includes space science and engineering. Dr. Khalil would 
like to express himself as a lifetime student of Engineering. 
 
 
 
 
Sabbir Ahmed Khan currently works as a 
graduate student on Physics and Nano-Science 
at Lund University. Previously he worked as a 
research and teaching assistant in the School of 
Engineering and Computer Science of BRAC 
University, Dhaka.
 
His research interests focus 
on Material science, Robotics
 
and Renewable 
energy technology.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shifur Rahman Shakil
 
is a research and 
teaching assistant in the School of Engineering 
and Computer Science of BRAC University, 
Dhaka. His research interests focus on 
Material science, Robotics, Space science and 
Renewable energy technology. He is also 
associated with developing software for blind 
people for the betterment of their education.
 
 
64
Journal of Automation and Control Engineering Vol. 4, No. 1, February 2016
©2016 Journal of Automation and Control Engineering
[4] M. Freed, R. Harris, and M. Shafto, “Human vs. autonomous 
control of UAV surveillance,” in Proc. the American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2004.
[14] A. E. Quaid and R. L. Hollis, “Cooperative 2-DOF robots for 
precision assembly,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference, vol. 
3, 1996, pp. 2188-2193.

