Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
80
Review on thermal challenges in embedded system
GIFTY K BABY1
Electronics and Communication Department,
Toc H Institute of Science and Technology, Kerala, India.
Email:giftykalapurackal@gmail.com
GNANA SHEELA K2
Electronics and Communication Department,
Toc H Institute of Science and Technology, Kerala, India.
Email:sheelabijins@gmail.com
Abstract
Embedded systems are used in safety critical areas such as automotive electronics and medical applications. These safety
critical applications impose strict requirements on reliability, performance, low power and testability of the underlying VLSI
circuits. The VLSI circuits operate very often at high temperature, which has negative impact on reliability, performance,
power-efficiency and testability with silicon technology scaling. Several thermal impacts on VLSI circuits and their related
challenges are discussed. This paper presents also a few emerging techniques that take temperature into account in the
design and test processes. There are number of embedded computers controlling virtually all devices and systems in a huge
spectrum of application areas including aerospace, manufacturing, chemical processes, healthcare care, automotive,
transportation, telecommunication, and consumer appliances. Many of these systems are safety-critical, such as automotive
electronics and medical equipment, with stringent reliability and real time requirements. At the same time, with silicon
technology scaling, VLSI circuits used to implement the computational components of these systems are built with smaller
transistors, operate at higher clock frequency, run at lower voltage levels, and operate very often at higher temperature.
Consequently, they are subject to more faults and interferences.
Keywords-Dynamic Thermal Management; Burn-in; Principal Orthogonal Decomposition; Model-Based Design
1.INTRODUCTION
Recently embedded system encountered many constraints such as power, energy, reliability, and
temperature. Among these challenging issues, temperature related issues have become especially important within
the past several years. This paper summarizes recent thermal management techniques for embedded system.
Temperature monitoring, requirement for Dynamic Thermal Management (DTM), includes temperature
estimation and sensor placement techniques for accurate temperature measurement or estimation. Micro
architectural techniques include both static and dynamic thermal management techniques that control hardware
structures. Floor planning covers a range of thermal-aware floor planning techniques for 2D and 3D
microprocessors. OS/ compiler techniques include thermal-aware task scheduling and instruction scheduling
techniques. Liquid cooling techniques are higher capacity alternatives to conventional air cooling techniques.
Thermal reliability/security issues cover temperature-dependent reliability modeling, Dynamic Reliability
Management (DRM), and malicious codes that specifically cause overheating. Temperature-related issues will
only become more challenging as process technology continues to evolve and transistor densities scale up faster
than power per transistor scales down.
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
81
I.1 Three Modes of Heat Transfer
A. Conduction
Thermal conduction is the process in which thermal energy transfers through matter, from a region of
higher temperature to lower temperature and acts to equalize the temperature difference. It can also be described
as the heat energy transferred from one material to another by direct contact. Fourier’s Law of Conduction states
that the rate of heat flow equals the product of the area normal to the heat flow path, the temperature gradient
along the path and the thermal conductivity of the medium. Heat flux, “q” is the rate of heat transfer per unit area
and it depends on the direction. Consider a one dimensional block with one side at a constant T1 and the others
B. Convection
Convection is the transfer of thermal energy between two surfaces as a consequence of a relative velocity
between them. The most practical application is where one surface is a solid and the other is a fluid.ide at a
constant T2, where T1 > T2. On a basic level, the convective heat transfer can be improved with higher airflow
and  more  surface  area.  However,  it  is  not  always  possible  to  make  the  thermal  solution  larger  or  increase  the
airflow, due the constraints of embedded form factors. Therefore, the thermal solution designer must factor in all
the boundary conditions in order to develop a suitable solution. Convective heat transfer plays a very important
role in electronics cooling. This mode of heat transfer will allow higher power processors to be cooled in most
applications.
C. Radiation
Radiation cooling is the transfer of heat by electromagnetic emission, primarily in the infrared
wavelengths. While the transfer of energy by conduction and convection requires the presence of a material
medium, radiation does not. In fact, radiation transfer occurs most effectively in a vacuum. Graphically represents
the radiation heat transfer between two surfaces at different temperatures. For the majority of embedded
applications, radiation will result in a very small percentage of the total heat transfer. The only applications where
it will have significant impact are in fan less designs.
2. LITERATURE SURVEY
Oleg Semenov et al (2003) presented burn-in which is  performed at elevated temperature, which is
achieved by special equipment .This approach will not be able to achieve the specified temperature gradients,
especially those with large magnitudes.  Burn-in is a quality improvement procedure challenged by the high
leakage currents that are rapidly increasing with IC technology scaling. These currents are expected to increase
even more under the new burn-in environments leading to higher junction temperatures, possible thermal
runaway, and yield loss during burn-in. It can be estimate the increase in junction temperature with technology
scaling. It shows that under normal operating conditions, the junction temperature is increasing 1.45 /generation.
The increase in junction temperature under the burn-in condition was found to be exponential. The range of
optimal burn-in voltage and temperature is reduced significantly with technology scaling.
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
82
      Dettori M et al (2003) formulated the principal Orthogonal decomposition (POD) used to develop a low-
order nonlinear model which simulation results for tracking a ramp with rate 50 C/sec with a controller scheme
that includes feedback, feed forward and pre filter and investigates the application of model-based control design
techniques to distributed temperature control systems. Multivariable controllers are an essential part of the
modern-day rapid thermal processing (RTP) systems. This paper considers all aspects of the control problem
beginning with a physics-based model and concluding with implementation of the real-time embedded controller.
The  thermal  system  used  as  an  example  throughout  the  paper  is  a  RTP  chamber  that  is  widely  used  in
semiconductor wafer processing. With its exceptionally stringent performance requirements of wafer temperature,
high temperature ramp rates, RTP temperature control is a challenging distributed temperature control problem.
Additionally, it is an important problem in the semiconductor industry because of the progressively smaller
“thermal budget” resulting from ever decreasing integrated circuit dimensions.
Jon L. E et al (2003)formulated model-based control system design which has excellent temperature
control on both the low-order and the full nonlinear simulations and need for addition of run-to-run control to deal
with system nonlinearities. Model-Based Design (MBD) is a mathematical and visual method of addressing
problems associated with designing complex control, signal processing and communication systems. It is used in
many motion controls, industrial equipment, aerospace, and automotive applications. Model-based design is a
methodology applied in designing embedded software. MBD provides an efficient approach for establishing a
common framework for communication throughout the design process while supporting the development cycle .
In model-based design of control systems, development is manifested in these four steps: 1) modeling a plant, 2)
analyzing and synthesizing a controller for the plant, 3) simulating the plant and controller, and 4) integrating all
these phases by deploying the controller.
               Jayanth Srinivasan et al (2004) formulated RAMP industrial strength model which has high correlation
between application power and temperature. The relentless scaling of CMOS technology has provided a steady
increase in processor performance for the past three decades. However, increased power densities and other
scaling effects have an adverse impact on long term processor lifetime reliability. This paper represents a first
attempt at quantifying the impact of scaling on lifetime reliability due to intrinsic hard errors, taking workload
characteristics into consideration. For our quantitative evaluation, we use RAMP previously proposed industrial
strength model that provides reliability estimates for a workload, but for a given technology.
 Chen F et al(2004) has developed the methodology of effective thermal conductivity which allows quick
evaluation of various Cullow-k campasite interconnect structures advancement in thermal properties of low-k
dielectrics and better chip cooling designs could be critical to future technologies. Demonstrated that interconnect
Joule heating and low thermal conductivity of low-k dielectric materials can have a large impact on chip
reliability and performance.
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
83
Liao w et al (2006) formulated genetic algorithm to solve problems with multiple solutions .The
advantage is that it solves problems with multiple solutions but it cannot assure constant optimization response
times. The value of average current becomes stable when the circuit is in the computer science field of. This
heuristic (also so artificial intelligence, a genetic algorithm  is a search heuristic that mimics the process of natural
selection sometimes called a meta heuristic) is routinely used to generate useful solutions to optimization and
search problems. Genetic algorithms belong to the larger class of evolutionary algorithms(EA), which generate
solutions to optimization problems using techniques inspired by natural evolution, such as inheritance, mutation,
selection, and crossover. Genetic algorithms find application in bioinformatics, phylogenetics, computational
science, engineering, economics, chemistry, manufacturing, mathematics, physics, pharma cometrics and other
fields.
Lio.Y et al (2007) presented thermal-constrained energy optimization procedure to minimize
system energy consumption under a constraint on peak temperature which optimizes energy under a
constraint on peak temperature. If  the  bound  is  too  loose,  the  system  may  operate  at  an
unnecessary-high temperature average which results in 11 °C temperature reduction with 8.3% energy
overhead are designed using the small cell library.
.Flament et al (2009) formulated ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable)low as reasonably
practicable. IC modeling using fault injection and simulation techniques could be performed to evaluate
mitigation efficiency. The implementation of equipments with embedded electronic to monitor, control, measure
and operate future large facilities dedicated to high energy physics or nuclear fusion are necessary. Reliable
operation of these equipments will be achieved through availability and reliability analysis. In several cases, the
equipment selection or development approach has to be done by considering a harsh environment in terms of
radiations. In order to implement these systems in such environments shielding, location and distance from the
source must be considered to reduce, to protect and to avoid radiation effects. People in charge of the choice of
the equipments have to take into account and mitigate radiation effects from subsystem to system level. This
requires an approach integrating tradeoff between performance and reliability, between the use of the state of the
art of technologies and robust and well known devices. Experience and knowledge from previous programs
should be considered to build approach and strategy that may be necessary to overcome difficulties. In the present
paper, we will review the main challenges faced by designers for systems implementation with embedded
electronics in future facilities dedicated to international physics programs.
         Zebo Peng et al (2010) time-redundancy based fault-tolerance techniques handle transient faults and the
hardware/ software trade-offs related to fault detection and fault tolerance with the increased silicon area,
additional design effort, lower production quantities, excessive power consumption, and protection mechanisms
against radiation (such as shields). It deals with the design of embedded systems for safety-critical applications,
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
84
where both fault tolerance and real-time requirements should be taken into account at the same time. With silicon
technology scaling, integrated circuits are implemented with smaller transistors, operate at higher clock
frequency, and run at lower voltage levels. As a result, they are subject to more faults, in particular, transient
faults. Additionally, in nano-scale technology, physics-based random variations play an important role in many
device performance metrics, and have led to many new defects. It describes several key challenges and presents
several emerging solutions to the design and optimization of such systems. In particular, it discusses the
advantages of using time-redundancy based fault-tolerance techniques that are triggered by fault occurrences to
handle transient faults and the hardware/ software trade-offs related to fault detection and fault tolerance.
 Nima Aghaee et al (2014) formulated an algorithm such as Burn in which has an advantage such as  low
cost in a reasonably short time and the disadvantage is that it do not sufficiently speed up the formation of the
defects that depend on large temperature gradients and consequently such early-life defects will go undetected.
Burn-in is usually carried out with high temperature and elevated voltage. Since some of the early-life failures
depend not only on high temperature but also on temperature gradients, simply rising up the temperature of an IC
is  not  sufficient  to  detect  them.  This  is  especially  true  for  3D  stacked  ICs,  since  they  have  usually  very  large
temperature gradients. The efficient detection of these early-life failures requires that specific temperature
gradients are enforced as a part of the burn-in process. This paper presents an efficient method to do so by
applying high power stimuli to the cores of the IC under burn-in through the test access mechanism. Therefore, no
external heating equipment is required. The scheduling of the heating and cooling intervals to achieve the required
temperature gradients is based on thermal simulations and is guided by functions derived from a set of thermal
equations.
Peng.z et al (2014) formulated electro migration and time-dependent dielectric breakdown which is
efficient but Time consuming which results in amplitude and frequency of temperature oscillation has a huge
impact on the overall lifetime of a chip. More and more embedded systems are used in safety-critical areas such as
automotive electronics and medical applications. These safety critical applications impose stringent requirements
on reliability, performance, low power and testability of the underlying VLSI circuits. With silicon technology
scaling, VLSI circuits operate very often at high temperature, which has negative impact on reliability,
performance, power-efficiency and testability. This paper discusses several thermal impacts on VLSI circuits and
their related challenges. It presents few emerging techniques that take temperature into account in the design and
testprocesses
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
85
3. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
TABLE 1.COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
Author Year Algorithm Advantages Disadvantages Results
Peng.z et al 2014 .electro-migration and
time-dependent
dielectric breakdown
efficient Time consuming Amplitude & frequency
scillation─ has huge impact
on the overall lifetime
Nima
Aghaee et al
2014 Burn in low cost in a reasonably short
time
does not sufficiently speed up the
formation of the defects that depend on
large temperature gradients and
consequently such early-life defects will go
undetected.
Zebo Peng et
al
2010 time-redundancy
based fault-tolerance
techniques
handle transient faults and
hardware/software trade-offs
related to fault detection and
fault
tolerance
increased silicon area, lower production
quantities, excessive power consumption, &
protection mechanisms against radiation
Lio.y et al 2007 thermal-constrained
energy optimization
procedure to minimize
system.
optimize energy under a
constraint on peak temperature.
If the bound is too loose, the system may
operate at an unnecessary-high
temperature
average 11 °C temperature
reduction with 8.3% energy
overhead
Weiping
Liao et al
2006 Genetic algorithm It solves problems with multiple
solutions.
cannot assure constant optimisation
response times.
The value of average current
become stable when the
circuits are designed
Jayanth
Srinivasan et
al
2004 RAMP [industrial
stenght model]
High correlation between
application power and
temperature
F. Chen et al 2004 effective thermal
conductivity
allows quick evaluation of
various Cullow-k campasite
interwnnect structures
advancement in thermal
properties of low-k dielectrics and better
chip cooling designs could
be critical to future technologies.
interconnect
Joule heating and low
thermal conductivity of low-k
dielectric
materials can have a large
impact on chip reliability and
performance
Oleg
Semenov et
al
2003
 burn-in
performed at elevated
temperature, which is achieved
by special equipment
not able to achieve the specified
temperature gradients, especially those
with large magnitudes.
Dettori.m et
al
2003 1.principal
Orthogonal
decomposition (POD)
used to develop a low-order
nonlinear
model.
. simulation results for
tracking ramp with rate 50
C/sec scheme that includes
feedback, feedforward
Jon L. E et al 2003 model-based control
system design
excellent
temperature control on both the
low-order and the full nonlinear
simulations.
need for addition of run-to-run  control  to
deal with system
nonlinearities
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
86
4. CONCLUSION
Embedded systems for safety-critical applications have put stringent requirements on reliability,
performance, power-efficiency and testability of the underlying VLSI circuits. These different requirements are
all  impacted by the temperature the chip.  This  survey paper  has discussed several  of  these thermal  impacts  and
their related challenges. It has also presented briefly several emerging techniques that take temperature into
account  in  the  design  and  test  processes  of  embedded  systems,  especially  at  the  system  level.  The  issues  are
discussed in this paper such as the influence of temperature on reliability, power consumption, and testability, are
not new, taken individually. However, the interplay of these issues and their increased impacts has led to many
great challenges. In particular, there are still many open problems in how to develop efficient global optimization
techniques to consider the different thermal impacts and other design requirements at the same time, so that it can
build highly reliable and predictable embedded systems in an efficient manner. This paper provides an overview
of the reliability modeling for embedded system and a perspective of the different system level design techniques
for lifetime optimization.
5. REFERENCES
1. R. Dennard.Design of Ion-Implanted MOSFET’s with Very Small Physical Dimensions. IEEE Journal of Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 0256–268, 1974.
2. K. Mistry.A 45nm Logic Technology with High-k+Metal Gate Transistors, Strained Silicon, 9 Cu Interconnect Layers,
193nm Dry Patterning, and 100Packaging. in IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2007, pp. 247–250.
3. M. Bohr.A 30 Year Retrospective on Dennard’s MOSFET Scaling Paper. IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society Newsletter, vol.
12, no. 1, pp. 11–13, 2007.
4. W. Liao.Temperature-Aware Performance and Power Modeling.Tech. Report, UCLA, Engr. 04-250, 2004.
5. H. Esmaeilzadeh.Power Challenges May End the Multicore Era. Communications of the ACM, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 93–102,
2013
6.  F. Reynolds.Thermally Accelerated Aging of Semiconductor ComponentsProceedings of the IEEE, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 212–
222, 1974.
7. Semenov .O .Effect of CMOS Technology Scaling on Thermal Management During Burn-In , IEEE,
8. T. Brozek, Y. D. Cha.Temperature Accelerated Gate Oxide Degradation Under Plasma-Induced Charging.IEEE Electron
Device Letters, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 288– 290, 1996.
9. S. Kumar.Adaptive Techniques for Overcoming Performance Degradation Due to Aging in CMOS Circuits.IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration Systems (TVLSI), vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 603–614, 2011.
10. S. Ramey.Intrinsic Transistor Reliability Improvements from 22nm Tri-Gate Technology.in IEEE International Reliability
Physics Symposium (IRPS), 2013, pp. 4C.5.1–4C.5.5.
11. Y. Leblebici .Design considerations for cmos digital circuits with improved hot-carrier reliability .IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1014–1024, 1996.
12. V. Huard. CMOS Device Design-in Reliability Approach in Advanced Nodes,in IEEE International Reliability Physics
Symposium, 2009, pp. 624–633.
13. A. Tiwari .Facelift: Hiding and Slowing Down Aging in Multicores. in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 129–140.
14. F. Oboril. Reducing NBTI-induced Processor Wearout by Exploiting the Timing Slack of Instructions .in Proceedings of the
Conference on Hardware/ Software Codesign and System Synthesis,vol.10, 2012, pp. 443–452.
15. F. Ahmed.Wearout- Aware Compiler-Directed Register Assignment for Embedded Systems.in Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design (ISQED), 2012, pp. 33–40.
16. J. Srinivasan .The Impact of Technology Scaling on Lifetime Reliability.Proc. DSN, 2004.
17. W. Huang.HotSpot: A Compact Thermal Modeling Methodology for Early-Stage VLSI Design. IEEE Trans. On VLSI
Systems, 2006.
18. I Ukhov .Steady-State Dynamic Temperature Analysis and Reliability Optimization for Embedded Multiprocessor Systems.
Proc. DAC, 2012
Gifty K Baby et. al. /International Journal of Modern Sciences and Engineering Technology (IJMSET)
ISSN 2349-3755; Available at https://www.ijmset.com
Volume 1, Issue 7, 2014, pp.80-87
© IJMSET-Advanced Scientific Research Forum (ASRF), All Rights Reserved
“IJMSET promotes research nature, Research nature enriches the world’s future”
87
19. M. Bao . Temperature-Aware Idle Time Distribution for Leakage Energy Optimization,. IEEE Trans. on VLSI Systems, 2012.
20. N. Aghaee. An Efficient Temperature-Gradient Based Burn-In Technique ,or 3D Stacked ICs. Proc. DATE, 2014
21. F. Hawki[2] W. Huang, et al.HotSpot: A Compact Thermal Modeling Methodology for Early-Stage VLSI Design. IEEE
Trans. On VLSI  Systems, 2006.
AUTHOR’S BRIEF BIOGRAPHY:
Gifty K Baby: She completed her B.Tech in the Department of Electronics & Communication
Engineering under CUSAT, Kerala. Currently she is pursuing M.Tech in the specialization of VLSI
and Embedded System of CUSAT, Kerala.
K.Gnana Sheela: She received her Ph D in Electronics & Communication from Anna University,
Chennai. Presently she is an Associate Professor in TIST.  She has published 18 international journal
papers. She is life member of ISTE.

