CERES 
Centre for Research on 
Embedded Systems
Presentation and 
Activity Report 2014-2015
Cover Photo
NAO is a humanoid robot being used in research and education 
worldwide. At Halmstad University it is most used by the group’s 
working with Model-based Methods for Cyber-Physical Systems. 
The nice and photogenic robot has as a result of the groups work, 
been visible in several TV shows during the last years. A good 
Ambassador for CERES!
CERES 
Centre for Research on 
Embedded Systems
Presentation and 
Activity Report 2014-2015
4        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Table of contents
Preface .............................................................................................................................................................5
CERES – 12 years of Excellence and Counting ...............................................................................................6
CERES – Vision and Strategy .........................................................................................................................7
EIS – Halmstad Embedded and Intelligent Systems Research  .........................................................................8
Towards a Parallel Future  ..............................................................................................................................14
Real-time Communication ............................................................................................................................16
Internet of Things..........................................................................................................................................18
Electronics Centre in Halmstad .....................................................................................................................19
Research Collaboration .................................................................................................................................20
Coproduction with Industry .........................................................................................................................22
Application Areas ..........................................................................................................................................27
Research oriented Education .........................................................................................................................28
Competence development .............................................................................................................................32
Presentation PhD Students  ...........................................................................................................................34
Licentiate thesis .............................................................................................................................................39
Some highlights .............................................................................................................................................42
CERES Staff ..................................................................................................................................................46
CERES Publications 2014-2015 ...................................................................................................................52
          5
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Welcome to the activity report of the Centre for Re-search on Embedded Systems (CERES) for the period 
of 2014 to 2015! 
From 2003 to 2013, CERES had been generously supported 
by profile grants from the Knowledge Foundation with the 
goal of establishing a stand-alone research center.  We are now 
excited to inform you through this report that this goal has 
been fulfilled and CERES has become a center of excellence 
in research with a stable profile of research, co-production 
with industry, and a balanced portfolio of funding sources. 
In this report, we give an overview of our broader research en-
vironment on Embedded Intelligent Systems (EIS), an over-
view of CERES in retrospect and a summary of our vision 
and mission for the future of CERES.  We then provide an 
outline of our research profile and research collaboration. 
Throughout the years, CERES has established and main-
tained an extensive network of industrial contacts. In this 
report you see a glimpse of the most prominent examples of 
such contacts and testimonials from some key people in our 
partner institutes. 
CERES is a research center but has vigorous contributions 
to our educational profile. Hence, we dedicated part of this 
report to our contribution to the educational programs at the 
School of Information Technology.  
CERES builds upon a growing team of strong researchers; we 
devote a part of this report to introduce our new colleagues. 
As stated at the outset, we believe that CERES is now stand-
ing firmly and is growing vigorously. We extend our warmest 
invitations to you to visit us and to collaborate with us in 
order to create a wider and deeper network of alliance in the 
area of cooperative embedded systems.  Together we become 
much stronger.
Enjoy reading our report and welcome to CERES! 
CERES
Centre for Research on  
Embedded Systems
Preface
Mohammad Mousavi,  
Professor and theme leader for 
Cooperative Embedded Systems
6        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES – 12 years of Excellence 
and Counting
CERES was established 12 years ago (in 2003) with the vision to create a center of excellence on cooperative em-
bedded systems. Throughout these years, CERES has become 
such a center of excellence gathering an international team of 
renowned researchers covering the different subfields of em-
bedded systems research. CERES has now become a point 
of strength in the international embedded systems research 
landscape. It has also become a major player in the profile and 
strategic development of Halmstad University, for example 
by hosting a major part of the PhD education in Information 
Technology and by being a leading player in the University’s 
strategic research initiative, Research for Innovation. Also, 
with its strong record of spin-off companies from the embed-
ded  systems area, CERES is considered vitally important for 
the University’s profiling as an innovation-driven university. 
Figure 1 depicts the increasing trend in the research fund-
ing for CERES as an indication of its steady growth since 
its establishment. The increase in funding has been coupled 
with sustained development in expertise both in terms of the 
number of researchers and the research areas covered by them. 
We have focused on internationalization for the past few years 
and due to that, we could also expand our network of inter-
national academic collaborators and partner companies ex-
tensively. 
Figure 1: Research Funding in Thousand Swedish Kronor
CERES has moved in the recent years to diversify its funding 
portfolio in order to ensure a robust and sustainable growth. 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 provide an overview of our different 
sources of funding in 2014 and 2015, respectively. As it can 
be seen, CERES has come a long way from being solely de-
pendent on Knowledge Foundation research funding and 
currently secures close to 50 percent of its research funding 
from other sources. This is even more remarkable, once we 
consider that the total research funding of CERES has almost 
tripled since 12 years ago. Building upon a successful past, we 
are looking forward to a bright future!
Figure 2: Distribution of Funding Sources in 2014
Figure 3: Distribution of Funding Sources in 2015 (Prognosis)
Building upon a suc-
cessful past, we are 
looking forward to a 
bright future! 
          7
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES – Vision and Strategy
Vision 
CERES will be among the top five European centers of excel-
lence in cooperative embedded systems. It will provide inno-
vative system-level and multi-disciplinary solutions to societal 
challenges in close collaboration and co-production with its 
industrial and academic partners. 
Strategy
To implement this vision, we have identified the following 
classes of strategic activities, which are briefly explained below 
and are elaborated throughout this report:
• Excellence in Research: we carry out research at the 
highest international level in close collaboration with our 
partners, both at Halmstad University and worldwide. 
We publish our results in the best academic outlets, with 
a particular emphasis on publishing in journals with high 
quality standard. We cover a broad spectrum of research 
from fundamental areas contributing to embedded sys-
tems to applied technological research that can lead to 
new products by our industrial partners. 
• Coproduction with Industry:  Our research, even the 
most fundamental part, is motivated by societal and in-
dustrial challenges and has the prospect of applicability. 
Our industrial partners play a key role in providing us 
with their challenges and we develop our applied re-
search in full collaboration with them. Our network of 
industrial partners is a key asset and we maintain and ex-
tend this invaluable resource through coproduction that 
leads to tangible added value for them. 
• Competence Development: We bank on the expertise 
provided by our colleagues and collaborators. We help 
our existing colleagues develop their expertise even fur-
ther through both inbound and outbound guest research-
ers at various levels and extend our pool of expertise by 
strategic recruitments. We constantly develop leadership 
skills at CERES by organizing and participating in man-
agement and leadership workshops. 
• Research-Based Education: One of the key function-
alities of our institution is to serve as a knowledge-base 
and disseminate this knowledge through educational 
programs. We constantly innovate our educational pro-
grams and develop programs that meet societal needs in 
our areas of expertise.  
Research Agenda
CERES aims at covering a broad spectrum of research areas 
within cooperative embedded systems in order to offer holis-
tic and system-level solutions. To have sufficient impact, how-
ever, we also need to have a critical mass and sufficient depth 
in each of the sub-areas present at CERES. Hence, we have 
decided to put particular emphasis on the following three re-
search areas:
• Model-based Methods for Cyber-Physical Systems,
• Parallel Architectures and Tools, and  
• Real-time Communication.
In addition, we participate in a number of interdisciplinary 
research areas, such as Internet of Things and Health Technol-
ogy. Another exciting carrier for our research and coproduc-
tion with industry is the brand new Electronics Centre, which 
celebrates its grand opening in September 2015.
In the remainder of this report, we first present an overview 
of the general research landscape at our research school’s en-
vironment, called Embedded Intelligent Systems (EIS). Sub-
sequently, we offer a detailed introduction to our three main 
research areas. Finally, we provide a glimpse of our interdis-
ciplinary research areas, our research collaborations, and our 
brand new Electronics Centre.
8        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
EIS – Halmstad Embedded and 
Intelligent Systems Research 
The overall mission of School of ITE and its research en-vironment EIS (Halmstad Embedded and Intelligent 
Systems Research) is to provide knowledge (solutions, the-
ories, methods, tools) and competence (graduates) relevant 
to the creation of innovative IT products and services. The 
knowledge and competence range from enabling technolo-
gies, via systems solutions and applications, to valuable IT 
use. By this, ITE/EIS intends to contribute to increased 
competitiveness of Swedish industry and increased quality 
and relevance of the university education. The disciplinary 
coverage of ITE/EIS is visualized in Figure 1. Through our 
joint competences we can be an attractive partner and deal 
with projects where the whole range is treated, from enabling 
technologies, like low-power technologies and semiconductor 
sensors, to value-adding IT use, considering user aspects. In 
between, system and application aspects are treated, e.g. intel-
ligent algorithms, application-specific computer architectures 
and languages, and efficient communication technologies. 
Rather than covering everything, our focus is on cooperating 
embedded systems for intelligent applications.
Figure 4. Embedded and intelligent systems research, ranging from 
enabling technologies, via systems solutions and applications, to business 
models.
The vision of ITE/EIS is to be:
• a preferred partner in research projects,
• an internationally recognized research environment
• an attractive environment for education
• well-known for our innovation profile in research
• a working environment characterized by equality and di-
versity
The overall goal is to, within the area of embedded and intelli-
gent systems, make ITE/EIS a nationally leading and interna-
tionally recognized environment for research and education, 
characterized by well-developed cooperation with industry 
and society. ITE/EIS shall be considered a leading centre of 
excellence on embedded and intelligent systems within Eu-
rope.
One of the general strategies of EIS is to remain and further 
strengthen as a complete academic environment. We shall not 
only be a complete academic environment from the perspec-
tive of the whole school, but also for the different parts. By 
building strengths in selected research themes and application 
areas, we shall be an attractive partner. In addition to offer-
ing education on all levels, the school shall be characterized 
by components typical for a strong, complete academic envi-
ronment, e.g. with a strong international touch, with a good 
balance of staff at different levels, and having at least parts 
with research at an excellent international level. As a strong 
and profiled research environment, we should also be able to 
attract funding in terms of large research programs.
Magnus Jonsson, professor and chairman of EIS steering group.
          9
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Model-based Methods for     
Cyber-Physical Systems
There is growing consensus that many of the most im-portant future innovations will involve closely coupled 
computational (or “cyber”) and physical components, often 
in a networked or distributed setting. Cyber-Physical Systems 
(CPSs) is a term coined by Helen Gill in 2006 to describe 
such systems, and has served as a flag for a large community 
of researchers working in this area. At Halmstad this flag has 
so far been carried by Professors Mousavi and Taha, both of 
whom develop model-based methods that enable innovation 
in CPSs. 
New methods are being developed for specification, simu-
lation, and testing.  Specification is the process of creating 
the models, which serve as the central artifact in model-based 
methods.  Simulation provides a mechanism for “animating” 
or “running” models, and provides a fundamental tool for 
understanding the dynamics of a given model. At Halmstad, 
focus has been on rigorous simulation methods which take 
into account round, discretization, and quantization errors 
and are guaranteed to produce correct results. Research on 
testing focuses on developing notions of conformance of soft-
ware product lines and hybrid systems, as well as test-case 
generation.  Application areas include robotics, automotive, 
and healthcare systems.
Senior staff members: 
Veronica Gaspes, associate professor
Wojciech Mostowski, assistant professor
Mohammad Mousavi, professor 
Walid Taha, professor
Junior members:
Ferenc Bartha, postdoctoral researcher, Rice University
Adam Duracz, Ph.D. Student
Xu Fei, research assistant
Sebastian Kunze, Ph.D. Student
Masoumeh Taromirad, postdoctoral researcher
Mahsa Varshosaz, Ph.D. student
Yingfu Zeng, Ph.D. Student, Rice University
To the left: Professor Walid Taha and the humanoid Jonson
10        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
A Cyber-Physical Approach   
to Robot Design
In many important situations, analytically predicting the be-
havior of physical systems is not possible. For example, the 
three dimensional nature of physical systems makes it prov-
ably impossible to express closed-form analytical solutions for 
even the simplest systems. This has made experimentation the 
primary modality for designing new cyber-physical systems 
(CPS). Since physical prototyping and experiments are typi-
cally costly and hard to conduct, ”virtual experiments” in the 
form of modeling and simulation can dramatically accelerate 
innovation in CPS. Unfortunately, major technical challenges 
often impede the effectiveness of modeling and simulation. 
The project develops foundations and tools for overcoming 
these challenges. The project focuses on robotics as an im-
portant, archetypical class of CPS, and consists of four key 
tasks:
1. Compiling and analyzing a benchmark suite for model-
ing and simulating robots, 
2. Developing a meta-theory for relating cyber physical 
models, as well tools and a test bed for robot modeling 
and simulation, 
3. Validating the research results of the project using two 
state-of-the-art robot platforms that incorporate novel 
control technologies and will require novel programming 
techniques to fully realize their potential 
4. Developing course materials incorporating the project’s 
research results and test bed.
With the aim of accelerating innovation in a wide range of 
domains including stroke rehabilitation and prosthetic limbs, 
the project is developing new control concepts and modeling 
and simulation technologies for robotics. In addition to new 
mathematical foundations, models, and validation methods, 
the project will also develop software tools and systematic 
methods for using them. The project trains four doctoral stu-
dents; develops a new course on modeling and simulation for 
cyber physical systems that balances both control and pro-
gramming concepts; and includes an outreach component to 
the public and to minority-serving K-12 programs.
Partners:  
Rice University, Texas A&M, The MathWorks
Funding:  
United States National Science Foundation and Halm-
stad University
Unfortunately, major tech-
nical challenges often im-
pede the effectiveness of 
modeling and simulation. 
 Research Project
Model-based Methods for 
Cyber-Physical Systems
          11
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Next Generation Test Methods 
for Active Safety Functions
The NG-Test is supported by Vinnova under the Strategic 
Vehicle Research Partnership (FFI) initiative. The goal of the 
project is to develop next-generation methods to address the 
challenge of safety testing for advanced driving functions, 
such as automatic collision avoidance and similar active safety 
functions.
Partners:  
Volvo AB, SP, Volvo Cars, Autoliv, VTI, Chalmers
Funding:  
Vinnova under the Strategic Vehicle Research Partnership 
(FFI)
The project explored several different approaches to next-gen-
eration testing, including the use of robotic drivers, balloon 
cars (which reduce damage from collisions in physical tests), 
immersive car simulators, virtual reality, and rigorous simula-
tion.  The latter, which was a significant area for Halmstad’s 
work, focused on developing tools (inside Acumen) that 
enabled rigorous simulation of systems with uncertainty. A 
central case study in this work (depicted in the visualization 
above) was to study how rigorous simulation can be used 
to determine upper bounds on the severity and/or damage 
caused by a collision in certain scenarios, taking into account 
the variability in the performance of obstacle sensors and in 
brake actuation. Halmstad’s involvement lead in NG-Test to 
the consideration of formal verification tools (such as rigor-
ous simulation) as part of the possible future tools to enable 
next-generation testing. The project also helped Halmtad’s 
researchers better understanding the computation costs in-
volved in rigorous simulation, as well as the limits on the 
complexity of systems that can be analyzed today using rig-
orous simulation.
In addition to Halmstad University, the project involved sev-
eral partners, including Volvo AB, SP, Volvo Cars, Autoliv, 
VTI, and Chalmers.  From Halmstad, Dr. Philipssen (now at 
Google Technologies), Professor Taha, Professor Larsson, Dr. 
Jawad Massood, and Doctoral student Adam Duracz were 
involved.  The Halmstad team collaborated most closely with 
Henrik Eriksson from SP and Christian Grante from Volvo 
AB. 
 Research Project
Model-based Methods for 
Cyber-Physical Systems
12        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
AUTO-CAAS - Automated Con-
sequence Analysis for Automo-
tive Standards
The Automotive Open System Architecture (AUTOSAR) 
standard is gaining momentum with several automotive man-
ufacturers and there is a growing trend towards new vehicle 
platforms based on the latest versions of this standard. The 
standard enables manufacturers to allow Tier-1 suppliers to 
contract arbitrary Tier-2 software developer for ECUs, as long 
as the developed software conforms to the specified behavior 
according to AUTOSAR. This is in clear contrast to earlier 
situation, in which a preferred Tier-2 developer was appoint-
ed to develop software for all Tier-1 hardware suppliers. This 
paradigm shift brings about economical and financial benefits 
(both for suppliers and manufacturers). However, it also in-
troduces certain risks and challenges.
The AUTOSAR standard is complex and does leave room for 
interpretation and optimizations. In order to be competitive, 
Tier-2 developers strive after implementing several optimiza-
tions and utilizing room for interpretation of the standard to 
make their product out-perform the competition.
The goal of this project is to exploit the technology of mod-
el-based testing in order to detect deviations from the AU-
TOSAR standard and furthermore trace the consequences of 
such deviations into visible deviating behavior (failures). To 
this end, we will use and enhance the model-based testing 
framework developed at QuviQ to detect deviations from the 
AUTOSAR standard. This framework is, for example, used 
by SP (Technical Research Institute of Sweden) to certify soft-
ware delivered to Volvo Car Corporation. As noted before, 
one of the major obstacles in using the current model-based 
framework is the different interpretations of the standard. 
Unless the consequences of these interpretations are proper-
ly analyzed, such variations are justified by the developers. 
This poses a major challenge for the widespread application of 
the standard as a model for certifying components, modules, 
ECUs and vehicle functions.
Members: 
Thomas Arts, Co-Founder and CTO of QuviQ AB
John Hughes, Co-Founder and CEO of QuviQ AB, Pro-
fessor at Chalmers University of Technology
Wojciech Mostowski, Assistant Professor, AUTO-CAAS 
Project
Mohammad Mousavi, Group Leader, Principal Investiga-
tor for AUTO-CAAS Project
Michael Svenstam, ArcCore AB
Partners:
ArcCore AB
QuviQ AB
Halmstad University 
Funding:
Knowledge Foundation
 Research Project
Model-based Methods for 
Cyber-Physical Systems
          13
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
EFFEMBAC - Effective Mod-
el-Based Testing of Concurrent 
Systems
A promising solution to testing issues lies in automated Mod-
el-Based Testing processes. A major obstacle in widespread 
application of Model-Based Testing is the lack of abstract yet 
accurate models in industrial practise. Therefore, we would 
like to use domain-specific languages to create an abstract sys-
tem model and augment this model with information from 
the implementation to steer the test-case selection and gener-
ation algorithms.
The general objectives of our research goals include:
• Integrating domain-specific models into a Model-Based 
Testing process.
• Augmenting domain-specific models with structural in-
formation.
• Devising mechanised test-selection criteria.
• Enabling compositional testing.
• Defining practically sensible notion for test-adequacy.
• Devising concrete design for testability guidelines.
Members: 
Sebastian Kunze, Ph.D. Student
Mohammad Reza Mousavi, Principal Investigator
Masoumeh Taromi Rad, Postdoctoral Researcher
Partners:
University of Illinois, USA
Reykjavik University, Iceland
Radouboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Embedded Systems by TNO, The Netherlands
Halmstad University 
Funding and duration:
A 5-year project funded by the Swedish Research Council
 Research Project
Model-based Methods for 
Cyber-Physical Systems
14        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Towards a Parallel Future 
The embedded computing future is parallel. In the devices and infrastructure around us, be it for communication, 
transport, health, security, manufacturing or entertainment, 
high performance computers for signal processing do a criti-
cal job – often with very low power budgets. Increased paral-
lelism is the only way ahead for providing significant perfor-
mance improvement while keeping the energy use and heat 
dissipation under control. Manycore processor architectures 
offer scalable parallelism and the performance needed for 
implementation of the required functionality. However, the 
increasing programming complexity of such highly parallel 
devices is a challenge. Industry need to take a jump in terms 
of re-targeting from existing software development solutions 
to solutions compatible with evolving manycore platforms, 
i.e., not just one parallel platform but a sequence of ever more 
parallel architectures. In the world after the jump-to-paral-
lelism, software portability, program correctness and pro-
grammer productivity demand that programs are written in 
a high-level language capable of expressing application-level 
parallelism, while abstracting away platform dependent phys-
ical parallelism.  
A number of projects within the CERES sub-area Embedded 
Parallel Computing have been set up to address these chal-
lenges.
Two projects, which finished already in 2013, laid the foun-
dation for our research in this area:
The Knowledge Foundation funded project Jump to Many-
core Platforms (JUMP) (2012-2013) identified future chal-
lenges in advanced signal processing systems. The research 
analysed how these challenges match with future hardware 
development and which programming methods and tools 
need to be developed to bridge the gap to the expected future. 
The project Smart Embedded Multicore Systems (SME-
CY) (2010-2013) engaged Halmstad University and 28 other 
academic and industrial partners from nine European coun-
tries as part of the European strategic research programme 
ARTEMIS. The project developed multi-core technologies in 
the form of new parallel architectures and, in particular, as-
sociated supporting tools in order to master complete system 
design.   
Senior staff members: 
Tomas Nordström, Prof.
Bertil Svensson, Prof.
Verónica Gaspes, Associate Prof.
Amin Farjudian, Assistant Prof.
Zain Ul-Abdin, Assistant Prof.
Junior staff members: 
Erik Hertz, PhD Student
Essayas Gebrewahid, PhD Student
Sebastian Raase, PhD Student
Süleyman Savaş, PhD Student
          15
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
High Performance Embedded 
Computing  (HiPEC)
The project High Performance Embedded Computing 
(HiPEC) (local project leader, Verónica Gaspes) is funded 
by the Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF) and is run 
jointly with the two ELLIIT partners Lund University and 
Linköping University during 2011-2016. The project ad-
dresses reconfigurable array processor architectures as well as 
software tools for their programming. Two massively paral-
lel execution platforms with powerful computing nodes and 
hierarchical interconnection structures suitable for streaming 
applications are developed and studied. The software develop-
ment approach is based on using the CAL actor language for 
application programming as well as the development and use 
of tools for timing and energy analysis at early design stages. 
Combining both hardware and software experts in the same 
project provides a strong basis for covering the whole spec-
trum of this new technology. The group from CERES works 
on developing the code generation parts of the tool-chain, 
starting from the CAL actor machine intermediate represen-
tation and creating backends for the developed architectures 
but also for commercial architectures. The work usually ends 
up generating code that the native tools of the target architec-
tures can handle; in general this is C code for each individual 
core and using special libraries for communication and coor-
dination of the cores. Working with intermediate represen-
tations on several levels is one way to increase portability of 
the tools.  
Streaming Applications on 
Embedded High-Performance 
Commercial Platforms (STAMP)
The project Streaming Applications on Embedded High-Per-
formance Commercial Platforms (STAMP) (local project 
leader, Zain Ul-Abdin), 2013-2014 is an ELLIIT-sponsored 
project in collaboration with the Computer Science depart-
ment at Lund and can be seen as a spinoff of the HiPEC 
project. While the HiPEC project has a focus on the design 
of new hardware architectures and efficient mapping of appli-
cations on these, STAMP has a focus on the efficient use of 
architectures that are emerging on the commercial market at 
an increasing pace. The STAMP project aims to complete the 
design flow for compiling and executing CAL applications 
targeting selected emerging commercial architectures, thus 
leveraging the tool-chain developed in HiPEC. Currently we 
have developed backends for Adapteva’s Epiphany and Am-
bric manycore architectures.  
Embedded Streaming Com-
putations on Heterogeneous 
Energy-efficient aRchitectures 
(ESCHER)
The project Embedded Streaming Computations on Hetero-
geneous Energy-efficient aRchitectures (ESCHER) (project 
leader, Tomas Nordström), 2014-2016, is a Knowledge Foun-
dation funded project run in collaboration with the compa-
nies SAAB, Xcube, ImaComp, and Adarate. It aims to develop 
a tool framework that can support programmer productivity 
and program portability for streaming applications running 
on heterogeneous manycore architectures while maintaining 
state-of-the-art performance and power efficiency. The design 
and implementation of such a framework needs a coordinated 
effort to co-develop both the hardware architectures and the 
application development environment. With regard to hard-
ware, the focus is on how parallel heterogeneous architectures 
should be organized, designed and evaluated, as well as how 
they should interface with the application development tools 
and frameworks. The software aspect will focus on how to 
develop real-time streaming applications at a high level of ab-
straction, develop a single application source that can target 
a multitude of heterogeneous architectures, utilize domain 
knowledge to better target a diverse set of architectures, and 
support an efficient design process taking into account re-
source efficiency and real-time aspects.
 Research Projects
Parallel Architecture 
16        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
This research group has contributed extensively to the communication area, especially real-time commu-
nication. Our main research areas are on communication 
methods and protocols, channel coding and diversity, timing 
analysis as well as network architectures for communication 
within and between embedded systems, utilizing either wired 
or wireless communication. We have been contributing to wi-
reless industrial real-time communication already in the late 
90s. We founded the concept of deadline-dependent coding, 
and later a framework for reliable real-time communication, 
later adapted for, e.g. multi-channel networks using IEEE 
802.15.4. Within the field of wireless communication for 
cooperative traffic safety applications, we have contributed 
with results on both centralized and decentralized solutions 
improving the real-time performance compared to standard 
IEEE 802.11p. The group is performing research on how to 
support hard real-time traffic over switched Ethernet – since 
early 2000, with the first publications in 2002.
ACDC ”Autonomous Coopera-
tive Driving: Communication 
Issues” (2014-2016)
Vehicular communication using wireless technology is a cor-
nerstone in the design of many important cooperative safety 
or convenience services offered in today’s vehicles, as e.g. lane 
change assistance or blind spot warnings. A growing appli-
cation is vehicle platooning, where a caravan of vehicles on 
the highway can automatically follow a leading vehicle (con-
trolled by a human driver). The next step in the evolution of 
this application area is fully autonomous driving, which is 
considered as a strategically important development direction 
by numerous leading car and truck manufacturers. Although 
the introduction of fully autonomous vehicles into ordinary 
city environments still lies far ahead, the automatic opera-
tion of vehicles in restricted areas, as e.g. in harbours, storage 
facilities, or mines, is feasible to some extend already today. 
However, cooperation between vehicles using wireless com-
munication can enhance the possibilities to a great extent. 
Autonomous cooperative driving enabled by intervehicle 
communication has highly demanding operating conditions 
and generates delay-sensitive data traffic with requirements 
on high reliability regarding correct data delivery. Achieving 
this high data reliability within a given time frame is particu-
larly difficult in vehicular networks due to the highly dynamic 
radio environment encountered by the communicating cars 
or trucks. There are two main application scenarios under in-
vestigation: platooning (road trains) and fully autonomous 
driving in restricted area like a construction site, a harbor, 
or a mine. Two main research questions are considered: how 
can wireless communication enable/enhance autonomous co-
operative driving and what application requirements on the 
communication will there exist in such applications? How 
can we design and configure communication protocols and 
methods to fulfill the requirements on dependable wireless 
real-time communications?
Real-time Communication
We have been contributing to 
wireless industrial real-time 
communication already in the 
late 90s.
Senior Members
Annette Bohm, post doctoral researcher
Magnus Jonsson, professor
Kristina Kunert, assistant professor
Tony Larsson, professor
Alexey Vinel, professor
Junior members
Le-Nam Hoang, Ph.D. student 
Marcus Larsson, Ph.D. student 
Nikita Lyamin, Ph.D. student
Hawar Ramazanali, Ph.D. student
Benjamin Vedder, Ph.D. student
Partners:
Volvo GTT, Volvo Cars, Scania, Kapsch TrafficCom, Qa-
mcom
          17
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Platooning: Safe and Efficient 
Integration into the C-ITS Envi-
ronment 
Due to its expected environmental and economic benefits, 
platooning of trucks is a C-ITS (Cooperative Intelligent 
Transport Systems) application of particular interest. A pla-
toon is led by a dedicated vehicle operated by a driver, while 
other platoon vehicles follow the leading vehicle at inter-ve-
hicle gaps of merely a few meters, significantly reducing the 
fuel consumption. Platooning is considered to be the first vi-
able step towards fully automated driving on our roads and 
is therefore the focus of various research projects involving 
major car and truck manufacturers. The published and ongo-
ing work on platooning often treats the platoon as an isolated 
entity, focusing on intra-platoon communication require-
ments, while a platoon’s interaction with surrounding traffic 
participants and its effect on and integration into other types 
of C-ITS applications is not considered. The aim of this proj-
ect is therefore to investigate the challenges and communica-
tion needs of a safe and efficient integration of the platoon 
into a broader C-ITS context. With an implementation of 
platooning on our highways just around the corner and oth-
er C-ITS safety applications to follow in the near future, an 
investigation of these issues is of very high interest to vehicle 
manufacturers. 
Platooning. Illustration from Volvo Car Group.
DEWI
The EU project “DEWI-Dependable Embedded Wireless In-
frastructure” with 58 partners from 11 countries deals with 
the development of wireless sensor networks and applica-
tions. It is part of the EU joint undertaking program ECSEL. 
DEWI deals with more than 20 industry driven application 
cases for citizens and professional users. The worked out re-
sults shall in conclusion be introduced to the public in all of 
Europe by using clear practical demonstrations in the areas 
of aeronautics, automobile, railroad and building automa-
tion. Furthermore DEWI provides essential contributions to 
interoperability, standardization and certification of wireless 
sensor networks and wireless communication.
DEWI consists of 58 partners from 11 countries
 Research Projects
Real-time Communication
Partner:
Volvo GTT
18        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Internet of Things
The integration of “intelligence” in ordinary things gives a substantial added value and a competitive advantage 
that represents an important opportunity for a renewal of tra-
ditional Swedish Industry and a possible increase of its global 
competiveness.  The pervasive computing vision, first stated 
by mark Weiser, in which smart objects form an Internet 
of things (IoT), creates an emerging market with a poten-
tial growth that is enormous; Ericsson is predicting 50 bil-
lion connected devices in year 2020 and further on CISCO 
is expecting 200 billion devices in year 2025. The expected 
market value is predicted by McKinsey to be more than 10 
trillion U.S. dollar before 2025, this technology evolution 
can be the bandwagon that will bring Sweden’s industry into 
next generation of industrialism. However, the introduction 
of integrated electronics in traditional products requires a 
large transformation of competence, and completely new ar-
eas of knowledge must be integrated in organizations. The 
ongoing IoT revolution is transforming Internet into a senso-
ry system (sensors for types of physical variables, temperature, 
pressure, vibration, light, moisture, stress). It evolves Inter-
net from operating as purely cyber-systems to cyber physi-
cal systems (CPS), i.e. connects the physical domain to the 
cyber domain. The pervasiveness of embedded systems, smart 
objects and IoT introduce a number of challenges, for ex-
ample: electromagnetic interference (EMI)/electromagnetic 
compatibility (EMC)/radio resource allocation/assignment, 
electronic building practice/integration/system packaging for 
next generation embedded systems, low power electronic de-
sign, network/device management and security. To realize the 
full potential of IoT, multidisciplinary application-oriented 
research is needed, and the 
research areas within Halm-
stad University embody a 
major part of necessary IoT 
enabling technologies. The 
IoT research theme at Halm-
stad University includes: de-
sign, modelling, simulation, 
fabrication, characterization 
and verification of novel 
low-cost, highly integrated, 
low-power computing and 
communicating devices, sen-
sors and circuits for IoT.  In the ongoing project “Electro-
magnetic Compatibility for Next Generation (EMC NG) of 
Embedded Devices”, the focus is to conduct a comprehen-
sive assessment, from an EMC perspective, of using addi-
tive manufacturing for integration of embedded electronics. 
Electromagnetic properties of the materials used in additive 
manufacturing are investigated and performed in the context 
of issues such as: applicable additive production methods and 
their spatial resolution, mechanical stability, and aging prop-
erties of materials. Secondary goals are: develop or improve 
laboratory measurement methods that more accurately reflect 
new requirements related to the pervasive computing vision; 
and develop best practice and recommendations for imple-
menting these techniques into new EMC test standards. In 
a proposed sister project, “Computational models for im-
proved EMC design - eMC Hammer”, the power of numeri-
cal computation in product development will be investigated. 
The focus is on numerical electromagnetic modelling meth-
ods for component model-based design and the use of these 
models for EMC troubleshooting. The goals are to develop 
models for individual components that are easily integrated 
and parameterized to system models, enable EMC modelling 
of electronic systems at early design stage and to identify the 
cause of EMC problems. This gives an opportunity to signifi-
cantly speed up the design cycle for embedded systems and 
thereby reduce costs and increase competitiveness of Swedish 
industry. The long term goal of the IoT theme within CERES 
is to conduct high level research in coproduction with indus-
try so that Sweden continues to be a world leading nation in 
next generation of industrialism. 
However, the introduction of 
integrated electronics in tra-
ditional products requires a 
large transformation of com-
petence, and completely new 
areas of knowledge must be 
integrated in organizations. Internet of Things might requi-
re circuits downscaled in many 
aspects. NB the transmitter the toy 
lady keeps in her hand. 
          19
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Electronics Centre in Halmstad
The new facilities of Electronics Centre in Halmstad (ECH) are now operational and were inaugurated the 
11th of September, at the yearly “Research for Innovation 
Conference” at Halmstad University. ECH is an arena for re-
gional cooperation in the field of electronics, where regional 
small and medium-sized companies with common techno-
logical challenges are forming a regional knowledge/resource 
cluster in collaboration with the University and the public 
sector in the region. 
The new facilities include resources such as advanced elec-
tronics labs for HF and RF measurements, and especially a 
new EMC testing facility with a 3 meter test range. The new 
EMC test facilities will give the local electronics industry an 
opportunity to speed up their development cycles, develop-
ment team can get access to the EMC/radio test range for 
fast evaluation of their designs and get EMC/ R&TTE com-
pliance feedback at early design stages. This new facility will 
also strengthen CERES in the area of embedded electronics, 
and complement previous orientation towards dependable 
systems, test and verification. 
The ongoing digital revolution requires that traditional indus-
try add intelligence to their products. This transformation of 
traditional industry elevates the technical design challenges 
and requires that new knowledge and skills are added to old 
organisations. ECH’s goal is to be an excellence/resource cen-
tre for the regional industry especially focusing on applied 
research, innovation and knowledge-building in the field of 
integration, compliance and design of electronics. Our belief 
is that ECH can be an important actor to strengthen the re-
gional industry and strong incitement for new industries to 
settle down in the region.
Standards
Some of the measuring standards possible to test accord-
ing to at the new 3 meter test range at ECH.
EN 61000-4-2 ESD +/-16kV
EN 61000-4-3  RF 80MHz-2.0GHz 10V/m, 
2.0GHz-2.7GHz 3V/m 
EN 61000-4-4 Burst max +/-4kV
EN 61000-4-5 Surge max +/-3kV
EN 61000-4-6 RF 150kHz-80MHz max 10Vrms
EN 61000-4-11 Dips
EN 55011 30MHz-6GHz 
EN 55022 30MHz-6GHz
EN 55016-2-3 30MHz-6GHz
          
This new facility will also 
strengthen CERES in the area 
of embedded electronics, and 
complement previous orien-
tation towards dependable 
systems, test and verification. 
Urban Bilstrup
Urban Bilstrup, ECH project manager
20        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Research Collaboration
ELLIIT - Strategic Research for 
Sweden
CERES position as a leading actor in embedded systems 
research has attracted cooperation on the national level in 
the so called ELLIIT consortium. In addition to Halmstad 
University, the universities in Linköping and Lund, as well 
as Blekinge Institute of Technology are members of this con-
sortium. After a careful international scientific evaluation of 
competing proposals from Swedish universities, the initiative 
of these four universities was selected by the Swedish Govern-
ment (in 2009) to achieve long-term extra funding of research 
that is considered to be of particular strategic importance to 
Sweden. Within the area of information and communication 
technology (ICT), two such long-term grants were given - the 
other was given to the Royal Institute (KTH).
Since 2010 CERES has therefore performed joint, strategic 
research projects together with the other ELLIIT partners. 
The collaboration has also led to winning other research 
grants, such as the grant for the HiPEC project from SSF. 
The ELLIIT funding has also enabled and co-funded the re-
cruitment of two new professors at CERES: Walid Taha in 
Computer Science, and Mohammad Mousavi in Computer 
Systems Engineering.
To Halmstad University it is strategically important that 
CERES continues to develop additional strength in order to 
qualify for maintaining this role in the national investment in 
information and communication technology.
International collaboration - 
University of Erlangen
CERES has been collaborating with Prof. Dietmar Fey (Chair 
of Computer Architecture) at the Friedrich-Alexander Uni-
versity of Erlangen-Nurnberg (FAU).  One of our former 
MS thesis students, Konrad Haublein, is now carrying on his 
PhD studies at FAU under Prof. Fey supervision. In addition, 
our collaboration with Prof. Fey’s group involves developing 
the compilation support for actor languages to heterogeneous 
platforms using LLVM. The said support is being developed 
as an extension to our in-house CAL compiler framework and 
we will be using image-processing applications as experimen-
tal case studies.
International collaboration – 
Eindhoven University of Tech-
nology
CERES maintains a stable collaboration with Eindhoven 
University of Technology, particularly with the Embedded 
Systems research group of prof.dr.ir Jan Friso Groote. This 
collaboration is mainly in the area of testing and verifica-
tion of embedded systems and has, among others, led to a 
joint Ph.D. graduate and a textbook entitled “Modeling and 
Analysis of Concurrent Systems” published in this area by the 
MIT press in 2014.
The Japanese Connection
Starting with a visit to Halmstad University in Spring of 
2014, Professor Taha’s group has been in regular contact with 
two groups in Japan working on modeling languages for hy-
brid systems: Professor Ueda from Waseda University, and 
Dr. Daisuke Ishii from the Tokyo Institute of Technology. 
Professor Waseda was a key participant in Japan’s influential 
Fifth Generation Languages program, and is the principal de-
signer of the HydLa hybrid systems modeling language.  Dr. 
Ishii is a leader in the emerging area of reachability analysis 
for hybrid systems. Partly because there is only a small num-
ber of programming researchers around the world who are 
also interested in hybrid systems, there was an instant con-
nection between the Swedish and Japanese groups. Since the 
first visit, the two have met via skype approximately once a 
month, and the colleagues from Japan visited once again in 
Spring 2015. Most recently, the two groups are working to-
gether to organize Shonan meeting on the topic of “Validated 
Numerics Meets Reachability Analysis for CPS”, which will 
take place at the Shonan Village Center from September 28th 
to October 1st.
          21
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Health Technology -   
Collaboration with CAISR
The elderly population is growing, living longer and suscep-
tible to age-related diseases and problems. As a consequence, 
demand for health and social care will increase dramatically in 
the years to come. However, as they current stand, healthcare 
systems are not prepared to address such a challenge because 
there are not enough facilities and professionals specialized in 
geriatric care. Information and communication technologies 
therefore play an important role in bridging the gap between 
future healthcare demands and available healthcare resources. 
Researchers and students at CERES and CAISR (Center 
for Applied Intelligent Systems Research) are continuous-
ly collaborating in projects that aim at improving the com-
fort, independence and continuous care of older individuals 
living alone, as well as enhancing and complementing the 
services of those delivering care. For example, a joint project 
between CERES and CAISR explored the questions of how 
active in-database processing could support the development 
of services to support night-time caregiving and how active 
in-database processing could improve the security of collected 
sensor data. Another joint project investigated the integration 
of an autonomous robot into a database-centric architecture 
supporting ambient intelligent (AmI). The project also explo-
red how ambient intelligence and the robot could comple-
ment one another to support ambient assisted living appli-
cation, such as using the AmI to detect anomalies and the 
robot as a first-aid agent. The collaboration between CERES 
and CAISR also involved the development of a portable smart 
home demonstrator that aims at assisting researchers and de-
velopers to foresee issues before full-scale experiments are per-
formed. All three joint projects make use of a database-centric 
system architecture developed at CERES. In the architecture, 
a modern database management system functions as platform 
for smart home environments and AAL applications.
Above: Wagner Ourique de Morais 
working with the interface for The 
Intelligent Bed, a demonstrator used 
for development of services for elderly 
people.
To the left:  System architecture for 
a database management system that 
can work together with smart home 
environments and AAL applications
22        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Coproduction with Industry
Saab is a world leader in the design of advanced radar systems. 
Saab is a leading provider of sensor systems encompassing 
advanced airborne, ground-based and naval radar, as well as 
an extensive range of services. With more than 50 years of 
experience in sensor development and more than 3000 sen-
sors delivered worldwide, Saab is today a world-leading com-
petence-centre for microwave and antenna technology. Saab 
has an established relationship to Halmstad University dating 
back to the early 1990-s, and over the years the cooperation 
has broadened and deepened. The cooperation with the re-
searchers at Halmstad University in different joint projects 
has been summarized in Figure 1. Saab has benefited from the 
cooperation with the researchers in early-stage design-space 
exploration of technology choices to evaluate their possible 
impact on future products and services. Halmstad University 
is also seen as a resource for dialogue, for active learning and 
for knowledge sharing related to ongoing research also in are-
as in which Saab is not actively involved. This has the poten-
tial to lead to new avenues of cooperation in future research. 
Saab also acknowledges the advantage of 
such a cooperation to identify the gaps in skills of its existing 
environment, such as the understanding of new models of 
computation that can be the basis of future software tools, 
and to bridge this knowledge gap in time. Doctoral and Mas-
ter students working in the projects have also been a source 
of qualified human resources for the company. In particular, 
the opportunity to hire people with a PhD degree in an area 
perfectly matching the need of Saab is seen as an advantage.
In the words of Per M Ericsson (Senior Specialist):
 “CERES is a way for us to get new influences from the re-
search community, but also to strengthen the competence 
of our engineering personnel by actual participation in the 
research projects. We appreciate the long-term focus in the 
research. Yet we have already got results that can be used, and 
partly have influenced our roadmaps and designs.”
http://www.saabgroup.com/
Figure 5. Projects landscape corresponding to various phases.
Saab AB
          23
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden is the national 
institute for research, testing, certification, metrology and 
calibration and is working closely with large and small com-
panies, universities, institutes and other organizations. Inter-
national research and cooperation plays an important role. 
SP´s mission is to contribute to growth and competitiveness 
of industry as well as to safety, conservation of resources and 
a good environment in society. SP does this through applied 
research and a wide range of services in technical evaluation 
and metrology. With a staff of 1400, SP is one of Sweden’s 
largest research institutes. The main customers are industry, 
research councils, the European commission and the Swed-
ish state. SP performs certification of products and quality 
control systems.   SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden 
was one of the partners when the Centre for Research on Em-
bedded Systems (CERES) was started at Halmstad in 2005. 
SP participated in several projects during the six-year “profile 
funding” by KK-Stiftelsen and has continued the cooperation 
with Halmstad Högskola (HH) within the CERES+ initiative 
which started 2011. HH and SP are both members of SAF-
ER, the Vehicle and Traffic Safety Centre hosted by Chalmers, 
and of the Competence and Innovation Node for Automo-
tive Electronics (Vehicle ICT Arena) hosted by Lindholmen 
Science Park. Common research interests include V2x com-
munication and dependable networked systems.  SPs PhD 
student Benjamin Vedder is enrolled at the EISIGS research 
school with Magnus Jonsson (HH) as main supervisor and 
Jonny Vinter (SP) as assistant supervisor. This collaboration 
has been very fruitful and has, during the last two years, re-
sulted in three publications and a licentiate degree for Benja-
min. SP (Jan Jacobson) is also engaged in EISIGS by acting 
as leader for the reference group. SP is looking forward to a 
long-term collaboration with HH and the EISIGS research 
school and plan to employ a new PhD student for the second 
batch of EISIGS students.
http://www.sp.se/
A car used in the SAFER project, in which both SP and Halmstad University are members.
SP Technical Research Institute
24        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
The Volvo Group is one of the world’s leading manufactur-
ers of trucks, buses, construction equipment and marine and 
industrial engines. The main assignment of Advanced Tech-
nology & Research, part of the Volvo Group division Group 
Trucks Technology (GTT), is to drive research, development 
and advanced engineering for the long term competitiveness 
of the Volvo Group products and services, but includes also 
innovation, business engineering, and corporate services.
For almost a decade, Volvo Group Advanced Technolo-
gy & Research has participated in several research projects 
and programs hosted and driven by Halmstad University. It 
is a fruitful collaboration where the Volvo Group Advanced 
Technology & Research has gained new insights in especially 
what wireless real-time communication can facilitate for the 
vehicular environment. Currently, we are part of the Autono-
mous Cooperative Driving Enabled by Dependable Wireless 
Real-Time Communication (ACDC) project, which focuses 
much on road trains (a.k.a. platooning) where wireless com-
munication is the enabler for reducing the distance between 
vehicles. Wireless communication between vehicles enables 
new applications contributing to a better road traffic safety 
and efficiency.
http://www.volvogroup.com/
Skidpan driving in Halmstad. The test was a part of a student project conducted by exchange students from the Netherlands within the EU 
exchange program ERASMUS.
Volvo Group Advanced  Technology & Research
Equipment for data collection during skidpan driving
          25
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Adapteva
Adapteva Inc has been at the forefront of introducing the 
Epiphany manycore processor, which is a supremely scalable 
shared memory architecture featuring up to 4096 processors 
on a single chip interconnected with a high-bandwidth on-
chip network. Each node in the chip contains a fully func-
tional floating-point unit. Adapteva and CERES have been 
collaborating since the launch of the first product based on 
the Epiphany architecture, a tiny 16-core 32 GFLOPS chip
(E16G301) implemented in 65nm. CERES researchers have 
been actively involved in developing high-level programming 
support for the Epiphany architecture. In this regard, we 
have implemented a backend code generator in our in-house 
CAL tool-chain for CAL dataflow language compilation tar-
geting the Epiphany architecture. CERES and Adapteva has 
been co-publishing the findings of our research in top-tiered 
conferences and we are also collaborating in getting research 
funding from international funding agencies.
In the words of Andreas Olofsson, CEO/Founder at Adapt-
eva:
“We have been collaborating with CERES on programming 
the Epiphany since 2010 with great results. It has been a 
pleasure working with Professors Svensson, Nordstrom, and 
Abdin and I look forward to many more years of productive 
research. The Epiphany technology is now available at over 
200 Universities worldwide and CERES has the distinction of 
being Adapteva’s first academic research partner and the most 
prolific publisher of high quality Epiphany related research 
to date.”
Andreas Olofsson giving a talk at Halmstad University
26        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Shared knowledge creates opportunities – “For the future of elec-
tronics in Halmstad”
For the future of electronics in Halmstad” is a collaboration 
between business, academia and research institutes togeth-
er with the municipality, region and industry associations 
Swedish Electronics and Halmstads Electronics Association. 
Together we create resources and develop skills and research 
collaboration that will not only boost the area but also in-
crease interest and knowledge about electronics in general. 
The University is taking a leading role in Future Electronics in 
Halmstad via its long-term investment in Electronics Center 
in Halmstad (ECH).
Four larger meetings have been organized during 2014/2015, 
but also a number of meetings in small groups focused on 
specific areas. It has been about improving education and de-
veloping new courses but also the development of electronics 
center and research projects.
The picture is from a meeting session where students and companies met 
to talk about projects, work place training and future work
Members
Companies: 
3M
AES Nordic AB
Anritsu, Armeka AB
Artektron AB
Celsicom AB
Comfort Audio AB
Etteplan AB
Free2move AB
Getinge Sterilization AB
Gutec AB
Harry Sjögren AB
HMS Industrial Networks AB
J&D Assisting Systems AB
Lansen Systems AB
Mobile Integrator AB
MPQ Consulting AB
Neat Electronics
NIBE Energy Systems
Phoniro Systems AB
Propoint AB
Saab AB
Rohde & Schwarz
Sensor Communications Sweden AB
Structab AB
Swedish Adrenaline AB 
Triacon Scientific AB
Organizations: 
Halmstad University
SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden 
The Swedish Electronics Trade Association 
Halmstads elektronikförening 
Science Park Halmstad AB
Region Halland
Halmstad Municipality 
Halmstads näringslivs AB
Application Areas
Advanced Sensing and 
Communication Systems
Health Technology
Traffic and Transport
e-lab, Enabling Technologies
28        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES, together with CAISR, constitute the research environments that serve as a basis for Halmstad Univer-
sity’s first and second cycle education programs in Computer 
Science and Engineering. The same holds for PhD education 
in the subjects Computer Science and Engineering and Sig-
nals and Systems Engineering.
CERES staff is involved in education at all levels, contribut-
ing with project ideas, theses proposals and supervision as well 
as teaching courses and developing education programmes. 
PhD students are encouraged to co-supervise master theses 
related to their PhD projects.
Second cycle programs
The master’s program on Embedded and Intelligent Systems 
(EIS) is the result of integration of the following two research 
areas:
- Cooperating Embedded Systems, represented by areas such 
as cyber-physical systems, parallel architectures, real-time sys-
tems and wireless communication and
- Applied Intelligent Systems, represented by areas such as sig-
nal processing, artificial intelligence, and data mining.
This integration provides enormous opportunities for com-
bining methods and techniques for inter-disciplinary solu-
tions for Embedded Intelligent Systems.
The program offers courses on the fundamental bodies of 
knowledge underlying the above-mentioned two research 
fields.  It also features a design project, in which the students 
experience the design of a substantial embedded intelligent 
system in teams.  The program is concluded by a final project 
clearly relating to one of the active research areas at CERES 
or CAISR. The program has been running successfully since 
2007.  By now, the EIS Masters has a stable intake of 35 stu-
dents per year, of which 80 percent are international students.
As a measure of quality control and to ensure sustained up-
date and renewal, a group of researchers from CERES and 
CAISR performed a review of the EIS masters program in 
2014. They produced a self assessment containing obser-
vations and suggestions at three levels: program level, track 
level, and course level. In 2015, the self evaluation has been 
presented to involved research centers and the team got the 
task of implementing the suggestions and the received feed-
back into a revised curriculum for the EIS masters program. 
For this purpose, the team studied various similar programs 
at other universities and research institutes, as well as guide-
lines for curricula by groups of researchers and international 
organizations. The result is proposed to take effect in the EIS 
master’s program as of September 2016.
In 2013 Halmstad University was granted the right to award 
the degree Master of Science in Engineering (Civilingenjör in 
Swedish). The first group of 38 students was admitted in the 
fall of 2014. Civilingenjör has been for the last 100 years the 
most prestigious professional degree in engineering in Swe-
den. It is a five-year education, offered at 14 different Swed-
ish universities. At Halmstad University we offer it with the 
technical specialization Computer Science and Engineering. 
This deliberately connects to the strong research and industry 
connections of CERES and CAISR. For the final two years of 
study the programme offers the choice between the two pro-
files cooperating embedded systems and intelligent systems. 
The first of these is given by researchers within CERES.
Research oriented Education
Veronica Gaspes,  Chair of the research and education board
          29
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
To the right: Matilda Bengtsson, Civilin-
genjör student at School of Information 
Technology, Halmstad University
Civilingenjör
Advanced technical work in 
industry needs a solid base in 
mathematics and natural sci-
ences, a technical specialisation 
and also an entrepreneurial and 
socially skilled way of working. 
To achieve this, all the five years 
of a civilingengör education are 
needed. Already in the first se-
mester of the programme at 
Halmstad students are given per-
spectives of computer science and 
engineering with project work 
in groups and industry visits. 
The first three years include 52.5 
credits of mathematics, courses 
in physics, electrical engineering 
and the fundamentals of com-
puter science and engineering. 
They also include an optional 15 
credits course done as work pla-
cement at a company. Most tech-
nical courses are done in a project 
based manner, to train different 
aspects of project work.
  The final two years give a spe-
cialisation in either embedded or 
intelligent systems, or a combina-
tion of the two, with half of the 
credits being optional.
30        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Future developments
The School of Information Technology, host of CERES, is 
currently developing an international Master program in Net-
work Forensics and Computer Security to be started in the 
Fall of 2016. The program is meant to be an extension and 
continuation of the Bachelor program IT Forensics and In-
formation Security already offered by the school. The goal of 
the program is to further strengthen the student’s abilities in 
the area of digital forensics with the emphasis on network se-
curity, large data analysis (data mining), and biometrics. The 
program is meant to be oriented towards the research activi-
ties of CERES and CAISR, in particular on data acquisition 
and processing. More generally, the program is meant to be 
interdisciplinary, crossing the areas of IT, computer security, 
law, and social sciences. The particular courses and subjects 
that are planned to be part of this program include Advanced 
Computer Networks and Security, Cybercrime, and Applied 
Data Mining. 
The school is also developing, in collaboration with industry, 
the final part of a Master of Science in Engineering program 
(Civilingenjör) with the technical specialization Electron-
ics. This is part of CERES involvement with the electronics 
industry in the region that includes the Electronics Centre 
in Halmstad (ECH) and a research project on 3D-printing 
of electronics funded by the Knowledge Foundation (Elec-
tromagnetic Compatibility for Next Generation Embedded 
Devices). Students of this new program will have the oppor-
tunity to develop a thorough knowledge of the design and 
development of new electronics, sensors and materials. They 
will have the opportunity to work in a collaborative environ-
ment together with researchers from CERES and companies 
involved in ECH. Part of the development of the program is 
financed by the KK-foundation as an AVANS project.
International collabora-
tion in education
The master’s programmes at the School of Information Tech-
nology are offered in English and a majority of the students 
are recruited internationally. The international students come 
both from partner universities and as regularly admitted stu-
dents. Agreements with other universities include two which 
have been running for many years: one is a double degree ar-
rangement in Computer Science and Engineering with Fach-
hochschule Salzburg where students spend one year at each 
university and do a master’s thesis which is examined at both 
universities. Another is a mobility scheme within the master’s 
programme in Information Technology where students move 
between Halmstad, Wroclaw University in Poland and Ost-
westfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences in Germany.
In recent years, with the growing importance of several Asian 
countries both in electronic engineering and generally in edu-
cation and world economy, collaboration has focused on that 
region. Study-abroad agreements with several universities 
in China help recruit students from China. Also in China, 
teacher exchange and summer courses for groups from part-
ner universities have started during the last two years. Stu-
dents from the School of Information Technology are now 
going, if still in quite small numbers, to partner universities in 
Japan, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan. Efforts are made 
particularly to increase the number of students and teachers 
going for exchange to the countries mentioned. Besides direct 
education we now also regularly have students from partner 
universities, including those from France, Holland, Turkey, 
who come for internships included in or related to their edu-
cation. They then typically spend three or four months work-
ing in one of our research projects.
PhD education
CERES has been involved in PhD education from its very 
start. During 2013 and 2014 the school of Information Tech-
nology started EISIGS, the Industrial Graduate School in 
Embedded and Intelligent Systems. In the spring of 2014 8 
PhD students were affiliated with the school. A kick-off work-
shop was arranged on March 31 to April 1, 2014, with par-
ticipants from the industrial partners, the university and the 
Knowledge Foundation, which co-funds EISIGS. 
The goal of EISIGS is to provide the right environment for 
producing qualified, independent researchers (PhDs) that un-
derstand, advance, and champion embedded and intelligent 
systems research. We aim to strengthen Swedish industry by 
training doctoral-level researchers that have both technical 
depth and a broad understanding of industrial requirements, 
the innovation process and which innovations that can lead 
to business opportunities. In contrast to traditional graduate 
programs in science and technology, the school will therefore 
place special emphasis on the larger context wherein technical 
expertise is applied to produce commercially successful inno-
vations. In particular, recognizing the importance of a firm’s 
ability to innovate and transform innovation to new business 
opportunities, emphasis on innovation pervades the entire 
          31
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
school’s program. We believe that this emphasis will 
produce a new breed of researchers that can recognize, 
utilize and develop the innovation potential of an in-
dustrial context.
All the PhD students have got started well and are 
productive. A number of international conference 
papers have been submitted and published. We have 
also stated that EISIGS shall lead to new externally 
funded research projects sprung from some of the 
PhD student projects. One such project is approved 
with funding from Vinnova/FFI, which has sprung 
from the collaboration between HH and VTI con-
nected to one of the PhD student projects. Moreover, 
we have already submitted several other applications 
for funding of new research projects.
There are examples of results or effects for the com-
panies already at this point. Regarding the HEM Nät 
PhD student project, we had some effects on HEM’s 
monitoring system. In this case, HEM Nät has started 
working on development of monitoring and control 
of low voltage distribution network according to sug-
gestions from the project. This is based on more effi-
ciently using already existing smart meters, and also 
adding new meters in secondary substations. Regard-
ing the SP PhD student project, a quadracopter sys-
tem has been developed, which has got good demon-
stration visibility in related projects at the company 
and externally.
In the near future, we hope to be able to start another 
batch of PhD students within EISIGS.
To the right: Hassan Nemati, industrial Ph D student at Hem 
Nät in Halmstad, sharing his time beteween Halmstad Uni-
versity and the company. Hassan is a former master student at 
the university.
The master’s programmes 
at the School of Information 
Technology are offered in 
English and a majority of 
the students are recruited 
internationally.
Veronica Gaspes, Chair of the 
research and education board
32        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Competence development
Amin Farjudian,    
Assistant Professor
I obtained my BSc in pure mathematics from Sharif University of Technology in 2000, 
where I wrote my undergraduate dissertation ”Modeling information change using non-
well founded set-theory” under the supervision of Prof. Mohammad Ardeshir. In 2004, I 
obtained my PhD in theoretical computer science under the supervision of Prof. Achim 
Jung, from the University of Birmingham (UK). My PhD thesis was titled ”Sequentiality in 
Real Number Computation”. Since 2004, I have been working as a lecturer and research-
er in computer science and mathematics in Sharif University of Technology (Iran), Aston 
University (UK), and The University of Nottingham Ningbo (China). Though the common 
theme of most of my research has been computable analysis, I have carried out research in a 
number of areas of computer science and mathematics and have published on ordinary and 
partial differential equations, algorithmic randomness, semantics of programming languages 
(mainly Domain Theory), semantics of concurrency, verification of floating point software, 
data mining, set theory, and philosophy of language. Since May 2015, I have started work-
ing in Halmstad University with Prof. Tomas Nordström on the ESCHER project where 
the aim is to design domain specific languages for signal processing on heterogeneous ar-
chitectures.
Alexey Vinel, 
Professor 
I was born in 1983 in Leningrad, Russia. I received the bachelor’s (Hons.) and masters’ 
(Hons.) degrees in information systems from Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace 
Instrumentation,Saint Petersburg, Russia, in 2003 and 2005, respectively. Subsequently, I 
obtained my Ph.D. degrees in technology from the Institute for Information Transmission 
Problems, Moscow, Russia, in 2007, and the Tampere University of Technology (TUT), 
Tampere, Finland, in 2013. Since 2015, I am a professor of data communications at the 
Centre for Research on Embedded Systems at Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden. 
Prior to that, I have been a Researcher at TUT during the period 2010 of 2013 and a guest 
professor at Halmstad University during the period of 2013 to 2015. I have been involved in 
research projects on vehicular networking standards, advanced driver assistance systems, and 
autonomous driving. I have been an associate editor for the IEEE Communications Letters 
since 2012. I am a Senior Member of IEEE.
Dietmar Fey, 
Professor 
Prof. Dietmar Fey from Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen –Nurnberg visited CE-
RES during June 2014 and spent two weeks as part of his sabbaticals. He is the chair of 
computer architecture with research interests spanning from design of parallel computer 
architectures to nano technologies. During his stay he has given a keynote talk at the HiPEC 
project workshop titled “Parallel embedded computing – from multicore to heterogeneous 
architectures using virtualization and future nano technologies”. We have also identified 
some concrete tasks for our research collaboration such as using our CAL compilation tool-
chain for implementing image processing applications on heterogeneous platforms consist-
ing of GPUs and FPGAs. 
          33
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Eugenio Moggi, 
Visiting Professor 
In 1983 I received a MSc in Computer Science from Pisa University (supervisor Prof. Gi-
useppe Longo) and at the same time a Diploma from Scuola Normale Superiore. In 1988 
I received a PhD in Computer Science from Edinburgh University by defending a thesis 
on  “The Partial Lambda-Calculus” (supervisor Prof. Gordon Plotkin). Before moving to 
Genova University in 1990 as Full Professor, I worked as Research Associate in Cambridge 
(with Prof. Martin Hyland and Andrew Pitts), Edinburgh (in the Laboratory for Founda-
tions of Computer Science) and Pisa University.  My most significant research contributions 
are: categorical semantics of polymorphic types, the study of formal systems for partial 
functions, notions of computations as monads, metalanguages for computational monads 
and evaluation logic, categorical semantics of program modules, and type systems and oper-
ational semantics for multi-stage programming languages.
Masoumeh Taromirad, 
Postdoctoral researcher
I have completed my PhD (2015) in the Enterprise Systems Research Group in the Depart-
ment of Computer Science, University of York, UK. My PhD thesis research introduces a 
systematic model-based approach to recover trace links in projects that span multiple en-
gineering domains (such as safety-critical systems). Currently, I am working on a “Unified 
Symbolic Testing Framework”, as part of the Effective Model-Based Testing of Concurrent 
Systems (EFFEMBAC) project. I am also interested in traceability, model-driven engineer-
ing (in particular, model evolution and model transformation), requirements engineering, 
and software development methodologies. Before commencing my PhD, I was involved in 
a project to develop an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system, as a senior programmer 
and senior software designer and architect
Sebastian Kunze, 
Ph.D. Student 
I started a master’s programme in Informatics at Hochschule Darmstadt in Germany and 
finished it at Mälardalens University in Sweden specialising in Software Engineering. With-
in my master’s thesis I focused on automated test case generation for Function Block Dia-
grams using Java Path Finder and symbolic execution. At Halmstad University I am work-
ing on the Effective Model-Based Testing on Concurrent System project.
Wojciech Mostowski, 
Assistant Professor
I have started my position as an assistant professor at Halmstad University in April 2015. 
Previously, I worked in the Netherlands, most recently at the University of Twente. My re-
search interests are generally understood as formal methods, security sensitive smart card ap-
plications, and in embedded systems for automotive applications (until very recently the last 
item being mostly my private hobby). I authored and co-authored over 30 peer-reviewed 
papers and book chapters on the above subjects and participated in numerous national 
and EU funded research projects. Furthermore, I am an experienced university teacher, 
and have recently received the official Dutch University Teaching Qualifications certificate 
from the University of Twente.  During my appointment at CERES, I am going to work 
on the Knowledge Foundation project AUTO-CAAS, which is concerned with applying 
and extending model-based testing techniques in the context of the automotive standard 
AUTOSAR.
34        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
In 2007 I started studying at Chalmers University of Tech-
nology in the programme Automation and Mechatronics. I 
got my bachelors degree in 2010 and in 2012 I got my mas-
ters degree in the masters programme Communication Engi-
neering at Chalmers. As my masters thesis I made the major 
part in the construction of a miniature autonomous vehicular 
platform with 1:8 scale cars. In 2012 I started working at SP 
Technical Research Institute of Sweden and in 2013 I start-
ed my industrial PhD studies at SP together with Halmstad 
University in the area of computer science and testing. In my 
spare time I spend a lot of time on the construction and pro-
gramming of embedded intelligent systems. I have published 
many hardware and software designs on my personal home-
page. I have also won the Swedish national robot competition 
several times and got second place in one of Europe’s biggest 
competitions for self-made, autonomous and mobile robots.
Presentation PhD Students 
Benjamin Vedder
SP Technical Research Institute of 
Sweden
After receiving my MSc degree in Electrical Engineering from 
Lund University I worked in industry for a few years. My 
research career started with the Swedish Defense Research 
Agency (radar), continued with Ericsson Research (mobile 
phones), and then Cargine (within Koenigsegg) (combustion 
engines). In my spare time when I worked at Cargine I was 
pursuing my PhD on a self-developed methodology for per-
forming approximations of unary functions in digital hard-
ware. The advantages with the methodology are high chip 
area efficiency, very fast computation, very low power con-
sumption, and a favorable error behavior compared to com-
parable methodologies. Possible applications for the method-
ology are applications where high computation rates and high 
resolution are needed, such as signal and image processing, 
robotics and so on. My status today is that I have received 
my Licentiate degree from Lund University and am now at 
Halmstad University to finish my Doctor degree.
Erik Hertz
I have done my BSc in Computer Science and Information 
Technology in Haramay University, Ethiopia. I got my MSc 
in Embedded and Intelligent Systems from Halmstad Uni-
versity. After graduation, I joined CERES as Research En-
gineer. As Research Engineer, I contributed in the ELLIIT 
national research initiative and the SMECY European Arte-
mis project. Currently, I am a Ph.D. student at Halmstad 
University under the supervision of Bertil Svensson, Veronica 
Gaspes and Zain-ul-Abdin. My Ph.D. focus is on developing 
compilation tools for massively parallel, high-performance, 
low-power course-grain reconfigurable platforms. My resear-
ch interests are mainly in compilers, parallel and reconfigu-
rable computer architecture and embedded systems. I have 
defended my licentiate thesis--“Compiling Concurrent Pro-
grams for Manycores”--on March 20, 2015.
Essayas Gebrewahid
I studied Mathematics and Computer Science at Stockholm 
University and obtained my MSc with a thesis on the ”Der-
ivation of Probability Distributions for Risk Assessment”. 
Following my university education I spent four years as a 
consultant at IBM, working on projects involving all aspects 
of software delivery, including development, design and re-
quirements elicitation. I joined CERES and the Effective 
Modeling Group at Halmstad University in 2012, where I am 
developing a rigorous semantics for the Acumen language. 
The work is done under the supervision of Prof. Walid Taha 
and Assoc. Prof. Verónica Gaspes.
Adam Duracz
          35
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Marcus Larsson
Qamcom Research and Technology
After spending five years at Chalmers University of Technol-
ogy at the Automation and Mechatronics program with fo-
cus on mechatronics, I ended up in the automotive industry 
at the Swedish west coast (2008). The coming five years I 
spent developing and implementing embedded software, e.g. 
software for exhaust after treatment control and Human Ma-
chine Interface. In 2013 I joined Qamcom Research & Tech-
nology and Halmstad University and began my PhD studies 
aiming for a PhD in Information Technology with focus on 
communication. My main interest lies within vehicular com-
munication (V2X) and Intelligent Transportation System. 
Currently I am investigating dissemination strategies in V2V 
communications in a platooning scenario in order to increase 
the Packet Success Rate (PSR). With a high PSR in platoon-
ing the vehicles could potentially drive with smaller inter-ve-
hicle distance and hence save more fuel.
I received my BSc in Electronics and Telecommunications at 
Hanoi University of Technology, Vietnam and my M.Sc in 
Electrical Engineering, with specialization on Radio Com-
munications, at Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden. 
Before being a PhD at Halmstad University, I worked at the 
Research Centre of Vietnamese Post and Telecommunica-
tions Institute of Technology. Currently, under the supervi-
sion of Assoc. Prof. Elisabeth Uhlemann and Prof. Magnus 
Jonsson, my research mainly focuses on applying wireless 
communications for Distributed Control Systems. In June 
2015, I finished my Licentiate degree with the thesis titled 
“Relaying for Timely and Reliable Message Dissemination in 
Wireless Distributed Control Systems”.
Le-Nam Hoang
Mahboobeh Parsapoor has a licentiate degree of information 
technology from Halmstad University where she was a mem-
ber of Center for Research on Embedded Systems (CERES). 
She has started a project named “iEiAi”, integrating Emo-
tions in Artificial intelligence since 2007. 
In this project, she has worked on different aspects of emo-
tions and emotional systems to develop prediction models, 
intelligent controller, decision making, system identification, 
and optimization. She has successfully developed brain emo-
tional learning inspired models (BELIMs), inspired models 
from emotional systems. Furthermore, she has introduced 
ELIE, Emotional Learning Inspired Engine that can be uti-
lized as a learning engine in an autonomous system. 
She is interested in conducting research on various topics 
include computational intelligence, nonlinear system identi-
fication, prediction, radio and wireless communication, neu-
roscience, and cognitive science.  She is a member of IEEE, 
INNS, and AAAC. She is a member of technical program 
committee of several conferences such as IJCNN. She is in 
the reviewer panel of some ISI journals, IEEE communica-
tion letter and Neural Networks Journal, IEEE Transaction 
on Neural Network and Machine Learning and so forth.
Mahboobeh Parsapoor
I received my MSc degree in Computer Engineering from 
University of Tehran. As my MSc thesis, I worked on proba-
bilistic model checking of actor systems, which is still one of 
the major research topics that I am interested in. I joined the 
Ph.D. program in CERES at Halmstad University in 2014. 
Currently, I am working on model-based testing of software 
product lines under supervision of Prof. Mohammad Reza 
Mousavi and Prof. Gerardo Schneider.  In my research, I am 
considering the adaption of conventional testing techniques, 
aiming for testing software product lines more efficiently.
Mahsa Varshosaz
Presentation PhD Students 
36        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
I received my BSc in Information and Micro System Tech-
nology from Magdeburg University, Germany in 2012. Fol-
lowing that, I studied Embedded and Intelligent Systems at 
Halmstad University. In 2015, I received my MSc after de-
fending my master thesis, which was about fluid simulation 
on the Epiphany manycore architecture. Afterwards, instead 
of working in the industry, I started in Halmstad as a PhD 
student under the supervision of Tomas Nordström and 
Zain-ul-Abdin, where I continue to work with the Epiphany 
system. Currently, I do research on virtual machine abstrac-
tions suitable for heterogeneous manycore architectures.
Sebastian Raase
Presentation PhD Students 
Nikita Lyamin
I received BS’11 and MSc’13 (both with honors) in telecom-
munications from Siberian State University of Telecommuni-
cations and Information Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia. I have 
started my research activity in Novosibirsk being a bachelor 
student. That time I was focused on various domains of tele-
communications. In 2013 I had two research visits at Halms-
tad University in scope of COST WiNeMO Action IC0906. 
During these visits I was working on the development of the 
real-time DoS attacks detection method for VANETs.
Starting from the beginning of 2014 I was a research engineer 
at CC-lab at CERES for 6 month. In August 2014 I was 
enrolled as a PhD student under supervision of prof. Vinel 
and prof. Jonsson within the same department. My current 
research focuses on a vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs). 
In particular, I’m interested in performance evaluation of 
various VANETs mechanisms and security issues in certain 
VANETs applications.
My interest in computers started with games. I got my bache-
lor degrees from Halmstad University and Karadeniz Techni-
cal University (Turkey) in Computer Science and Computer 
Engineering respectively (2008 and 2009). Later, in 2011, I 
got my masters degree on Embedded and Intelligent Systems 
in Halmstad University.
After getting the master’s degree I first worked three months 
as a research engineer in the university and then, for two years 
in the industry, mostly with embedded systems using blue-
tooth communication. Then I got the opportunity to start 
PhD studies in my interest area which is parallel computer 
architectures. The focus of my research is heterogeneous par-
allel architectures. I am interested in artificial intelligence and 
information security as well. And if I can find time I still play 
computer games.
Süleyman Savas
I received the B.Eng. degree in Electrical Engineering from 
Kasetsart University, Thailand in 2010. After that, I worked 
as a hardware engineer in a company in Thailand for about 
one year. In 2011, I started the MSc program in Embedded 
and Intelligent Systems at Halmstad University. After finish-
ing the master’s degree, I joined the Embedded and Intelligent 
Systems Industrial Graduate School (EISIGS) in December 
2013, working in a project called ”Vehicle ICT Innovation 
Methodology” together with The Swedish National Road and 
Transport Research Institute (VTI). My research interests are 
in simulation, verification and testing of cooperative intelli-
gent transport systems (C-ITS).
Maytheewat Aramrattana
The Swedish National Road and 
Transport Research Institute (VTI)
          37
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
I received my BSc. in Computer Science from Federal Uni-
versity of Santa Maria, Brazil in 2002 and my MSc. degree 
in Information and Communication Sciences and Technol-
ogies from University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, France in 
2005. I joined CERES as Ph.D. student in 2007. From 2009 
to 2012 I worked as research engineer at Centre for Health 
Technology Halland (HCH, www.hh.se/hch) at Halmstad 
University and my work involved the development of serious 
games, measurement systems and smart home demonstrators, 
in particular for healthcare applications. My research focuses 
on software architectures for smart home environments and 
ambient assisted living systems and I’m defending my Ph.D. 
thesis in September 2015.
Wagner De Morais
Presentation PhD Students 
38        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
The mammalian brain can be used as an inspiration to deve-
lop a new computational intelligence.  This thesis introduces 
one model that is based on the neural structure of fear con-
ditioning and the previous proposed amygdala-orbitofrontal 
model. The proposed model can be seen as a framework for 
developing computational intelligence based on the emotio-
nal system instead of traditional CI models. The suggested 
model can be referred to as the brain emotional learning-in-
spired model (BELIM). Structurally, a BELIM consists of 
four main parts to mimic those parts of the mammalian brain 
that handle activating the fear response. 
In this thesis, different versions of BELIMs have been intro-
duced and are investigated for prediction applications. The 
performance has been evaluated using various benchmark 
data sets from prediction applications, e.g. sunspot numbers 
from solar activity prediction, auroral electrojet (AE) index 
from geomagnetic storms prediction, Lorenz time series. 
Brain Emotional Learning-Inspired Models
Licentiate thesis
Mahboobeh 
Parsapoor
Licentiate thesis, Halmstad University
Main supervisor: Professor Bertil Svensson
Co-supervisor: Dr Urban Bilstrup 
Discussion leader: Professor Christian Balkenius
Examiner: Professor Antanas Verikas
          39
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Licentiate thesis
Compiling Concurrent Programs for Manycores
The arrival of manycore systems enforces new approaches for developing applications in order to exploit the avai-
lable hardware resources. Developing applications for many-
cores requires programmers to partition the application into 
subtasks, consider the dependence between the subtasks, un-
derstand the underlying hardware and select an appropriate 
programming model. This is complex, time-consuming and 
prone to error.
In this thesis, we identify and implement abstraction layers in 
compilation tools to decrease the burden of the programmer, 
increase programming productivity and program portability 
for manycores and to analyze their impact on performance 
and efficiency. We present compilation frameworks for two 
concurrent programming languages, occam-pi and CAL Actor 
Language, and demonstrate the applicability of the approach 
with application case-studies targeting these different many-
core architectures: STHorm, Epiphany and Ambric.
For occam-pi, we have extended the Tock compiler and added 
a backend for STHorm. We evaluate the approach using a 
fault tolerance model for a four stage 1D-DCT algorithm im-
plemented by using occam-pi’s constructs for dynamic recon-
figuration, and the FAST corner detection algorithm which 
demonstrates the suitability of occam-pi and the compilation 
framework for data-intensive applications. We also present 
a new CAL compilation framework which has a front end, 
two intermediate representations and three backends: for a 
uniprocessor, Epiphany, and Ambric. We show the feasibility 
of our approach by compiling a CAL implementation of the 
2D-IDCT for the three backends. We also present an evalu-
ation and optimization of code generation for Epiphany by 
comparing the code generated from CAL with a hand-written 
C code implementation of 2D-IDCT.
Licentiate thesis, Halmstad University
Main supervisor: Professor Bertil Svensson, Halmstad University
Co-supervisors: Dr. Veronica Gaspes and Dr. Zain-ul-Abdin, 
Halmstad University 
Opponent: Professor Johan Eker, Ericsson Research, 
adjunct professor at Lund University
Examiner: Professor Mohammad Mousavi, Halmstad University
Essayas 
Gebrewahid
40        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Distributed control applications enabled by wireless networks are becoming more and more frequent. The 
advantages of wireless access are many, as control systems be-
come mobile, autonomous and connected. Examples include 
platooning and automated factories. However, distributed 
control systems have stringent requirement on both reliability 
and timeliness, the latter in terms of deadlines. If the deadline 
is missed, the packet is considered useless, similarly to a lost 
or erroneous packet in a system without deadlines. In addi-
tion, wireless channels are, by nature, more exposed to noise 
and interference than their wired counterparts. Consequently, 
it implies a considerable challenge to fulfill the deadline re-
quirements with sufficient reliability for proper functionality 
of distributed control applications. However, by taking ad-
vantage of cooperative communications, increased reliability 
can be achieved with little or no additional delay.  
  Reducing the delay until a message is successfully 
received is a two-fold problem: providing channel access with 
a predictable maximum delay and maximizing the reliabili-
ty of each transmission, once granted by the medium access 
method. To this end, this thesis proposes a framework that 
provides a bounded channel access delay and handles the 
co-existence of both time-triggered and event-driven messa-
ges encountered in distributed control applications. In addi-
tion, the thesis proposes and evaluates an efficient message 
dissemination technique based on relaying that maximizes 
the reliability given a certain deadline, or alternatively deter-
mines the delay required to achieve a certain reliability th-
reshold for both unicast and broadcast scenarios. Numerical 
results, which are verified by Monte-Carlo simulations, show 
significant improvements with the proposed relaying scheme 
as compared to a conventional scheme without cooperation, 
providing more reliable message delivery given a fixed num-
ber of available time-slots. It also becomes clear in which si-
tuations relaying is preferable and in which situations pure 
retransmissions are preferable, as the relay selection algorithm 
will always pick the best option. The relay selection algorithm 
has a reasonable complexity and can be used by both routing 
algorithms and relaying scenarios in any time-critical appli-
cation as long as it is used together with a framework that 
enables predictable channel access. In addition, it can be im-
plemented on top of commercially available transceivers.
Relaying for Timely and Reliable Message Dissemina-
tion in Wireless Distributed Control Systems
Licentiate thesis
Le-Nam 
Hoang
Licentiate thesis, Halmstad University
Main supervisor: Docent Elisabeth Uhlemann, Halmstad University 
Co-supervisor: Professor Magnus Jonsson, Halmstad University 
Discussion leader: Docent Fredrik Brännström, Chalmers University of   
Technology
Examiner: Professor Antanas Verikas, Halmstad University
          41
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Testing Safety-Critical Systems Using Fault Injection and  
Property-Based Testing
Testing software-intensive systems can be challenging, es-pecially when safety requirements are involved. Proper-
ty-Based Testing (PBT) is a software testing technique where 
properties about software are specified and thousands of test 
cases with a wide range of inputs are automatically generated 
based on these properties. PBT does not formally prove that 
the software fulfils its specification, but it is an efficient way to 
identify deviations from the specification. Safety-critical sys-
tems that must be able to deal with faults, without causing da-
mage or injuries, are often tested using Fault Injection (FI) at 
several abstraction levels. The purpose of FI is to inject faults 
into a system in order to exercise and evaluate fault hand-
ling mechanisms. The aim of this thesis is to investigate how 
knowledge and techniques from the areas of FI and PBT can 
be used together to test functional and safety requirements 
simultaneously.      
  We have developed a FI tool named FaultCheck 
that enables PBT tools to use common FI-techniques di-
rectly on source code. In order to evaluate and demonstrate 
our approach, we have applied our tool FaultCheck together 
with the commercially available PBT tool QuickCheck on a 
simple and on a complex system. The simple system is the 
AUTOSAR End-to-End (E2E) library and the complex sys-
tem is a quadcopter simulator that we developed ourselves. 
The quadcopter simulator is based on a hardware quadcopter 
platform that we also developed, and the fault models that we 
inject into the simulator using FaultCheck are derived from 
the hardware quadcopter platform. We were able to efficient-
ly apply FaultCheck together with QuickCheck on both the 
E2E library and the quadcopter simulator, which gives us 
confidence that FI together with PBT can be used to test and 
evaluate a wide range of simple and complex safety-critical 
software.
Licentiate thesis
Benjamin 
Vedder
Licentiate thesis, Halmstad University
Main supervisor: Professor Magnus Jonsson, Halmstad University
Co-supervisor: Dr. Jonny Vinter, SP
Discussion leader: Dr. Andreas Johansson, Conmore Ingenjörsbyrå, Hyssna
Examiner: Docent Nicholas Wickström, Halmstad University
42        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Some highlights
Prof. Walid Taha organized the HyML 2015 meeting 
at Rice University. The meeting brought internationally 
renowned academic and industry experts together to fa-
cilitate collaborations on research and education related 
to the hybrid systems modelling and simulation, valida-
ted numerics and formal semantics. Speakers included: 
Aaron Ames (Texas A&M University), Molham Aref (Lo-
gicBlox), Ferenc Bartha (Rice University), Albert Cheng 
(University of Houston), Jyotirmoy Deshmukh (Toyota), 
Franz Franchetti (Carnegie Mellon University), Walid 
Gomaa (Egypt-Japan University of Science and Techno-
logy), Gopal Gupta (University of Texas at Dallas), Vlad 
Kreinovich (University of Texas at El-Paso), Eugenio 
Moggi (University of Genova), Roland Philippsen and 
Gabor Simko (Google), Sriram Sankaranarayanan (Uni-
versity of Colorado), and Walid Taha (Halmstad Univer-
sity and Rice University).
The Halmstad Summer School on 
Testing provides an overview of the 
state of the art in testing, including 
theory, industrial cases, tools and 
hands-on tutorials by internationally- 
renowned researchers.
Doctoral and  Licentiate defence to come:
September 16, 2015
Wagner Ourique de Morais will defend his ph.d. thesis: ”Architecting Smart Home Environments for Healthcare: A 
Database-centric Approach”
September 21, 2015
Hawar Ramazanali will defend his licentiate thesis: ”Resource Handling for Military Training Networks”
          43
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Dr. Elisabeth Uhlemann from CERES organized a Work-
shop on Wireless Vehicular Communications at Halmstad 
University, Sweden on November 11, 2014 with around 40 
participants. The workshop featured an invited speaker, Dr. 
Thomas Zemen from FTW Telecommunications Research 
Center Vienna, Austria,funded by the IEEE VTS as well as 
presentations by researchers from Chalmers, Lund and Halm-
stad Universities. Participants came from Lund, Chalmers, 
Halmstad, and Linköping Universities as well as SP Technical 
Research Institute of Sweden, Viktoria Swedish ICT, Volvo 
Group Trucks Technology, Volvo Cars, Ericsson, Qamcom 
Research and Technology, WSN Consults Ltd, Noventus Sys-
tems, Advanced Circuit Design & Wireless Technology and 
Kristensson Konsult AB.
Dr. Thomas Zemen from FTW Telecommunications Research Center 
Vienna, Austria at the CERES workshop
Halmstad Colloquium
The Halmstad Colloquium is a distinguished speaker se-
ries. The prominent speakers are invited from universi-
ties around the world to talk about topics of interest for 
the researchers within our research evironment Halmstad 
Embedded and Intelligent systems research. The Halms-
tad Colloquium is hosted by the School of Information 
Technology. Guest 2014-2015 invited by CERES:
Manfred Broy, professor in Informatics at Technical Uni-
versity of München, Germany.“Seamless Modeling in the 
Development of  Cyber-Physical Systems”
Professor Kazunori Ueda, Department of Computer Sci-
ence and Engineering Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan. 
“A Hybrid Constraint Language HydLa and Its Imple-
mentation”
Professor Giorgio Buttazzo, RETIS lab Scuola Superiore 
Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy. “Real-time Support for Multicore 
Platforms”
Neil Jones, professor emeritus at DIKU (Department of 
Computer Science), Copenhagen University, Denmark. 
“Programs = Data = First-class Citizens in a Computa-
tional World”
Eugenio Moggi, Professor, Univ. di Genova, Italy.
“Hybrid System Trajectories as Partial Continuous Maps”
Neil Jones (seven from left), and part of the audience at the Halmstad Colloquium, February 26, 2015
44        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES was, as in previous years, an important actor in Em-
bedded Conference 2014. CERES personnel led one session 
and gave two talks. CERES also contributed with two demos 
in the Action Area; one Quadcopter demo given by a PhD 
student at SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden in col-
laboration with Halmstad University, and one demo of Nao 
robots given by two students from Halmstad University.
The CERES stand had a focus on Electronics Center in 
Halmstad, an arena for regional cooperation in the field of 
electronics.
For the first time Embedded Conference Scandinavia was ar-
ranged in Malmö. CERES took part with two sessions:
“Ultra low power CMOS radio for Internet of Things”  - 
Emil Nilsson
“Model-Based Testing of  Embedded System Product Lines” 
- Mohammad Reza Mousavi
 The exhibition booth showcased a robot hand. (below)
The Robot hand
Six students at the School of Information Tecnology devel-
oped the “Robot hand”, a nice example of cooperation be-
tween students with different skills. The hand imitates the 
movement of a human hand in front of a camera by using 
image analysis, a control system, servo motors and precision 
mechanical solutions.
          45
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Dr. Zain-ul-Abdin has been the Co-Chair of Self-Adaptive 
and Reconfigurable Computing track held in conjunction 
with the 12th IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Em-
bedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC) (http://euc14.
necst.it) Milan, Italy in August, 2014. The focus of the track 
was self-adaptive and self-healing systems, reconfiguration 
management techniques, and novel applications for reconfi-
gurable computing.
Dr. Zain-ul-Abdin has been arranging the special track on 
Coarse-Grained Reconfigurable Computing since 2013 held 
in conjunction with the International Conference on ReCon-
Figurable Computing and FPGAs (ReConFig- www.reconfig.
org), Cancun, Mexico. The track focuses on Coarse-Grained 
Reconfigurable Architectures (CGRA), which offer massive 
parallelism coupled with the capability of undergoing run-
time reconfiguration to meet the increased computational 
demands of high-performance embedded systems.
Guests from Rice University
In 2008, I have received my MSc at the University of Szeged, Hungary in theoretical 
mathematics. My thesis concentrated on the qualitative properties of delay differential 
equations. I have obtained my PHD in 2012 at the University of Bergen, Norway under 
the supervision of Prof. Warwick Tucker from the University of Uppsala, Sweden. Our 
research was centered around validated numerics, in particular we investigated global 
attractors of difference equations and stationary solutions of a certain class of partial 
differential equations using rigorous computations. Now I am working in the Effective 
Modeling Group with Prof. Walid Taha as a Post-doc at Rice University, Houston. The 
goals of our project are to improve and develop further the rigorous computations of the 
software Acumen, thus, making state of the art validated numerics easily accessible to the 
Hybrid Systems community.
I received my BSc in electronic engineering from XiDian University, China in 2010, and 
my MSc degree in embedded and intelligent systems in Halmstad University, Sweden in 
2012.  I’m currently a Ph.D student in computer science at Rice University, and working 
with Effective Modeling Group at Halmstad University, where I am applying program-
ming language techniques like partial evaluation and binding time analysis to increase 
the expressiveness of the Acumen language. The work is done under the supervision of 
Prof. Walid Taha.
Ferenc Bartha
Yingfu Zeng
46        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES Staff
Jonsson, Magnus 
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Real-time Computer Sys-
tems, Vice Director of CERES  
magnus.jonsson@hh.se
Larsson, Tony Ingemar  
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Embedded Systems 
tony.larsson@hh.se
Mousavi, Mohammad  
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Computer Systems Engi-
neering 
m.r.mousavi@hh.se
Nordström, Tomas  
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Computer Engineering 
tomas.nordstrom@hh.se
Taha, Walid   
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Computer Science 
walid.taha@hh.se
Vinel, Alexey  
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Data Communications 
alexey.vinel@hh.se
Svensson, Bertil  
Professor, PhD 
Prof., Computer Systems Engi-
neering,
bertil.svensson@hh.se
Bilstrup, Urban  
PhD, CE 
Lecturer, Computer Engine-
ering/Wireless Communication 
urban.bilstrup@hh.se
Böhm, Annette  
PhD, CSE 
Postdoctoral Researcher 
annette.bohm@hh.se
Beohar, Harsh  
PhD 
Postdoctoral Researcher, 
Model-based Testing 
harsh.beohar@hh.se
          47
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES Staff
Uhlemann, Elisabeth  
PhD, EE 
Associate Prof., Communication 
Systems 
elisabeth.uhlemann@hh.se
Carlsson, Jörgen  
PhD 
Senior Lecturer, Head of de-
partment 
jorgen.carlsson@hh.se
Gaspes, Verónica  
PhD, CS 
Associate Prof., Computer 
Science 
veronica.gaspes@hh.se
Kunert, Kristina 
PhD, CE 
Assistant Professor 
kristina.kunert@hh.se
Ul-Abdin, Zain  
PhD CSE 
Assistant Professor, Computer 
Science & Engineering 
zain-ul-abdin@hh.se
Farjudian, Amin
PhD, CS 
Assistant Professor  
amin.farjudian@hh.se
Mostowski, Wojciech
PhD, CS 
Assistant professor
wojciech.mostowski@hh.se
Taromirad, Masoumeh 
PhD
Postdoctoral researcher
m.taromirad@hh.se 
Lin, Shih Yang
PhD
Postdoctoral researcher
Bartha, Ference
PhD 
Postdoctoral researcher
48        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Sweidan, Dirar
BSc
Teaching assistant    
dirar.sweidan@hh.se
Lithen, Thomas
Engineer 
Research engineer 
thomas.lithen@hh.se
Xu, Fei
MSc, CSE
Research engineer
fei.xu@hh.se
Torstensson, Olga  
MSc 
Lecturer 
olga.torstensson@hh.se
Aramrattana, Maytheewat  
MSc, CSE 
PhD Student
maytheewat.aramrattana@hh.se
CERES Staff
Bornhager, Malin 
BSc, CE 
Lecturer 
malin.bornhager@hh.se
Erlandsson, Stella  
BSc, Innov. Eng. 
Project manager, Liaison officer 
stella.erlandsson@hh.se
Månsson, Nicolina  
MSc 
Lecturer 
nicolina.mansson@hh.se
Eldemark, Hans-Erik  
MSc, EE 
Lecturer, Computer Engineering 
and Innovation Engineering 
hans-erik.eldemark@hh.se
Wecksten, Mattias  
Lic.Tech.,CS 
Lecturer, Computer Engineering 
mattias.wecksten@hh.se
          49
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Lyamin, Nikita
MSc 
PhD Student
nikita.lyamin@hh.se
de Morais, Wagner  
MSc, CSE 
PhD Student 
wagner.demorais@hh.se
Duracz, Adam 
MSc, CS 
PhD Student 
adam.duracz@hh.se
Gebrewahid, Essayas  
Lic. Tech. CSE 
PhD Student
essayas.gebrewahid@hh.se
Hertz, Erik  
Lic.Tech., Eng. 
PhD Student
erik.hertz@hh.se
CERES Staff
Larsson, Marcus  
 
PhD Student 
marcus.larsson@hh.se
Parsapoor, Mahboobeh  
Lic. Tech.
Research Engineer 
mahboobeh.parsapoor@hh.se
Raase, Sebastian 
MSc, CSE  
PhD Student
sebastian.raase@hh.se
Hoang, Le-Nam  
Lic. Tech. 
PhD Student 
le-nam.hoang@hh.se
Kunze, Sebastian
MSc
PhD Student
sebastian.kunze@hh.se
50        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Vedder, Benjamin  
Lic. Tech.
PhD Student
benjamin.vedder@hh.se
CERES Staff
Varshosaz, Mahsa
MSc, CSE 
PhD Student
mahsa.varshosaz@hh.se
Savas, Süleyman  
MSc, CSE 
PhD Student 
suleyman.savas@hh.se
Zeng, Yingfu
MSc
PhD Student
Ramazanali, Hawar  
MSc, EE 
PhD Student
hawar.ramazanali@hh.se

52        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
CERES Publications 2014-2015
(updated August 2015)
International full-paper reviewed journal papers
2015 (including papers accepted for publication 
2015 or later)
Belyaev, E., A. Vinel, A. Surak, M. Gabbouj, M. Jonsson, and 
K. Egiazarian, “Robust vehicle-to-infrastructure video trans-
mission for road surveillance applications,” IEEE Transactions 
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2991-3003, July 
2015.
Beohar, H., M. Varshosaz, and M. R. Mousavi, “Basic beha-
vioral models for software product lines: Expressiveness and 
testing pre-orders,” Science of Computer Programming, online 
July 9, 2015.
Hoang, L.-N., E. Uhlemann, and M. Jonsson, “An efficient 
message dissemination technique in platooning applications,” 
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1017-1020, 
June 2015.
Jonsson, M., K. Kunert, and A. Kallerdahl, “Analysing AFDX 
networks using end-to-end response time analysis,” Journal of 
Interconnection Networks, vol. 4, no. 4, 2013 (accepted Dec. 
2014 and published online Feb. 2015). 17 pages.
Kaur, K., A. Dua, A. Jindal, N. Kumar, M. Singh, and A. Vi-
nel, ”A novel resource reservation scheme for mobile PHEVs 
in V2G environment using game theoretical approach,” ac-
cepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Tech-
nology, accepted 2015.
Kumar, N., S. Zeadally, N. Chilamkurti, and A. Vinel, 
“Performance analysis of Bayesian coalition game-based en-
ergy-aware virtual machine migration in vehicular mobile 
cloud,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 62-69, Mar-
ch-April 2015. 
Kumar, N., J. Lee. N. Chilamkurti, and A. Vinel, “Energy-ef-
ficient multimedia data dissemination in vehicular clouds: 
stochastic-reward-nets-based coalition game approach,” 
accepted for publication in IEEE Network, accepted 2015, 
DOI: 10.1109/JSYST.2015.2409651.
Mousavi, M. R., T. Basten, M. A. Reniers, and M. R. V. 
Chaudron, “Timed-Gamma and its coordination language,” 
Nordic Journal of Computing, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 75-111, 2015.
Noroozi, N., R. Khosravi, M. R. Mousavi, and T. A. C. Wil-
lemse, “Synchrony and asynchrony in conformance testing,” 
Software and Systems Modeling, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 149-172, 
2015.
Sardis, F., G. Mapp, J. Loo, M. Aiash, and A. Vinel, “In-
vestigating a mobility-aware QoS Model for multimedia 
streaming rate adaptation,” Journal of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, http://www.hindawi.com/journals/jece/
aa/548638/ref/, 2015.
Song, L., K.K. Chai, Y. Chen, J. Schormans, J. Loo, and A. 
Vinel, “QoS-aware energy efficient cooperative scheme for 
clustered-based IoT systems,” accepted for publication in 
IEEE Systems Journal, accepted 2015.
Shao, C., S. Leng, Y. Zhang, A. Vinel, and M. Jonsson, “Per-
formance analysis of connectivity probability and connectivi-
ty-aware MAC protocol design for platoon-based VANETs,” 
accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, accepted 2015.
Vinel, A., L. Lan, N. Lyamin, ”Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communi-
cation in C-ACC/Platooning Scenarios,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 192-197, Aug. 2015.
Zivari-Rezapour, M., A. Farjudian, and B. Emamizadeh, “Op-
timization related to some nonlocal problems of Kirchhoff 
type,” accepted for publication in Canadian Journal of Mathe-
matics, http://dx.doi.org/10.4153/CJM-2015-040-9, accep-
ted 2015.
2014
Balasubramaniam, S., N. Lyamin, D. Kleyko, M. Skurnik, A. 
Vinel, and Y. Koucheryavy, “Exploiting bacterial properties 
for multi-hop nanonetworks,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 184-191, 2014. 
Bellalta, B., E. Belyaev, M. Jonsson, and A. Vinel, “Perfor-
mance evaluation of IEEE 802.11p-enabled vehicular video 
surveillance system,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 18, 
no. 4, pp. 708-711, Apr. 2014.
Beohar, H. and P. Cuijpers, “Avoiding diamonds in de-
synchronisation,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 91, 
PART A, pp. 45-69, 1 Oct., 2014. 
Duracz, J. and M. Konečný, “Polynomial function intervals 
for floating-point software verification,” Annals of Mathema-
tics and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 351-398, 
2014. 
Lampoltshammer, T. J., E. Pignaton de Freitas, T. Nowotny, 
S. Plank, J. P. Carvalho Lustosa da Costa, T. Larsson et al., 
“Use of local intelligence to reduce energy consumption of 
wireless sensor nodes in elderly health monitoring systems,” 
Sensors, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 4932-4947, 2014. 
          53
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Publications
Lee, Y. L., T. C. Chuah, J. Loo, and A. Vinel, “Recent ad-
vances in radio resource managementfor heterogeneous LTE/
LTE-A networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutori-
als, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2142-2180, 2014. 
Lyamin, N., A. Vinel, M. Jonsson, and J. Loo, “Real-time 
detection of Denial-of-Service attacks in IEEE 802.11p vehi-
cular networks,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 1, 
pp. 110-113, Jan. 2014.
Mousavi, M. R. and J. Pang, “Special section on software ve-
rification and testing,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 
95, Part 3, pp. 273-274, 2014. 
Ourique de Morais, W., J. Lundström, and N. Wickström, 
“Active in-database processing to support ambient assisted li-
ving systems,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 14765-14785, 2014. 
Paula, M., J. J. Rodrigues, J. A. Dias, J. N. Isento, and A. Vi-
nel, “Performance evaluation of a real vehicular delay-tolerant 
network testbed,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor 
Networks, Article ID 219641, 2014. 11 pages. 
Willig, A. and E. Uhlemann, “Deadline-aware scheduling 
of cooperative relayers in TDMA-based wireless industrial 
networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 73-88, 2014. 
Wolkerstorfer, M. and T. Nordström, “Comparative simula-
tion study of fast heuristics for power control in copper bro-
adband networks,” Signal Processing, vol. 104, pp. 437-449, 
Nov. 2014.
Books, book chapters and editorial work 
2015 (including chapters etc. accepted for publi-
cation 2015 or later)
Huang, C.-M., S.-Y. Lin, A. Vinel, and M. Jonsson, “Proacti-
ve safety - cooperative collision warning for vehicles,” in Clean 
Mobility and Intelligent Transport Systems, Editors: M. Fiorini 
and J.-C. Lin, The Institution of Engineering and Technology 
(IET), 2015, ISBN 978-1-84919-895-0.
Kassab, M., M. Berbineau, A. Vinel, M. Jonsson, F. Garcia, 
and J. Soler, editors. Communication Technologies for Vehic-
les – Proc. 8th International Workshop, Nets4Cars/Nets4Trains/
Nets4aircraft 2015, Sousse, Tunisia, May 6-8, 2015. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9066, Springer Internatio-
nal Publishing Switzerland, 2015, ISBN 978-3-319-17764-9. 
250 pages.
2014
Bellalta, B., A. Zocca, C. Cano, A. Checco, J. Barcelo, and 
A. Vinel, “Throughput analysis in CSMA/CA networks using 
continuous time markov networks - a tutorial,”  in Wireless 
Networking for Moving Objects: Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, vol. 8611, Springer, pp. 115-133, 2014. 
Eckhoff, D., A. Festag, M. Gruteser, F. Schimandl, M. Segata, 
and E. Uhlemann, “Best practices for field operational tes-
ting,” in Inter-Vehicular Communications – Quo Vadis: Report 
from Dagstuhl Seminar 13392. Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss 
Dagstuhl, Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, pp. 206-209. 
Dagstuhl Reports, 13392, 2014.
Jonsson, M., A. Vinel, B. Bellalta, and E. Belyaev, editors. 
Multiple Access Communications, 7th International Workshop, 
MACOM 2014, Halmstad, Sweden, Aug. 27-28, 2014, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8715, Springer In-
ternational Publishing Switzerland, 2014, ISBN 978-3-319-
10261-0. 138 pages.
Mousavi, M. R. and A. Ravara, editors. Special issue on the 
10th International Workshop on the Foundations of Coor-
dination Languages and Software Architectures (FOCLASA 
2011), Science of Computer Programming, vol. 89, Part A, 
2014. 
Mousavi, M. R. and A. Ravara, “Foreword: Special issue 
on the 10th International Workshop on the Foundations 
of Coordination Languages and Software Architectures 
(FOCLASA 2011),” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 
89, Part A, pp. 1-1, 2014. 
Sikora, A., M. Berbineau, A. Vinel, M. Jonsson, A. Pirova-
no, and M. Aguado, editors. Communication Technologies 
for Vehicles –Proc. 6th International Workshop, Nets4Cars/
Nets4Trains/Nets4aircraft 2014, Offenburg, Germany, May 
6-7, 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8435, 
Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2014, ISBN 
978-3-319-06643-1. 174 pages.
Groote, J. F., M. R. Mousavi. Modeling and Analysis of Com-
municating Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014.
54        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Publications
Doctoral and Licentiate theses
2015
Gebrewahid, E., “Compiling Concurrent Programs for Ma-
nycores,” Licentiate Thesis, Halmstad University, Halmstad, 
Sweden, Halmstad University Press, Mar. 2015. 
Hoang, L.-N., “Relaying for Timely and Reliable Message 
Dissemination in Wireless Distributed Control Systems,” 
Licentiate Thesis, Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden, 
Halmstad University Press, June 2015. 
Vedder, B., “Testing Safety-Critical Systems using Fault In-
jection and Property-Based Testing,” Licentiate Thesis, Halm-
stad University, Halmstad, Sweden, Halmstad University 
Press, May 2015. 
Ourique de Morais, W. “Architecting Smart Home Environ-
ments for Healthcare: A Database-Centric Approach,” Ph.D. 
Thesis. Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden, Halmstad 
University Press, Sept. 2015.
2014
Parsapoor, M., “Brain Emotional Learning-Inspired Models,” 
Licentiate Thesis, Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden, 
Halmstad University Press, June 2014. 
International full-paper reviewed conference pa-
pers
2015 (including papers accepted for publication 
2015 or later)
Aerts, A., M. A. Reniers, and M. R. Mousavi “A tool proto-
type for model-based testing of cyber-physical systems,” Proc. 
of the 12th International Colloquium on Theoretical Aspects of 
Computing (ICTAC 2015), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
2015.
Aramrattana, M., T. Larsson, J. Jansson, and C. Englund, 
“Dimensions of cooperative driving, ITS and automation,” 
Proc. 2015 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Seoul, Korea, 
June 28 - July 1, 2015. 
Arts, T., M. R. Mousavi, “Automatic consequence analysis of 
automotive standards (AUTO-CAAS), Proc. of the First Inter-
national Workshop on Automotive Software Architecture (WASA 
2015), Montréal, QC, Canada, May 4, 2015, pp. 35-38. 
Beohar, H. and M. R. Mousavi, “A Pre-congruence Format 
for XY-simulation,” Proc. of the 6th International Conferen-
ce on Fundamentals of Software Engineering (FSEN 2015), 
Tehran, Iran, April 22-24, 2015. 
Campolo, C., A. Molinaro, A. Vinel, N. Lyamin, and M. 
Jonsson, “Service discovery and access in vehicle-to-roadsi-
de multi-channel VANETs,” Proc. 1st IEEE ICC Workshop on 
Dependable Vehicular Communications (DVC 2015), London, 
UK, June 12, 2015.
Duracz, A., H. Eriksson, F. Á. Bartha, Y. Zeng, F. Xu, and 
W. Taha, “Using rigorous simulation to support ISO 26262 
hazard analysis and risk assessment,” Proc. 2015 IEEE 12th 
International Conference on Embedded Software and Systems 
(ICESS), 2015. 
Hoang, L.-N., E. Uhlemann, and M. Jonsson, “A Framework 
for reliable exchange of periodic and event-driven messages in 
platoons,” Proc. 1st IEEE ICC Workshop on Dependable Vehi-
cular Communications (DVC 2015), London, UK, June 12, 
2015.
Khakpour, N. and M. R. Mousavi, “Notions of conforman-
ce testing for cyber-physical systems: overview and roadmap 
(invited paper),” Proc. of the 26th International Conference on 
Concurrency Theory (CONCUR 2015), LIPIcs–Leibniz Inter-
national Proceedings in Informatics, 2015.
Khamespanah, E., M. Sirjani, M. R. Mousavi, Z. Sabahi Ka-
vian, and M. R. Razzazi, “State distribution policy for dist-
ributed model checking of Actor models,” Proc. of the 15th 
International Workshop on Automated Verification of Critical 
Systems (AVOCS 2015), 2015.
Larsson, M., M. Jonsson, K. Karlsson, C. Bergenhem, and T. 
Larsson, “Curvature based antenna selection method evalua-
ted using the data age metric and V2V measurements,” Proc. 
1st IEEE ICC Workshop on Dependable Vehicular Communica-
tions (DVC 2015), London, UK, June 12, 2015.
Larsson, M., F. Warg, K. Karlsson, and M. Jonsson, “Evalua-
tion of a low-overhead forwarding algorithm for platooning,” 
Proc. International Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Sa-
fety (ICVES 2015), Yokohama, Japan, Nov. 5-7, 2015.
Lyamin, N., A. Vinel, and M. Jonsson, “Does ETSI beaco-
ning frequency control provide cooperative awareness?,” Proc. 
1st IEEE ICC Workshop on Dependable Vehicular Communica-
tions (DVC 2015), London, UK, June 12, 2015.
          55
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Publications
Mostowski, W, “Dynamic frames based verification method 
for concurrent Java programs,” Post-proceedings, 7th Working 
Conference on Verified Software: Theories, Tools, and Experi-
ments (VSTTE 2015), San Francisco, CA, USA, July 2015.
Parsapoor, M., U. Bilstrup, and B. Svensson, “Prediction of 
Solar Cycle 24: using a connectionist model of the emotional 
system,” Proc. 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks (IJCNN), Killarney, Ireland, July 12–16, 2015. 
Raase, S. and T. Nordström, “On the use of a many-core pro-
cessor for computational fluid dynamics simulations,” Proc. 
International Conference On Computational Science, ICCS 
2015 – Computational Science at the Gates of Nature, Reykja-
vík, Iceland, June 1-3, 2015, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
51, pp. 1403-1412, 2015. 
Ramazanali, H., M. Jonsson, A. Vinel, and U. Bilstrup, “Mul-
tichannel admission control for military training network,” in 
Proc. 2015 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Real-Time 
Distributed Computing (IEEE ISORC), Auckland, New Zea-
land, Apr. 13-17, 2015, pp. 150-157.
Shao, C., S. Leng, B. Fan, Y. Zhang, A. Vinel, and M. Jonsson, 
“Connectivity-aware medium access control in platoon-based 
vehicular ad hoc networks,” in Proc. IEEE International Con-
ference on Communications (ICC 2015), London, UK, June 
8-12, 2015.
Stranne, F., U. Bilstrup, and L. Ewertsson, “Behind the Mask 
– Attribution of antagonists in cyberspace and its implica-
tions on international conflicts and security issues,” Proc. In-
ternational Studies Association (ISA)’s 56th Annual, Convention 
– Global IR and Regional Worlds. A New Agenda for Interna-
tional Studies, New Orleans, LA, USA, Feb. 18-21, 2015. 
Ul-Abdin, Z. and B. Svensson, “Towards teaching embedded 
parallel computing: an analytical approach,” Proc. of the 18th 
Workshop on Computer Architecture Education, Portland, OR, 
USA, June 13, 2015. 
Vedder, B., H. Eriksson, D. Skarin, J. Vinter, and M. Jonsson, 
“Towards collision avoidance for commodity hardware qu-
adcopters with ultrasound localization,” Proc. 2015 Interna-
tional Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS'15), 
Denver, CO, USA, June 9-12, 2015, pp. 193-203.
Vedder, B., J. Vinter, and M. Jonsson, “Using simulation, 
fault injection and property-based testing to evaluate collision 
avoidance of a quadcopter system,” Proc. Dependable Systems 
and Networks Workshops (DSN-W), 1st International Workshop 
on Safety and Security of Intelligent Vehicles (SSIV), Rio de Ja-
neiro, Brazil, June 22, 2015.
Yu, R., J. Ding, W. Zhong, Y. Zhang, S. Gjessing, A. Vi-
nel, and M. Jonsson, “Price-based energy control for V2G 
networks in the industrial smart grid,” in Proc. 1st Internatio-
nal Conference on Industrial Networks and Intelligent Systems 
(INISCom 2015), Tokyo, Japan, Mar. 2-4, 2015, pp. 107-
112. Best paper award.
Yu, R., X. Huang, J. Kang, C. Yuen, A. Vinel, M. Jonsson, 
Y. Zhang, and S. Gjessing, “An optimal replenishment stra-
tegy in energy harvesting wireless networks with mobile char-
ger,” Proc. 11th EAI International Conference on Heterogeneous 
Networking for Quality, Reliability, Security and Robustness 
(QSHINE 2015), Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 19-20, 2015. Best pa-
per award.
2014
Barisas, D., A. Duracz, and W. Taha, “DSLs should be online 
applications,” Proc. Joint International Conference on Engine-
ering Education and International Conference on Information 
Technology: ICEE/ICIT-2014, Riga, Latvia, June 2 - 6, 2014, 
pp. 314-319. 
Belyaev, E. and A. Vinel, “Poster : Target packet loss selec-
tion for inter-packet loss protection for video streaming over 
VANETs,” Proc. 2014 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference 
(VNC), Paderborn, Germany, Dec. 3-5, 2014, pp. 197-198. 
Belyaev, E., A. Vinel, M. Jonsson, and K. Sjöberg, “Live video 
streaming in IEEE 802.11p vehicular networks: demonstra-
tion of an automotive surveillance application,” Proc. IEEE 
INFOCOM 2014, Toronto, Canada, Apr. 27 – May 2, 2014.
Böhm, A., M. Jonsson, K. Kunert, and A. Vinel, 
“Context-aware retransmission scheme for increased reliabi-
lity in platooning applications,” A. Sikora et al. (Eds.): Nets-
4Cars/Nets4Trains/Nets4Aircraft 2014, Offenburg, Germa-
ny, May 6-7, 2014, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 
8435, Springer International Publishing Switzerland, pp. 30-
42, 2014.
Campolo, C., A. Molinaro, and A. Vinel, “Understanding ad-
jacent channel interference in multi-channel VANETs,” Proc. 
2014 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), Pader-
born, Germany, Dec. 3-5, 2014, pp. 101-104. 
Duracz, J., A. Farjudian, M. Konečný, W. Taha, “Function 
interval arithmetic,” Proc. 4th International Congress of Mathe-
matical Software, ICMS 2014, Seoul, South Korea, Aug. 5-9, 
2014, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8592, pp. 677-
684. 
56        
CERES
CERES 
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Publications
Gebrewahid, E., M. Yang, G. Cedersjö, Z. Ul-Abdin, V. 
Gaspes, J. W. Janneck, and B. Svensson, “Realizing efficient 
execution of dataflow actors on manycores”, in Proc. of the 
12th IEEE International Conference on Embedded and Ubiqui-
tous Computing (EUC), Milan, Italy, Aug. 26-28, 2014.
Kleyko, D., N. Lyamin, E. Osipov, “Modified algorithm of 
Dynamic Frequency Hopping (DFH) in the IEEE 802.22 
standard,” M. Jonsson et al. (Eds.): Multiple Access Com-
munications, 7th International Workshop, MACOM 2014, 
Halmstad, Sweden, Aug. 27-28, 2014, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, vol. 8715, Springer International Publishing 
Switzerland, pp. 75-83, 2014.
Konečný, M., J. Duracz, A. Farjudian, and W. Taha, “Picard 
method for enclosing ODEs with uncertain initial values,” 
Proc. 11th International Conference on Computability and 
Complexity in Analysis, Darmstadt, Germany, July 21-24, 
2014, pp. 41-42. 
Larsson, T., J. Jansson, C. Grante, and C. Englund, “Coope-
rative partly automated and coordinated vehicles and trans-
ports,” Proc. The 2014 National Workshop on Transportation 
Cyber-Physical Systems, Arlington, Virginia, USA, Jan. 23-24, 
2014. 
Lisova, E., E. Uhlemann, J. Åkerberg, and M. Björkman, 
“Towards secure wireless TTEthernet for industrial process 
automation applications,” Proc. 19th IEEE International 
Conference on Emerging Technology and Factory Automation 
(ETFA), Barcelona, Spain, Sept. 16–19, 2014. 
Lyamin, N., A. Vinel, and M. Jonsson, “On the performance 
of ETSI EN 302 637-2 CAM generation frequency mana-
gement,” Proc. IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC 
2014), Paderborn, Germany, Dec. 3-5, 2014.
Masood, J., R. Philippsen, J. Duracz, W. Taha, H. Eriksson, 
and C. Grante, “Domain analysis for standardised functional 
safety: a case study on design-time verification of automatic 
emergency breaking,” Proc. The FISITA 2014 World Automo-
tive Congress, Maastricht, The Netherlands, June 2-6, 2014. 
Mohaqeqi, M., M. R. Mousavi, and W. Taha, “Conformance 
testing of cyber-physical systems: a comparative study,” Proc. 
14th International Workshop on Automated Verification of Cri-
tical Systems (AVoCS 2014), University of Twente, Enschede, 
Netherlands, Sept. 24-26, 2014. 
Nilsson, P., A. U. Shaik, R. Gangarajaiah, E. Hertz, “Hard-
ware implementation of the exponential function using taylor 
series,” Proc. 32nd NORCHIP Conference: The Nordic Micro-
electronics Event (NORCHIP 2014), Tampere, Finland, Oct. 
27-28, 2014. Article number: 7004740. 
Noroozi, N., M. R. Mousavi, and T. A. Willemse, “On the 
complexity of input output conformance testing,” Proc. 10th 
International Symposium on Formal Aspects of Component 
Software (FACS 2013), Nanchang, China, Oct. 27-29, 2013, 
Revised Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
vol. 8348, pp. 291-309. 
Olofsson, A., T. Nordström, and Z. Ul-Abdin, “Kickstarting 
high-performance energy-efficient manycore architectures 
with Epiphany,” Proc. Forty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on 
Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, Nov. 
2-5, 2014, pp. 1719-1726. 
Ourique de Morais, W., M. Mayr, N. Wickström, and R. Phi-
lippsen, “Ambient intelligence and robotics: complementing 
one another to support ambient assisted living,” Proc. 13th 
International Conference Intelligent Autonomous Systems (IAS-
13): 1st International Workshop on Intelligent Robot Assistants, 
Padova & Venice, Italy, July 15-19, 2014.
Ourique de Morais, W. and N. Wickström, “A lightweight 
method for detecting sleep-related activities based on load 
sensing,” Proc. IEEE 3rd International Conference on Serious 
Games and Applications for Health (SeGAH 2014), Rio de Ja-
neiro, Brazil, May 14-16, 2014. 
Parsapoor, M. and U. Bilstrup, “An imperialist competitive 
algorithm for interference-aware cluster-heads selection in ad 
hoc networks,” Proc. 2014 IEEE 28th International Conference 
on Advanced Information Networking and Applications (IEEE 
AINA 2014), Victoria, BC, Canada, May 13-16, 2014, pp. 
41-48.
Parsapoor, M. and U. Bilstrup, “A brain emotional lear-
ning-based prediction model for the prediction of geomagne-
tic storms,” Proc. of the 2014 Federated Conference on Computer 
Science and Information Systems, 9th International Symposium 
Advances in Artificial Intelligence and Applications (AAIA'14), 
Warsaw, Poland, Sept. 7-10, 2014, pp. 35-42. 
Parsapoor, M., U. Bilstrup, and B. Svensson, “Neuro-fuzzy 
models for geomagnetic storms prediction : using the auroral 
electrojet index,” Proc. 2014 10th International Conference on 
Natural Computation (ICNC), 11th International Conference 
on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery (FSKD 2014), Xia-
men, China, Aug. 19–21, 2014, pp. 12-17.
Ramazanali, H., M. Jonsson, K. Kunert, and U. Bilstrup, 
“Military training network with admission control using re-
al-time analysis,” Proc. IEEE 19th International Workshop on 
Computer Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links 
and Networks (CAMAD 2014), Athens, Greece, Dec. 1-3, 
2014.
          57
CERES
Presentation and Activity Report 2014-2015
Publications
Salama, C. and W. Taha, “Increasing Verilog’s generative 
power,” Proc. DUHDe – 1st Workshop on Design Automation 
for Understanding Hardware Designs – Workshop at DATE 
2014, Dresden, Germany, March 28, 2014. 
Savas, S., E. Gebrewahid, Z. Ul-Abdin, T. Nordström, and 
M. Yang, “An evaluation of code generation of dataflow lang-
uages on manycore architectures,” Proc. 2014 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing 
Systems and Applications (RTCSA 2014), Chongqing, China, 
Aug. 20-22, 2014.
Shao, C., S. Leng, Y. Zhang, A. Vinel, and M. Jonsson, “Ana-
lysis of connectivity probability in platoon-based vehicular 
ad hoc networks,” Proc. 10th International Wireless Commu-
nications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC 2014), 
Nicosia, Cyprus, Aug 4-8, 2014. Best paper award.
Svensson, B., Z. Ul-Abdin, P. M. Ericsson, A. Åhlander, H. 
Hoang Bengtsson, J. Bengtsson, et al., “A running leap for 
embedded signal processing to future parallel platforms,” 
Proc. 2014 ACM International Workshop on Long-Term Indu-
strial Collaboration on Software Engineering (WISE'14), ACM/
IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering (ASE '14), Västerås, Sweden, Sept. 15-19, 2014, pp. 
35-42. 
Ul-Abdin, Z. and M. Yang, “Dataflow programming of re-
al-time radar signal processing on manycores,” Proc. 2014 
IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing 
(GlobalSIP), Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec. 3-5, 2014, pp. 15-19. 
Vedder, B., T. Arts, J. Vinter, and M. Jonsson, ”Combining 
fault-injection with property-based testing,” Proc. Internatio-
nal Workshop on Engineering Simulations for Cyber-Physical 
Systems (ES4CPS’14) in conjunction with DATE 2014, Dres-
den, Germany, Mar. 28, 2014. 8 pages.
Vinel, A., E. Belyaev, B. Bellalta, and H. Hu, “Live Video 
Streaming in Vehicular Networks,” A. Sikora et al. (Eds.): 
Nets4Cars/Nets4Trains/Nets4Aircraft 2014, Offenburg, 
Germany, May 6-7, 2014, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
vol. 8435, Springer International Publishing Switzerland, pp. 
156-162, 2014.
Wang, R., H. Zhang, and T. Larsson, “Region-based geocast 
routing protocols for VANETs : summary, evaluation methods 
and simulation models,” Proc. 3rd International Conference on 
Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), Vienna, Austria, Nov. 
3-7, 2014. 
Yang Lin, S., A. Vinel, C. Englund, and L. Chen, “Poster: 
Adaptive wavelength adjustment (AWLA) for cooperative 
speed harmonization,” Proc. 2014 IEEE Vehicular Networking 
Conference (VNC), Paderborn, Germany, Dec. 3-5, 2014, pp. 
113-114. 
Zhang, H., R. Wang, and T. Larsson, “Simulation of regi-
on-based geocast routing protocols,” Proc. 2014 International 
Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), Vienna, 
Austria, Nov. 3-7, 2014, pp. 719-726.
Internal reports
2015
Ourique de Morais, W. and N. Wickström, “Evaluation of 
extensibility, portability and scalability in a database-centric 
system architecture for smart home environments,” Technical 
Report, Halmstad University, Sweden, 2015.
2014
-
Other (incl. national conferences and internatio-
nal conferences without full-paper review)
2015 
-
2014
Groote, J. F. and M. R. Mousavi, “Book announcement : mo-
deling and analysis of communicating systems,” Bulletin of 
the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science, no. 
114, 2014.
Parsapoor, M., and U. Bilstrup, “Emotional learning inspired 
engine: for cognitive radio networks,” 10th Swedish National 
Computer Networking Workshop, SNCNW 2014, Västerås, 
Sweden, June 2-3, 2014.


Visiting Address: Kristian IV:s väg 3
P O Box 823, SE 301 18 Halmstad
Telephone: +46 35 16 71 00
E-mail: registrator@hh.se
www.hh.se
CERES, the Centre for Research on Em-
bedded Systems, is a long-term research 
programme established by Halmstad Uni-
versity with support from The Knowledge 
Foundation and Swedish industry. The fo-
cus is on cooperating embedded systems, 
with applications in areas such as traffic and 
transport, health care, and sensing and com-
munication systems. The industrial partners 
include multinational companies as well as 
research-based growing companies.
H
al
m
sta
d 
U
ni
ve
rs
ity
, S
ch
oo
l o
f I
nf
or
m
at
io
n 
Te
ch
no
lo
gy
, S
ep
te
m
be
r 2
01
5.
 E
di
tio
n 
2.

