UNIVERSITY OF PUNE
Circular No. 230 of 2008-2009
Subject : Information regarding Eligibility conditions and verification of Eligibility
Application Forms in respect of various courses of the University.
Principals of affiliated colleges, Directors of recognised institutions and Heads of University
Departments shall take the responsibility of doing all the work related to eligibility of students
admitted by them to various courses of the University in their respective colleges/institutions/
University Departments.
Eligibility certificate is the first document which enables the students to get admission
to the chosen course in the College & Institutes under University Jurisdiction. In the interests of
the students as well as in the academic interests of the University, it is necessary that the process
of issuing eligibility certificate should be completed expeditiously. If such process is delayed or
remains faulty due to any reason, students and alongwith them all other concerned have to suffer.
Money spent by the students and their valuable years are wasted.
To avoid such eventuality or at least to minimise the same, it is necessary that this process
should be completed very carefully, cautiously and with speed. The Heads of University departments/
the Principals of colleges as well as Directors of recognised Institutes are requested to note
carefully the following instructions for this purpose :
1. The Principal of the College or Director of the Institute should check that the applicant
satisfies all the conditions of admission to the concerned course before admitting such
an applicant i.e. admissions are to be made according to the rules.
2 . The Principal/Director/Head, University Department shall ensure that the student has
submitted copies of the required Certificates.  The Principal/Director/Head shall verify
the true copies with the originals and endorse accordingly.
3. The originals should be retained by the College/Institute/University Department and
should be made available to the University officials at the time of verification of
eligibility.
4. The  student is responsible for  any discrepancy, error, wrong or incomplete information
in the form. The authority granting admission shall ensure that the student has filled
application completely and without any mistake.
5. Eligibility shall be decided strictly as per the provision of Ordiance No. 56 to 64 and
0.115 & 0.116.
6. The Principal of the affiliated college and Director of the Recognised Institute/Head,
University Department shall note the contents of University Circulars issued in this
regard from time to time.
7 . It should be noted that the eligibility rules should be strictly followed while
giving admission to the students and if any candidate is found ineligible, the
Principal/Head of the Dept./Director of the Institute shall be held  responsible
for the lapse and the University office shall not be a party to any litigations
arising out of this critical position.
8. It shall be carefully checked that the students enter all the required information in the
prescribed eligibility form and no column in the form is left blank.
9. (A) Photocopies of the following documents in the neat and legible form with
endorsement as true copy by the Principal/Head/Director or teacher incharge of
admissions, under his signature and stamp (with date) shall be attached to the
application. Certificates not so attested should not be accepted. All Original
documents should be returned to the concerned student/s after the same
are verified by the college/institute/department for scrutiny.
(1) Statement of Marks (Last qualifying exam.).
(2) Passing/Degree certificate (If statement of marks does not indicate clearly
-class/ percentage of marks obtained by the student in the relevant
examination).
(3) Migration certificate (Original) (if applicable).(original will not be returned)
(4) Transference certificate (if applicable).(original will not be returned)
(5) Attendance certificate, (if applicable).(original will not be returned)
(6) (a) Written Statement regarding gap in education and/or change of name
   (in the original),
(b) if applicable. (on Rs. 10/- stamp paper/court fee stamp of Rs. 10)
(7) Final score card in respect of M.B.A. student.
(8) Copy of the admission letter issued by admission authority in case of centralised
admission process by State or University.
(B) (1) If an Affiliated College/Institute/University Department admits students who
are not eligible and if such students are allowed to fill in Examination Form
a penalty of Rs. 10,000/- per student shall be imposed on the College and
the performance of Examination of such students will also be cancelled.
(2) If any Affiliated College admits any student not eligible for Under-graduate
or Post-Graduate Courses of this University and allows him/her to fill in the
Examination Form, a penalty of Rs. 5000/- per student shall be imposed on
the College and performance of the examination of such student shall be
cancelled.
(3) The same rule applies to the University Departments, Centres/Schools. The
Head of University Department/Director of Recognised Institute will have
to pay penalty as above in case not eligible candidate is allowed to fill in the
University Examination form.
2
10. The condition of eligibility regarding minimum percentage of marks at the
degree level will be relaxed in case of a candidate who gets required minimum
percentage of marks at the Post Graduate level. For such admission his
minimum percentage of marks at P.G. level will be considered
11. CANDIDATES FROM MAHARASHTRA STATE BELONGING TO SC/ST/DTNT/
OBC MUST SUBMIT THE CASTE VALIDITY CERTIFICATE.
(The students migrating from other states will not be entitled to the concessions/
benefits available to the S.C./S.T./D.T.N.T.,S.B.C. and O.B.C. students of the
Maharashtra State).
The courses for which the condition of minimum percentage of marks is
required; a relaxation of  5% marks be given to the above mentioned categories
of Maharashtra State only, if the same is not mentioned specifically.
(Student belonging to N.T.(C), N.T.(D) and O.B.C. must submit Creamy Layer Free
Certificate).
However the candidates from other states who are nominated by the Govt. of India
for admission to any course are entitled to the concessions/benefits available to SC/ST/
DTNT/SBC and OBC, provided they belong to such category of nominating state Ref.
OTC-1097/TE-1 dated 5-8-97 of Maharashtra State for Admission Purpose.
12. The eligibility fee shall be as prescribed by the University Authorities from
time to time (Annexure A).
13. The Colleges/Institutes/University Departments shall receive eligibility fees from their
students and shall issue receipts thereof. The Principal shall submit demand draft
in the name of ‘The Registrar, University of Pune, Pune-411 007’ of the amounts
so collected, within 10 days from the last date mentioned below alongwith list of
students. (A single Demand Draft must be given along with coursewise list of the
students.)
As per decision taken by the University authorities on the subject mentioned above, it
is hereby notified as below :
Colleges should be accept 40% amount of the total eligibility fees to words remumration
to non teching staff and deposit, the rest of 60% amount to University of Pune. (for
example : if the eligibility fee is Rs. 100/- then College should be accept Rs. 40/- and
deposit the amount of Rs. 60% to University of Pune).
It is further informed that the amount of late fees, additional fees, additonal late fees
should be totally deposited to University of Pune without deducting 40% college share.
Departments, Colleges and Institutes are hereby informed to strictly follow the norms
mentioned above.
3
( a ) The last dates for receiving eligibility forms in the College/Institute/Department
office are as under :
Sr. Course Last Date Last Date Last Date
No. without with Late with Additional
Late Fee Fee of Rs.50/- Late Fee of Rs.200/-
(Elig. Fee) (Elig. fee)
1     2     3        4         5
1. All Degree/Diploma/Certificate 31st Aug. 30th Sept. 31st October
and Post-Graduate Courses.
(Except the courses for which
admissions are made by the Govt.
of Maharashtra and the courses for
which admissions are made in the
second term).
2. M.Phil., Ph.D. and other 2 months 3 months 4 months
courses after P.G. examination. from the date from the date from the date
of issuance of of issuance of of issuance of
admission letter admission letter admission letter
3. All courses for which admissions 30 days 30 more days 15 more days
are made by the Govt. of from the date
Maharashtra and in centralised of letter of the
Admission process of Govt. of Maha./
this University. Pune University
as the case may be
(b) The Principals/Directors/Heads of University Departments shall submit the lists
of candidates admitted to the University Office/District Centre within four days
from the last dates mentioned in the above table respectively.
(c) If any of the last date mentioned above falls on Sunday or Holiday, the last date
shall be the next working day.
14. The Principal/Head/Director is requested to arrange the applications classwise under
four categories as follows :
(a) Students joining the First Year (Arts, Science and Commerce and other Professional
courses) after passing the Higher Secondary School Certificate Examination
(XII Std.) of the Maharashtra State Board of Higher Secondary Education.
(b) Students joining the University for any course on the basis of passing
H.S.C.or equivalent examination other than H.S.C. examination of
Maharashtra State.
4
(c) Students joining any course on the basis of having passed qualifying examination
from Pune University will also be required to fillup the eligibility forms.
(d) The College/Institute/Department shall maintain the record of eligibility cases for
3 years from the date of admission.
15. Change in Name :
It shall be ensured that name of the student in the application form for eligibility and
statement of marks, passing certificate, Degree Certificate of the qualifying examination
or in any other document enclosed therewith is the same. If in any case there is
a difference in the name i.e. in the case of a girl-student if name after marriage is
different, proof for change in name, such as copy of Government Gazette,
Marriage Registration Certificate, Affidavit should be enclosed along with the application
form. Eligibility Certificate shall not be issued in the absence of such documentary
proof.
16. Admissions as per provisions of Ordinance No. 59 :
The Principal/Head/Director shall ensure that in case of a student to whom admission
is granted in anticipation of declaration of his result, as per provisions of Ordinance No.
59, the necessary certificates are received within two months from the date of admissions,
failing which Principal/Head/Director shall cancel the admission of such student under
intimation to the University and the student concerned.
17. Recognised Degrees / Diplomas :
Students passing degrees/diplomas from the Universities/Boards/other Examining Bodies
which are recognised by Association of Indian Universities, New Delhi are only eligible
for admission in this University on a reciprocal basis provided that the entrance
qualifications, duration of the course and the general standard of attainment is similar
to those prescribed by this University (lists of such Universities, HSC Boards and
Examining Bodies are enclosed).                                   (Annexure ‘B’)
* However in case of degree awarded by open universities the condition regarding and
duration of course may be relaxed, provided that the general standards of attainment
are similar to those prescribed by the Recognising University.
18. Admissions of External Students as regular students :
The candidate registered as external student of the University shall be eligible for admission
as a regular student in the next higher class of the same course and vice versa.
19. As per U.G.C. directives a Graduate means a Bachelor Degree holder of three years
duration course of a Statutory Indian University.
20. Admission to courses after Graduation :
For the purpose of admission to second Graduation course or Post Graduation course
the candidate should have passed Graduate course of three years duration of this
University or any other statutory Indian University or equivalent examination.
21. Eligibility of MCVC (minimum competency vocational course) is equivalent to XIIStd
of Maharastra State Board of higher Education.
22. The students who are passing "A Level Examination University of Cambridge is
equivalent to XII std of Maharastra State Board of secondary and Higher secondary
(Goverment of Maharastra)
5
23. The Students who are Passing Examination conducted by Vishvashanti Gurukul of the
University of Cambridge for I.B. Diploma programme is equivalent to the XIIStd of
Goverment of Maharastra Board Programme is equivalent to the XIIStd of Maharastra
State Board of Secondary & Higher Secondary Education.
24. Migrated Student with A.T.K.T. Not Eligible for Admission :
No student coming from another University shall be eligible for admission in this
University in the next higher class unless he is declared as passed in the preceding
year/class of the former University, i.e. student who has been granted ATPT/ATKT
in any course by other University shall not be eligible for admission in the next higher
class of that course in this University.
25. Student who has appeared for supplementary examination not eligible :
Student who has appeared for any supplementary examination of the Statutory
Board/University shall not be eligible for admission in higher class in this
University unless he is declared as passed before the last date prescribed for
admission to the course.
26. Student with S.S.C. and G.C.D. are not Eligible :
Students passing S.S.C. examination with English of any Board and Government
Commercial Diploma examination of the Government of Maharashtra are not
held eligible for admission to the F.Y. Course of any faculty.
27. Student with 11 years H.S.C. / S.S.L.C. are not Eligible :
( i ) Students passing the Higher Secondary Examination of any Board with
duration of 11 years are not eligible for admission to any course where
H.S.C. (XII std.) or equivalent examination is the minimum qualification
in this University. (e.g. Rajsthan Board, M.P. Bhopal Board etc.)
( ii) Students passing the School level examination conducted by the following
Boards should not be admitted to any course in this University on the
basis of certificates of  these Boards :
(1) The Central Board of Higher Education, Tilak Nagar, New Delhi
110018.
(2) The Central Board of Higher Education, 39/7, East, Patel Nagar,
New Delhi.
(3) The Central Board of Higher Education, Vachaspati Bhavan, New
Delhi.
(iii) Students passing the Higher Secondary Examination (10+2) conducted by
Bharatiya Shiksha Parishad, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, are not eligible for
admission to any course in this University.
28. Students passing Diploma in Tools and Die Making conducted by Nettur
Technical Training Foundation (NTTF) Bangalore, are not eligible for
adminission to any course of this University.
29. Students passing first year of Yashwantrao open University, Nasik, Tilak
Vidyapeeth, Pune, S.N.D.T. University Mumbai are not eligible for Second &
Third year of Degree Course of this University.
6
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
7
(1)  Faculty of Arts & Fine Arts
Bachelor's Degree
1. First Year B.A. (a) Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) or its
equivalent Examination with English as a passing
subject.
(b) Three Years Diploma Course (after S.S.C. i.e. 10th
Standard), of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(c) Three Years Diploma in Pharmacy Course (after S.S.C.
i.e. 10th), of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(d) S.S.C. of 10 years or 11 years with English and
Indian Air Force Educational Test for promotion
to the rank of Corporal.
(e) Trained Teachers Certificate Course, of Inter-State
Board of Anglo Indian Education, New Delhi.
(f) Intermediate Commerce/Arts examination from the
Recognized Board of Secondary Education, M.P.
Bhopal with 4 subjects including General English.
(g) Diploma in Education with English, of Bureau of
Government of Mahrashtra.
(h) MCVC (minimum competency Vocational Course
Goverment of Maharastra)
2. First Year B.A. Performing Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) or its equivalent
Arts Arts (Music, Dance, Drama) Examination with English with
45% marks with common Entrance Test.
3. First Year B.A. Fine Arts Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) or its equivalent
Examination with English.
4. .i Advanced Certificate Minimum H.S.C. or its equivalent examination passed.
Course in Buddhist No previous knowledge of Buddhist languages. Pali /
Studies.
ii. Advanced Diploma Sanskrit / Chinese and Tibetan.
Course in Buddhist Studies.
iii. Higher Diploma Course in
Buddhist Studies.
iv. Post-Graduate Diploma course
in Buddhist Studies.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
8
5. Certificate/ Diploma and H.S.C. or its equivalent Examination. i.e. 10 + 2.
Advanced Diploma Course
in English Literature.
b) Advanced Diplomas in Diploma Course in respective Languages.
French/ German/ Russian /
Japanese.
c) Special Diploma in Russian Advanced Diploma in Russian languge.
d) Certificate Course in A Bachelor degree in any subject or S.S.C. having
Manuscriptology minimum ten years experience as a Librarian in recognized
institutes.
e) Diploma in Urdu S.S.C./H.S.C. passed with English and Urdu subject.
f) Intensive Certificate Course S.S.C. or Equivalent Examination.
in French
g) Special Diploma in Advanced Diploma in French or Equivalent qualification.
Commercial French
6. Second Year B.A. Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty provided student who has
passed B.A. Examination will not be eligible for admission
to S.Y.B.A. in the same subject in which he has passed his
B.A. Examination.
Master’s Degree
7. a) Master of Arts Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
b) Master of Arts in Bachelor’s Degree and Sanskrit, Prakrit & Pali subjects
Sanskrit Linguistics atleast at H.S.C. level
1. Communication Sanskrit
2. Introduction of Stotra Subhasitka Literature
3. Introduction of Bhagwadgeeta
4. Vyakarana
5. Introduction of the Upanisads
6. Introduction to Manuscriptology
c) M.A. Performing Arts Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty with 45% marks.and
aptitude, performing test, Audition test.  or
(a) Bachelor’s Degree with subjects Music, Dance,
Drama.   or
(b) Bachelor’s Degree and Visharad of Akhil Bhartiya
Gandharva Mahavidyalaya.   or
(c) Bachelor’s degree and sufficient work experience in
Music/Dance/Drama.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
9
P.G. Diploma/Certificate
8. a) Post Graduate Diploma Master’s Degree in any faculty and Sanskrit, Prakrit & Pali
in Sanskrit Linguistics subjects atleast at H.S.C. level.
b) Post Graduate Diploma A Master’s Degree in any faculty.
in Indian Logic &
Episthemology.
c) Post Graduate Diploma A Bachelor’s Degree.
in Pali.
d) Diploma course in Certificate course of Pune University in the same Language.
French/ - German/Russian For Japanes Diploma Course with minimum B Grade at
/Japanese Spanish certificate Examination.
e)  Special Diploma in German (a) Advanced Diploma in German  or
    Translation and Special Dipl- (b) Bachelor’s degree in German   or
    oma in Commercial German. (c) Any other equivalent qualification
(2) Faculty of Mental, Moral & Social Sciences
Bachelor’s Degree
1. First Year B.A. (a) Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) or its
equivalent Examination with English.
(b) Three Years Diploma Course (after S.S.C. i.e 10th
standard), of Board of Technical Education
conducted by Government of Maharashtra or its
equivalent.
(c) Three Years Diploma in Pharmacy Course of Board
of Technical Education, conducted by Government of
Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(d) S.S.C. of 10 years or 11 years with English and Indian
Air Force Educational Test for promotion to the rank
of Corporal.
(e) Trained Teachers Certificate Course of Inter-State
Board of Anglo Indian Education, New Delhi.
(f) Intermediate Commerce/Arts examination from the
Board of Secondary Education, M.P. Bhopal with
4 subjects including General English.
(g) Diploma in Education of Bureau of Government of
Maharashtra with English.
(h) MCVC (minimum competency vocational course,
Govetrment of Maharastra
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
10
2. Second Year B.A. Bachelor's degree in any faculty provided student who
has passed B.A. Examination will be eligible for
admission to S.Y.B.A. in the same subject in which he
has passed his B.A. Examination.
3. Bachelor of Library and A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Information Science.
4. Diploma in Technical Graduation in any discipline from a recognized University.
Communication Candidates  with  a  three  year  Diploma  after  S.S.C. and
at least three years professional experience in Manufacturing
or Service Industry will also be eligible to
seek admission to the course. Candidates must have sound
knowledge of English and skills in M.S. Word.
5. Certificate Course in Book Graduation in any discipline from a recognized
editing and Publishing. university. Candidates with a post S.S.C. three-year diploma
in printing technology or Post-Higher professional
experience in book editing and publishing industry will also
be eligible to seek admission to the course.
Master’s Degree
6. Master of Arts A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
7. Master of Arts (Mathematics) B.A. or B.Sc. with mathematics (special or subsidiary).
8. M.A. (Mass Communication Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
& Journalism)
9. Master of Library and (a) A Bachelor of Library Science with First class or
Information Science Bachelor’s degree of Library Science with three years
experience in Library work. or
(b) A Diploma (after graduation) in Library Science
with First Class.
10. Master of Library and A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Information Science
(with Credit System)
11. Master of Social Work A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
12. Master of Mass Relation A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
13. Master of Arts Social Studies A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
(Inter-disciplinary)
14. Masters Programme in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty with 50% marks.
Development Planning &
Administration (M.A./M.Sc.)
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
11
15. Post Graduate Diploma in (a) Bachelor of Arts in Psychology ( Special / General ).
School Psychology. or
(b) Bachelor of Home Science with specialization in Child
Development. or
(c) Bachelor of Science with Psychology as principal /
subsidiary subject.  or
(d) Bachelor of Education. or
(e) Master of Social Work. or
(f) Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty , of Open University
with three year course in Psychology at graduation
16. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty with  45% of marks.
Foreign Trade.
17. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty with 45% marks.
Financial & Investment
Management.
18. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty with  45% marks.
Insuarance & Financial
Service.
19. Post Graduate Diploma in (a) A Bachelor’s Degree in Arts or Science faculty with
Human Resource Psychology at special or general level. or
Development. (b) Any Graduate with three year courses of Psychology
from an Open University.
Diploma / Certificate
20. Diploma in Public Administration. A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
21. Diploma in Social Work A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
22. Diploma in Tribal Development A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
23. Diploma in Rural Development A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
24. Diploma in Industrial Psychology A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
25. Diploma in Child & Family A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Counseling
26. Diploma in Journalism A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
27. Diploma in Travel & Tourism A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
28. Diploma in Philosophy A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
29. Diploma in Indology A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
30. Diploma in Indian Numismatics A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
12
31. Diploma in Medieval Indian A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Studies & Archival Sciences
32. Diploma in Child Guidance (a) A Bachelor’s Degree with Psychology  or
(b) A Bachelor of Education.
33. Diploma in Disaster H.S.C. (10+2) Examination with English as a
subject. Management
34. Diploma in Clinical and Master of Arts in Psychology.
Counselling Psychology
35. Diploma in Cartography in Bachelor’s degree in Geography.
Geography
(3) Faculty of Science
Bachelor’s Degree
1. First Year B.Sc. (a) Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) or its
equivalent Examination with English with any three
science subjects such as Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Mathematics, Geography, Geology, etc.  or
(b) Three Years Diploma Course of Board of Technical
Education conducted by Government of Maharashtra
or its equivalent.  or
(c) Three Years Diploma in Pharmacy Course of Board
of Technical Education conducted by Government of
Maharashtra or its equivalent.  or
(d) Intermediate Science Examination with Compulsary
English, Physics, Chemistry, Biology/Mathematics or
any other three subjects from the Board of Secondary
Education M.P. Bhopal, as a regular candidate.
(e) Higher Secondary School Certificate(10+2)
Examination with English and any of the following
vocational subjects of + 2 level (MCVC).
Subject Code    Subject .
79 Auto Electrical
A1 Electrical Maintenance
A2 Mechanical Maintenance
A4 General Civil Engg.
C2 Electronics
C3 Chemical Plant Operation
D9 Computer Science
C5 Elementary Laboratory Technology
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
13
J1/J2/J3 Electronics Technology
J4/J5/J6 Maintenance & Repairs of Electrical
Domestic Appliances
K1/K2/K3 Auto Engineering Technician
K4/K5/K6 Mechanical Technology
P1/P2/P3 Medical Lab. Technician
P4/P5/P6 X-Ray Technician
P7/P8/P9 Opthalmic Technician
T1/T2/T3 Repair, Maintenance & Rewinding of
Electrical Motors.
L1/L2/L3 Horticulture of other Agriculture Group.
2. F.Y. B.Sc. (a) H.S.C. (10+2) Level Examination in science with
(Computer Science) Mathematics.  or
(b) Three Years Diploma Course ,after S.S.C. (10th
standard) of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
3. F.Y.B.Sc. (Biotechnology) (a) H.S.C. (10+2) Science Passed or equivalent.
(b) Admission should be made on partly merit and partly
entrance examination basis
(Note : Individual college is free to make mathematics
compulsory).
4. F.Y.B.Sc. (Wine Technology) H.S.C. (10+2) Science or equivalent.
5. B.Sc. (Applied) B.M.Tech Bachelor of Science. or B.E. or B.Sc. (Nursing) or
M.B.B.S.or
(Bio-Medical Techniques) B.A.M.S. or B.H.M.S. or B.V. Science or B.Pharm or its
Equivalent with second class.
6. B.Sc. (Applied) Analytical B.Sc. (Chem.) Special or sub-subject.
Chemistry
7. B.Sc. (Applied) (a) Bachelor of Science with Physics/Chemistry/Botany/
Optometry Zoology/Electronics/Microbiology, with 50%
marks.  or
(b) M.B.B.S./ B.A.M.S./ B.H.M.S./ B.Pharm. with
50 % marks.
8. B.Sc. (Applied) Bachelor of Science in Biology, Zoology, Botany
(Biotechnology) Biotechnology, Life Sciences, Microbiology, Chemistry,
Agriculture, Physics, Geology, any Subsidiary B.Sc.
(Computer Science) Subject with minimum 50% Marks,
Bachelor of Pharmacy 50%.
9. B.Sc. Applied course Bachelor of Science, B.Sc. (Computer Science), BA in
Geographic Information Geography with Mathematics/Statistics as a subordinate subject,
System and Remote Sensing MA in Geography, B.Arch., M.C.A., MCM, with 50% Marks,
Bachelor of Engineering.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
14
10. B.Sc.(Applied) B.Sc. (Microbiology) or B.Sc. (Biotechnology)
Wine Technology
11. B.Sc. Tech. (a) The candidate who is serving or served in the
(Weapon System) Regiment of Artillery for minimum 5 years
(b) Passed H.S.C.(10 + 2)  or has completed initial training
from recruitment in Artillery Centre after S.S.C.
(c) Basic Diploma in Weapon System or equivalent unit
instructors course.
12. B.Sc. Home Science The B.Sc. in Home Science degree course will consists of
six semesters in three years.
Candidate passed the higher secondary school certificate
examination H.S.C. in science or commerce or arts stream/
or Home Science/Vocational Course/Diploma in
Engineering/Pharmacy/Homoeopathy or equivalent exam.
from any recognized Board or University.
Master's Degree
1. Master of Science (M.Sc.) Bachelor of Science, in respective subject. & B.Sc.(Bio-
Tech.) is eligible for M.Sc. admission in Microbiology, Zoology,
Botany, Biotechnology.
2. M.Sc. (Space Science) Bachelor of Science / Engineering.
3. M.Sc. (Environmental Sci.) (a) Bachelor of Science. or
(b) Bachelor in Engineering any branch.   or
(c) Bachelor of Science in Agriculture, Fisheries with
50%  marks.
(d) Pharmacy.
4. M. Sc. (Physics) Bachelor of Science with Physics as a special subject
5. M. Sc. (Maths.) Bachelor of Science with Mathematics or/Mathematics
atleast upto second year B.E./B.Tech.
6. M. Sc. (Polymer Science) Bachelor of Science With 50% Marks & Physics as one of
Subsidiary subject  or
Bachelor of Engineering in Chemical/ Polymer.
7. M. Sc. (Health Science) (a) Bachelor of Science.  or
(b) Bachelor of Arts in Social Sciences. or
(d) Bachelor of Science in Nursing.  or
(e) Bachelor of Science in Physiotherapy.  or
(f) M.B.B.S., B.A.M.S., B.H.M.S., B.Pharm. with
50% marks.
8. M.Sc. (Bio Technology) (a) Bachelor of Science, or  M.B.B.S.,B.A.M.S., B.H.M.S.,
(University Department) B.Pharm. with 55% marks.
(b) Entrance Test Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
15
9. M.Sc. (Bio technology) Bachelor of Science in Bio Technology with 60% marks as
(College) minimum & 55% marks for reserved Category Students.
10. M.Sc. (Petroleum Technology) Bachelor of Science.
11. M.Sc. (Computer Science) (a) Bachelor of Science faculty with 50% marks.
(University Department) (b) Entrance Test
12. M.Sc. (Computer Science) (a) Bachelor of Computer Science BCS with 50% marks  or
(College) (b) B.Sc. (Computer Science) with 50% marks   or
(c) A Bachelor of Engineering with 50% marks.
13. M.Sc. (Computer Science) Bachelor of computer science with 50% marks.  or
(Interdisciplinary School B.Sc. (Computer) with 50% marks.
of Scientific Computing) OR
B.E. in Computer Science/Information Technology/
Electronics Telecommunication with 50% marks.
14. M.Sc. (Drug Chemistry) B.Sc. Chemistry with 50% marks.
15. M.Sc. (PPPR) Tech. (a) Graduate of National Defence Academy or any other
Weapon Systems recognized University   or
(b) A Commissioned Officer of Indian Military Academy
(IMA) or Officers Training Academy (OTA)  or
(c) Has passed the Long Gunnery Staff course in field or
surveillance and Target Acquisition stream  or
(d) Has taught in the school of Artillery for one year or
in Artillery Unit for two years after having the Long
Gunnery Staff Courses.
(e) Has minimum seven years service as an Officer.
Diploma / Certificate
1. Diploma in Weapon System Diploma in Weapon System Technology will be awarded to
Technology those students, who successfully complete his course,
conducted at MAC Wing. MIRC, Ahmednagar. Students
are eligible for admission, subject to fulfilling the under-
mentioned qualitative requirements and pre-requisites :
(a) Should have minimum of five years of services.
(b) Should have passed Matriculation/SSC from any
recognised Board of Secondary Education
(c) Should have successfully completed 12 weeks of Basic
Gunnery Training as a young soldier, Conducted at
MIRC Ahmednagar.
(d) Should be a Grade 1 Gunner and should have
completed the Basic Conversion Course.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
16
(e) Should have done on the job training for minimum
two years (104 weeks) at unit level, other than non
contact periods.
Post-graduate Diploma in Infantry Combat Vehicle (ICV)
Technology and Combat Application will be awarded
to those students, who successfully complete this
course, conducted at MAC Wing, MIRC, Ahmednagar.
Students are eligible for admission, subject to fulfilling
the under-mentioned qualitative requirements and pre-
requisites.
2. Post Graduate Diploma in (a) Should be a Graduate from any recognised University.
Infantry Combat Vehicle (ICV) (b) Should be a Commissioned Officer in the Indian Army.
Technology and Combat (c) Should have done on the Job Training for minimum
Application (ICVTCA) one year (52 weeks) at unit level other than non contact
periods.
(d) Should be physically fit and be able to pass the
requisite Battle Physical Proficiency Test as per laid
down standards.
Diploma in Vehicle System Technology will be awarded
to those students, who successfully complete this
course, conducted at MAC Wing, MIRC, Ahmednagar.
Students are eligible for admission, subject to fulfilling
the under-mentioned qualitative requirements and
pre-requisites.
3) Post Graduate Diploma in Bee B.Sc.(Students those who have offered Zoology/Botany
keeping (Central Bee Research at  F.Y / S.Y level are eligible)
and Training Institute Khadi &
Village Industrial Commission,
Ganeshkhind Road Pune-7)
4. Post Graduate Diploma in (a) M.A./ M.Sc., Maths/Statistics/Physics/Electronics,
Industrial Mathematics Computer Industrial Mathematics Science or Equivalent.
(b) B.E./ B.Tech. any branch or equivalent
5. Post Graduate Diploma in B.Sc. (any Science Subject/Agriculture)
Geo-Environment Appraisal and
Management
(University Department)
6. Post Graduate Diploma in Geo B.E. (Civil) M.Sc. (Geology)
Techonology (University Department)
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
17
7. Diploma in Advanced Digital B.E. Electronics or B.E. (E & T.C.) or
System Design B.Tech Electronics
8. Certificate Course in Armament (a) B.Sc. or B.E. or Diploma in Engineering or Equivalent
Test Evaluation  (b) Belonging to Director General of Quality Assurance
(SQRA) Ordinance Factories Board (OFB), Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO),
Directorate of Naval Armament Inspectorate (DNAI)
9. Certificate Course in Biomedical M.Sc. Electronics OR B.E. Electronics
Electronics, Industrial Controllers,
mechatronics, Network Design.
(Department of Electronics,
Unversity of Pune)
10. Certificate Course in Personal H.S.C. (10+2) Science or Equivalent or Diploma in
Computer Maintenance, Engineering.
Network Maintanance
11. Certificate Course in Network Any Graduate.
Administration, System Administration
12. Certificate Course in Finite B.E. Mechanical or B.E. Production.
Element Analysis (FEA)
13. Certificate Course in VLSI (a) B.E. Electronics/B.Tech Electronics. OR
Design, embedded System and (b) B.E. Electronocs & Telecommunication /Instrumentation
Advanced Digital Signal / Computer / Information Tehnology.OR
Processing (c) M.Sc. in Electronics or equivalent.
14. Certificate Course in 3D CAD, B.E. Mechanical / Production / Auto Mobile.
CAM & CAE, Computer Aided
Produce Design
15. P.G. Diploma in Geo-Environmental B.Sc. (First Class) in any Science Subject / Agriculture.
Appraisal and Management
16. P.G. Diploma in Advanced Geo M.Sc. Geology / B.E. Civil Engineering
Technology
17. Diploma in Vehicle System (a) Should have minimum of five years of service
Technology Course. (b) Should have passed Matriculation/SSC from any
recognised Board of Secondary Education.
(c) Should have succesfully completed 24 weeks of Basic
Automotive Training as a Young Soldier conducted at
MIRC Ahmednagar.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
18
(d) Should be a Grade 1 Driver and should have completed
the Basic Conversion Course.
(e) Should have done on the job training for minimum
two tears (104 weeks) at unit level other than non
contact periods.
Diploma in Communication System Technology will be
awarded to those students, who successfully complete
this course, conducted at MAC Wing, MIRC,
Ahmednagar. Students of the Mechanised Infantry are
eligible for admission, subject to fulfilling the
under-mentioned qualitative requirements and
pre-requisites.
18. Diploma in Communication (a) Should have minimum five years of service
Systems Technology (b) Should have passed Matriculation/SSC from any
recognised board of Secondary Education.
(c) Should have successfully completed 12 weeks of Basic
Radio training as a Young Soldier conducted at MIRC,
Ahmednagar
(d) Should be a Grade 1 Operator and should have
completed the Basic Conversion Course.
(e) Should have done on the job training for minimum
two tears (104 weeks) at unit level other than contact
periods.
19. M.Tech.(Atmospheric Physics) Master of Science in Physics or Mathematics or Computer
Science or Statistics or Atmospheric Physics or Meteorology
or with specialisation in Meteorology.
20. M.Tech. in Lasers & (a) M.Sc. or equivalent in Physics, Applied Physics,
Electronic Optics. Electronics, Electronic Science or equivalent in
Electronics Electrical Communication, Tele
Communication, Electronics and Tele Communication/
Tele Communication Engineering, or Physics with 55%
Marks B.E. (Computer/ Information Technology).
(b) Departmental candidates are possessing AMIE /
grade IETE degree with 60% marks and above are
also eligible.
21. Master of Computer Application (a) Bachelor’s Degree in Science Faculty with 50% marks
 (University Dept.) for Open category and passing marks for Reserved
category.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
19
(b) Mathematics at 10+2 level is essential.
(c) Entrance examination.
22. Master of Computer Application(a) Bachelor Degree in Science faculty with 50%
 (Colleges) marks for Open category and passing marks for
Reserved category.
(b) Mathematics at 10+2 level with 45% desirable.
23. M.Tech. (Computer Science) A GATE Score in any Mathematical Science or any Physical
Science or any Engineering discipline valid at the time of
admission. OR A UGC-CSIR Junior Research Fellowship
in any Mathematical Science of any Physical Science.
24. M.Tech. in Mathematical (a) The course is meant for officers of Army, Navy, Air
Modelling & Simulation For Modelling & Simulation ce, DRDO, other
Departments at Central, State Government/Public
Sector undertaking and nominees of University of Pune.
(b) A Master Degree in Physics or Mathematics,
Engineering/Technology. (Circular No. 22 of 1997 )
25. M.Tech. Bio Information Bachelor of Science with First class.
26. M.Sc. (Tech.) BA /Bachelor of Science with Mathematics at least upto
(Industrial Mathematics 2nd year level OR B.E./B.Tech./B.Sc. (Engineering)
with Computer applications)
27. M.Tech (Modeling & Simulation)(a) B.E. or equivalent in any branch of Engineering OR
Centre for Modeling and (b) Master Degree in Science / Arts / Commerce discipline.
Simulation (University Dept.) and Background in Mathematics equivalent to the
University of Pune. F.Y.B.Sc. Mathematics Syllabus.
28. M.Sc. (Biotechnology) H.Sc. (10+2) with English, Physics, Chem., Biology, Maths.
(five year Integrated course) with 60% marks.
29. M.Tech. (Biotechnology) H.Sc. (10+2) with English, Physics, Chem., Biology, Maths.
(six years course) with 60% marks.
30. Advanced Diploma in Masters Degree in Biotechnology, Physics, Mathematics,
Bio Informatics Chemistry, Microbiology, Botany, Zoology, Agriculture,
Veternary Sciences, MCA,  M. Pharm. or Bachelor’s degree
in Engineering, Technology, or Medicine (MBBS), or
equivalent qualifications with 60 % aggregate marks in
Bio Informatics
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
20
31. P.G. Diploma in Dietetics (a) Bachelor of Home Sciences   or
(b) Bachelor of Science with specialization in Bio-
chemistry, Microbiology, Life Science.
(4) Faculty of Law
1. Three-Year Law Course :
(a) First LL.B. :
A student passing Batchelor’s degree examination with Minimum 45% Marks in any
faculty of this University or any other Recognised University shall be eligible for admission to First
year LL.B. Course (three-year degree course)
(b) Second LL.B. :
A student who has taken admission to II LL.B. course of this University, after passing
the  First LL.B. examination from any other University recognised by AIU and Bar Council of
India will have  to appear and pass in the subjects of First LL.B. course of this University in which
he has not already passed, in his parent University. Further, if he so desires, he will be exempted
in any
of the subjects of the Second LL.B. examination of this University in which he has already passed
in the partent University. However, in scuh case, he will not be awarded class at the II LL.B.
examination.
(c) Third LL.B. :
A  student passing the Second Year LL.B. (LL.B. General) examination from a
Statutory Indian University recognised by AIU and Bar Council of India  is allowed to seek
admission to the Third LL.B. Course in his University on the condition that he shall appear for
and pass in all papers prescibed for the First and Second Year LL.B. Course of this University
of which he has not passed in his parent university. Further if he so desires, he will be exempted
in any of the subject at the Third LL.B. examination of this University if he has already passed
in those subjects in the parent University. However, in such a case, he will be required to appear
and pass in the deficient papers according to syllabus of First LL.B./Second LL.B. of this
University. Further, in such a case he will not be awarded a class at the Third LL.B. examination.
2. LL.B. (Five Years) (a) Higher Secondary School Certificate Examination
Bachelor of Social Science & (10+2) or its equivalent with  45 % marks.
Legal Science (B.S.L.) (b) Three Years Diploma Examination of Board  of Tech-
nical Education.(Subject to approval of Bar Council of
India) or
(c) Corporal Test 10th after (SSC) with English &
I.A.F. Educational Test for promotion to the rank of
Corporal.
Master’s  Degree
3. Master of Law A Bachelor’s Degree in Law (LL.B.)
( LL.M.)
4. Master of Labour Law A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty
& Labour Welfare ( M.LL. & L.W.)
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
21
Diploma / Certificate
1. Diploma Course in Human Rights
2. Diploma Course in Cyber Laws
3. Diploma Course in Consumer Protection Laws
4. Diploma Course in Intellectual Property Right Laws
5. Diploma in Taxation A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty
Law (D.T.L.)
6. Diploma in Labour A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty
Laws & Labour Welfare
7. Diploma in Co-operative A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty
Laws
8. Diploma in Criminology A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty
9. Diploma in Legislative A Bachelor of Law
Drafting
10. Certificate Course in Forensic Bachelor of Law  OR
and Medical Jurisprudence Bachelor of Medicine
(5) Faculty of Medicine
Candidate applying for admission to Post-Graduate course in Maharashtra must have
registered himself/herself at least provisionally under the Maharashtra Medical Practitioners Act,
1961 as amended from time to time and must produce evidence of the same at the time of
submitting the application for admission. The candidate must renew the registration under the said
Act during the course of his/her studies, failing which, the Dean/Principal shall take such action
as he may deem fit, including advising the Univerisity to cancel the Registration of the Candidate.
“Candidate applying for admission to post-graduate course in Maharashtra must have
completed internship before or on the last date of submission of application and
will have to produce the completion certificate, Registration certificate with application”.
Degree Eligibility
1. M.D. (Doctor of Medicine) Degree of M.B.B.S. or equivalent degree.
(All Branches)
2. M.S. (Master of Surgery) Degree of M.B.B.S. or equivalent degree.
3. D.M. (Doctor of Medicine) Degree of M.D.(or its equivalent) from recognized
institute, in the subject as under :
Prior Requirement.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
22
1. Cardiology M.D. ( Medicine )
M.D. ( Pediatrics )
2. Nephrology M.D. ( Medicine )
M.D. ( Pediatrics )
3. Neurology M.D. ( Medicine )
M.D. ( Pediatrics )
4. M.Ch. (Master of Chirurgie) Degree of M.S. (or its equivalent degree) in the
subjects as under :
Prior Requirement.
1. Cardio Vascular & Thoracic M.S. (Genreral surgery)
Surgery
2. Urology M.S. (Genreral surgery)
3. Neuro Surgery M.S. (Genreral surgery)
M.S. (Orthopaedies)
4. Paediatric Surgery M.S. (Genreral surgery)
5. Plastic and M.S. (Genreral surgery)
Reconstructive Surgery
5. Master of Hospital Administration M.B.B.S. from statutory University.
Diplomas
1. Diploma courses in Degree of M.B.B.S. or its equivalent.
all Branches
M.Sc. Courses
1. M.Sc. (Anatomy) A Bachelor of Science with subjects Botany/ Zoology/
Bio- technology/ Microbiology  or  M.B.B.S. Bachelor of
Physiotherapy
2. M.Sc. (Physiology) A Bachelor of Science with subjects Botany/ Zoology/
Bio-technology/ Microbiology  or  M.B.B.S., Bachelor of
Physiotherapy
3. M.Sc. (Medical Biochemistry) A Bachelor of Science with subjects Botany/ Zoology/ Bio-
technology/ Microbiology/ Chemistry  or  M.B.B.S.
4. M.Sc.(Medical Microbiology) A Bachelor of Science with subjects Botany/ Zoology/ Bio-
technology/ Microbiology or M.B.B.S.
5. M.Sc. Pharmacology A Bachelor of Science with subjects Botany/ Zoology/ Bio-
technology/ Microbiology/ Chemistry,  or  B.Pharm. or
M.B.B.S.
6. M.Sc. Genetic Sciences A Bachelor of Science with subjects Botany/ Zoology/ Bio-
technology/ Microbiology  or  M.B.B.S.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
23
Dental Surgery :
1. Master in Dental Surgery A Bachelor’s degree in Dental Surgery i.e. B.D.S.
(M.D.S.)
Physiotherapy :
1. Master of Physiotherapy A Bachelor of Physioptherapy from recognised university.
(M.PhT.)
(6) Faculty of Engineering
Bachelor’s Degree
1. First Year Engineering Tech. (a) Candidate should have passed the HSC (Std. XII)
examination of Maharashtra State Board of Secondary
and Higher Secondary Education or its equivalent
examination with subjects English, Physics, Chemistry
and Mathematics and secured minimum 50% marks
i.e. 150 marks out of 300 marks (45% marks i.e. 135
marks out of 300 marks for backward class category
candidates from (Maharashtra) in the subjects Physics,
Chemistry and Mathematics added together.
Or
(b) Diploma holders who have passed the Diploma course
in Engineering / Technology with minimum of 50%
marks from the polytechnics affiliated to MSBTE Or
AICTE approved autonomous polytechnics in
Maharashtra State or equivalent.
(c) In other states, a candidate who has qualified national
level AIEEE exam.
(d) English Medium of Instruction of Diploma Level.
2. Second Year Engineering (a) The candidiate should have passed in First Class /
First Class with condonation, post SSC Or post HSC
diploma course in Engineering / Technology of the
Maharashtra State Board of Technical Education
(MSBTE).
Or
(b) Of any other recognised Diploma equivalent to the
Diploma awarded by the Maharashtra State Board of
Technical Education (MSBTE) with English as a
medium of instruction at Diploma level.
(c) Out of State : Any other state / Territory Diploma
equivalent to MSBTE, approved by AICTE, English
as a medium of instruction out of state
Or
Of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University,
Lonere (BATU).
Or
Of any other AICTE approved institution which has
been granted academic autonomy by the Government
of Maharashtra Or University in the State of
Maharashtra.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
24
3. Part time Degree course Diploma course in Engineering/Technology with aggregate
in Engineering (Civil, 50% marks of Board of Technical Examination,Maharashtra
Mechanical, Electrical, and one year working experience in appropriate profession.
Electronics, and
Telecommunication )
4. Diploma in Print (a) Diploma / Degree in Printing Technology /
Administration Engineering.Or
(b) A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty with three years
experience in the printing Industry.
(c) Diploma in any other branch of Engineering Or
Technology with three years experience in the Printing
Industry.
5. Bachelor of Architecture Candidates having more than 50% marks in aggregate at
the new 10+2 standard of Higher Secondary School
Certificate; HSC having Mathematics and English as Special
subjects shall be eligible. The admission shall be subject to
an aptitude test conducted by the competent authority.
Migrated Students
(a) The migration of the student from one University to
another University is permitted up tothe Third Year of
the B.E. course. No objection of D.T.E. is necessary.
(b) Admission shall not be granted to the students, coming
from outside the state of Maharashtra, in the S.E.,
T.E. and Final year of the B.E. course except for
Physically transferred Govt. servant/military personnel.
(c) No provision for internal admission in Second year Or
at any other stage of the 5 years Course in
Architecture.
6. Master’s Degree Bachelor Degree in Engineering in the respective branches
M.E. of Pune University Or degree from any other University
recognised as equivalent thereto by this University. OR
Passing A.M.I.E. / A.M.I.E.T.E. after 3 year Diploma with
valid GATE score in respective branches. The
examination conducted by Institute of Mechanical
Engineering for Associate Membership is not equivalent
to B.E.
M.E., M.Tech. Courses Bachelor’s Degree in Engineering / Technology of Pune
University in the respective branch Or degree from any
other University, recognised as equivalent thereto by
this University.
M.E., M.Tech. Computer Engineering B.E. / B.Tech. in Computer
Engineering / Information Technology.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
25
M.E., M.Tech. (Computer B.E. /B.Tech.
Science & Engineering) - (i) Computer Engineering
Information Technology (ii) Electronics, Electronics &
Telecommunication
(iii) Electrical Engineering
(iv) Information Technology.
(v) Instrumentation Engineering
M.E., M.Tech. (vi) Computer balence Engineering.
M.Tech. Modeling & Simulation (vii) B.E. or equivalent in any branch of Engineering
OR M.Sc. equivalent in any branch of science
( Final year students may apply.)
M.E. (Metallurgy) / M.Tech. B.E./B.Tech. Metallurgy & equivalent
M.E. (Electrical) B.E./B.Tech. Electrical Engineering & equivalent
M.E. (Civil) B.E./B.Tech. Civil Engineering / Civil Construction &
equivalent
M.E. Electronics / E & TC / B.E./B.Tech. in Electronics, Electronics &
Telecommunication, Instrumentation & Control,
Industrial Electronics, Computer Engineering &
equivalent
M.E. (Instrumentation & Control B.E./B.Tech. Instrumentation & Control.
Course) Electronics & Telecommunication, Electronics
Instrumentation Engg. Bio-Medical, Industrial
Electronics.The engineering barnches like Electronic
Instrumentation, Electronics & Instrumentation,
Electronic Instrumentation & Control, Biomedical
Engineering, Biomedical Electronics, Biomedical
Instrumentaion.
M.E. (Mechanical) B.E./B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering, Mechanical
Sandwich & equivalent.
M.E. (Production) B.E./B.Tech. Production, Mechanical Engineering,
Mechanical Sandwich / Prod. Sandwich & equivalent
M.E. (Industrial) B.E./B.Tech. in Industrial Engineering & equivalent.
MCA (Engineering) (a) Any Bachelor Degree with minimum 50%
marks (minimum 45% marks for backward
class category candidate)
(b) Studied Mathematics / Statistics at 10+2
level or studied Maths./Stats. at higher level
as one of the subjects.
M.Arch. (Architecture) 4.1 The candidate with a minimum of 50%
marks in aggregate in a Bachelor of
Architecture degree course or equivalent
courses recognized by the Council of
Architecture shall be admitted to the post
graduate course in architecture.
M.B.A. (Engineering) Any graduate with minimum 50% marks for Open
category students  OR  45% marks for backward
class students.
(7) Faculty of Ayurved
Post-Graduate Degree Courses
( Ayurved Vachaspati )
Qualification required for Eligibility
These corses are transfered to Maharastra University Health seience (M.U.H.S.)
1  (a) The candidate possessing any of the qualification mentioned in the second schedule
appended to the Indian Medicine Central Council Act 48 of 1970 and are covered
under Parts “A”, “A-1”, “B”, “C” Schedule appended to Maharashtra Medical practioners
Act, 1961 and passed the qualifying examination from the state of Maharashtra are
only eligible, provided they fulfill the prescribed eligibility condition of the University and
rules framed by Government which are in force and as modified from time to time.
(b)  (i) Candidate applying for admission to Post-Graduate course in Maharashtra must
have registered himself/herself at least provisionally under the Maharashtra Medical
practioners Act, 1961 as amended from time to time and must produce evidence
of the same at the time of submitting the application for admission. The candidate
must regularly renew the registration under the said Act during the course of his/
her studies, failing which, the Dean/Principal shall take such action as he may
deem fit, including advising the University to cancel the Registration of the
Candidate.
(ii) “Candidate applying for admission to  post-graduate course in Maharashtra must
have completed internship before or on the last date of submission of application
and will have to produce the completion certificate with application”.
(c ) The candidate to be eligible for admission to the post-graduate course must have
secured a minimum of 55 percent of uncorrected marks in the subject of speciality for
which he/she is applying. However, this condition will not be applicable for the
candidates in service (i.e. teaching and non-teaching medical staff) and reserved category
candidates.
(d) Teachers in Ayurvedic Colleges shall register only in the same subject in which they
are appointed and approved by the University.
Note : This condition of University approval shall not be applicable for the teachers
in Government Ayurvedic colleges.
(e) For non-teaching medical person, the seat will be given in the subject(s) by rotation.
(f) The student from the Outside State shall have to produce the provisional “Eligibility
Cerfificate” within 15 days from the date of admission. He/She should submit
provisional registration certificate of Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine or  receipt
of application for the same.
(g) Every candidate will have to appered for the common Enterce Examination conducted
by state Goverment & or Association of Private colleges.
26
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
27
(8) Faculty of Commerce
Bachelor’s Degree
1. First Year B.Com. (a) Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) or its
equivalent Examination with English.
(b) Three Years  Diploma Course after S.S.C. i.e. 10th
standard, of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(c) Two Years Diploma in Pharmacy after HSC, of Board
of Technical Education conducted by Government of
Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(d) Intermediate  Commerce/Arts  examination  from the
Board of Secondary Education, M.P. Bhopal with
4 subjects including General English.
(e) MCVC
2. B.B.A. (a) A candidate for being eligible for admission to the
(Bachelor of Business Degree Course in Bachelor of Business Administration
Administration) shall have passed 12th Std. Examination (H.S.C. 10+2)
first year 45% from any stream with English as one of
the subjects.
(b) Two Years Diploma in Pharmacy after HSC, of Board
of Technical Education conducted by Government of
Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(c) Three Year Diploma Course (after S.S.C. i.e. 10th
standard), of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(d) Every eligible candidate has to pass a common
Entrance Test to be conducted by the respective
Institute/College.
3. B.B.M. (International Business)(a) A candidate for being eligible for admission to the
(Bachelor of Business Management) degree course in B.B.M. International Business
first year Management shall have passed 12th Std. Examination
(H.S.C.10+2) from any stream with English as passing
subject. and minimum 45% marks in aggregate.
(b) Three Years  Diploma Course after S.S.C. i.e. 10th
standard, of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(d) Every eligible candidate has to pass a common
Entrance Test to be conducted by the respective
Institute/College.
(e) Two Years Diploma in Pharmacy after HSC, of Board
of Technical Education conducted by Government of
Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(e) M.C.V.C.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
28
4. B.C.A. (a) In order to be eligible for admission to bachelor of
Bachelor of Computer ComputerApplications a candidate must have passed
Application (a) H.S.C.(10+2) from any stream with English as
passing subject with minimum 45% marks in aggregate.
(b) Two Years Diploma in Pharmacy Course of Board of
Technical Education, conducted by Government of
Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(c) Three Year Diploma Course (after S.S.C. i.e. 10th
standard), of Board of Technical Education conducted
by Government of Maharashtra or its equivalent.
(d) MCVC.
(e) Every eligible candidate has to pass Common Entrance
Test to be conducted by the respective Institute/College.
Master’s Degree
5. Master of Commerce (a) Bachelor of Commerce.
(b) Bachelor of Business Administration. (BBA)
(c) Any Graduate from Foreign University with
minimum four Commerce subjects.
(d) B.F.T.
(e) BCA
Diploma/Certificate
 6. Post-Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Company Secretaryship
 7. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Salesmenship and
Advertisement
 8. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Statistics
 9. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Taxation
10. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Banking
11. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Accountancy
12. Post Graduate Diploma in A Bachelor’s Degree in Commerce with IInd class (50 %
International Business agreegate marks), Business Administration, Social, Mental,
Moral Sciences, Physical Sciences, Engineering, Pharmacy
13. Diploma in Secretaryship A Bachelor’s Degree in any Faculty.
14. Diploma in Taxation A Bachelor’s Degree in any Faculty.
15. Certificate Course in H.S.C. (10+2) or its equivalent Examination with English.
E Commerce
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
29
(9) Faculty of Education & Physical Education
Bachelor’s Degree
1. Bachelor of Education A Bachelor’s / Master’s degree in any faculty with minimum
(B.Ed.) 45% marks.
2. Bachelor of Education (a) A  Bachelor’s degree  in  any  subject  with Physical
(Physical Education) Education as an elective subject. or
(b) A Bachelor’s degree in  any  faculty having subject of
Physical Education at the H.S.C. level and 45% marks.
or
(c) A Bachelor’s degree in any faculty and represented
State/University in Sports/ games/ athletics. or
(d) A Bachelor’s degree in any faculty and secured 1st,
2nd, or 3rd position in Inter-Collegiate sports/games/
tournament. or
(e) A Bachelor’s / Master degree in any faculty with
minimum 45% marks.
Students will be eligible for admission to English medium
divisions only if they have done their entire education
earlier with English as the medium of instruction. Note
for English Medium Courses.
3. Bachelor of Education A Bachelor of Arts or Science with 50 % marks and
(Hearing Impared) with the School teaching Subjects as the area of study at
(visual, blind) the graduate level.
4. Bachelor of Education A Bachelor’s / Master’s Degree with at least 45% Marks
(English Education) and with English as a Special Subject.
5. B.A.B.Ed. Integrated Course 4 Years H.S.C. or an equivalent examination from
any other Board or University with
English as a Compulsory Subject with
atleast 45% Marks or grade B.
6. Bachelor of Physical 3 Years Graduate
Education (BPE)
7. B.Ed. Education of Handicapped 1 Years Graduate
8. B.Ed. (Yoga) 1 Year Graduate
9. Bachelor's Degree (B.Sc.) in 3 Years H.S.C. Exam. from Statutory Board/
Physical Education, Health University in India or equivalence.
Education and Sports
30
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
Master’s Degree & M.Phil., Ph.D.
1. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D)    – Master's Degree (with 55%)
2. Ph.D in Education    – Master's Degree (with 55%)
(Interdisciplinary)
3. Master of Philosophy (M.Phil.) (1 Year) Master's Degree
4. M.Phil in Education (1 Year) Master's Degree
(Interdisciplinary)
5. M.Phil. (Physical Education) (1 Year Regular) M.Ed. (Phy.)/M.P.Ed.
6. Master of Education A Bachelor of Education.(Gen.,P.E.,Sp.Edn.)
7. Master of Physical Education A Bachelor of Physical Education with 50% Marks  Or
GPE with 50% Marks.
8. Master of Physical Education A Master of Physical Education of University of Pune only
Supplementary
9. Master of Education (M.Ed.) 2 Years B.Ed. (for inservice Teachers, Educators
(Part Time) & Educational Professionals only)
10. M.Ed. Interdisciplinary 1 Years B.Ed.
11. M.A. (Edn.) Interdisciplinary 2 Years Graduate
Diploma / Certificate
1. Post-Graduate Diploma in 1 Year B.Ed. OR Any Bachelor Degree OR
Research Methodology of Teacher Education
Education
2. Diploma in Education for 1 Year Minimum 12th Standard Pass or its
Deaf equivalent from any Board or University.
3. Diploma in Education for 1 Year Graduate
Teachers of Mentally
Retarded Children
4. Diploma in Health Education 1 Year Phy. Education/B.P.Ed. or equivalent
degree course recognised by University.
5. Diploma in Sports Journalism 1 Year Phy. Education/B.P.Ed. or equivalent
degree course recognised by University.
Sr. Name of the Course Qualifications required for Eligibility
No.
31
6. Spl. Diploma in Education Higher Secondary School Certificate Examination.
(Hearing Impaired)
7. Certificate Course for    – H.S.C.
Training of Adult Education
Middle Level Functionaries
(Animators) and Supervisors
8. Spl. Dip. in Education 1 Year H.S.C.
(Hearing Impared)
Following courses are introduced from 2004-2005
9. Advance Certificate Course 180 Clock Hours Graduate
in Research Methodology &
Statistical Methods
10. Certificate Course in 90 Teaching Hrs. D.Ed. or B.Ed. degree with minimum
Communication in English (Conveniently 45% Marks.
spaced out over
period of 6
months)
11. Certificate Course in 130 Clock Hours Passed H.S.C. with 45% Marks.
Gymnasium Instructor
(10) Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Bachelor's Degree
1. First Year Bechelor of Phamacy :
(a) The candidate should be an Indian National and should have passed Higher Secondary
school certificate (10+2) Examination of Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher
Secondary  Education or its equivalaent examination with subject English, Physics, Chemistry
and Biology or Mathematics and secured minimum 50% marks i.e. 150 marks out of 300
marks (45% marks i.e. 135 marks out of 300 marks for Backward class category candidates
belonging to Maharashtra state only) In the subjects Physics, Chemistry and Biology /
Mathematics (Maximum marks obtained in Biology or Mathematics shall be considered for
purpose of addition)
AND
Obtained Non-zero score at MHT-CET - of relevant year Enterance Examination conducted
by Government of Maharashtra OR Private Management Association of Pharmacy Colleges
which is authorised by PNS, D.T.E and Govt. of Maharashtra, India.
32
OR
(b) Diploma in Pharmacy with minimum 50% marks. (The candidate should be passed from the
PCI, (Delhi) approved Diploma in Pharmacy from the state of Maharshtra or other states
of India.)
OR
(c) Candidates of foreign National / PIO/Children ward of Indian workers in the Gulf Countries
should have passed an examination equivalent to HSC of Maharashtra state Board of
secondary and Higher Secondary education with subject English Physics, Chemistry and
Biology / Mathematics secured minimum 50% marks in the subject Physics, Chemistry and
Biology / Mathematics added together at one & the same seating (Maximum marks obtained
in the Biology or Mathematics shall be considered for purpose of addition)
OR
(d) Any other Eligibility criteria prescribed by Government of Maharashtra / Pravesh Niyantran
samittee, M.S. Mumbai
2. Second Year Bachelor of Pharmacy :
Candidate should have passed at Diploma Course in Pharmacy with minimum 60% marks.
(The candidate should be passed from PCI (Delhi) approved Diploma in Pharmacy from the
state of Maharashtra or other states of India)
OR
Any other eligibility criteria prescribed by Governement of Maharashtra / Pravesh Niyantran
samittee M.S., Mumbai.
3. Master of Pharmacy.
  First Semester of Master of Pharmacy :
The candidate should have passed the Bachelor of Pharmacy with minimum 60% marks
from any recognized University or an Insitution affiliated to any University recognized by
University grants commission (UGC) and should have valid GATE score. Obtained non-zero
score at C.E.T. of the releavent year conducted by Goverment of Maharastra (or) D.T.E.
(or) private management Assocation of pharmacy courses which is outhorised by PNS/
Goverment of  maharastra (D.T.E.).
OR
Any other eligibility criteria prescribed by Governement of Maharashtra / Pravesh Niyantran
samittee M.S., Mumbai.
(11) Faculty of Management
 1. Master of Business A Bachelor's degree in any faculty as defined for
Administration Centralized Admission procedure (CAP) carried by the
competent authority of the State of Maharastra.
33
2. M.B.A. Biotechnology A Bachelor’s degree or Master’s degree in science ,
Bio-chemistry, Biology, Botany, Chemistry,
Environmental science, Genetics, Life sciences,
Microbiology, Zoology (etc.), Agriculture, Medical Sciences,
Pharmacy, Ayurved , Veterinary sciences, echnology,
Engineering with 45% marks.Appeared for National level
test approved by Department of management science
(PUMBA). Entrance Test, G.D. & P.I. conducted by
Department of Management Sciences. (PUMBA )
 3. Master of Personnel A Bachelor’s degree in any faculty, The written test,
Management interview by the Director of the Institute concerned.
4. Master in Business Two Years’ Diploma in Business Management (D.B.M.)
Studies or Studies Two Years Post-Graduate Diploma in Business
Management (PGDBM) or Two Years’ Diploma in
Management Science (DMS) awarded by Statutory
University.
  5. Master of Computer A Bachelor’s degree or Master’s degree in any faculty
Management I Year awarded by Statutory University. The written test,
interview by the Director of the Institute concerned.
Master of Computer A.D.C.A. course of Pune University in First Class.
Management II Year Such admission shall not exceed 5 % of overall sanctioned
intake of M.C.M. at the Institute.
6. Master of Marketing A Bachelor’s degree or Master’s degree in any faculty
Management awarded by Statutory University.Entrance Test, Group
(M.M.M.) Discussion, Personal Interview by the
7. Master of Computer Eligibility (Criteria for a dmission as per Centralized
Application Admission Application procedure (CAP) carried by the
compelent  authority of the state of maharastra
Bachelor's Degree (B.Sc. Hospitality Services)
1. Bachelor of Hotel Management Higher Secondary School Certificate (10+2) Examination
Management or its equivalent Examination with 45%
marks.
 2. Bachelor of Hotel Diploma Course in Hotel Management
Management and
Catering Technology I Year
3. Bachelor of Science - Hospitality
Studies w.e.f Academic (B.Sc.HS) The candidates should have passed the H.S.C.
Year 2006/07 (XIIth Std) Examination or its equivalent in any
(B.Sc. H.S.- First Year) stream or vocation with minimum aggregate of
45% marks.
34
10. A) Post-Graduate Diploma
1) Diploma in Business A Bachelor’s Degree univeristy in any faculty awarded by
Management Statutory
OR
Diploma awarded by the Board of Technical Education.
(State/Central Government )
(Post S.S.C. 3 years diploma with 2 year experience after
passing diploma
Post H.S.C. 2 years diploma with 1 year experience after
passing diploma)
2) P.G. Diploma in Computer ——— do ———
Management
3) P.G. Diploma in Marketing ——— do ———
Management
4) P.G. Diploma in Hospital ——— do ———
Management
5) P.G. Diploma in Capital ——— do ———
Marketing Management
6) P.G. Diploma in Financial ——— do ———
Services
7) P.G. Diploma in Environ- ——— do ———
mental Management
8) P.G. Diploma in Computer ——— do ———
Application
9) P.G. Diploma in Material ——— do ———
and logistics Management
10) P.G. Diploma Inport and ——— do ———
Export Management
B
1) Diploma in Office Management A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Management
2) Diploma in Co-operative A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Management
3) Diploma in Print A Bachelor’s Degree in any faculty.
Administration
35
I.  ELIGIBILITY FOR PROGRAMME
1. M.Phil. : An applicant should have passed Master's Degree Examination of a recognized
statutory university with IInd Class in the concerned subject.
Ph.D. : For admission to the Ph.D. programme in a subject in any faculty, applicants fulfilling
the following criteria shall be treated as eligible.
(a) Persons having passed Post Graduate Degree Examination with at least 50% marks
or having grade equivalent thereto awarded by the concerned University.The cases of
persons having less than 50% marks at Post Graduate Degree Examination be referred
to R. & R. Commitee for consideration. The Registration of such persons shall be
confirmed on the recommendations of the R. & R. Commitee.
OR
(b) Persons working in National Laboratoris-Institute/Government/Private organization
nominated / sponsored by by the respective employer These persons should be holding
rank of the Asstt. Director or above.
Procedure for Submitting Eligibility Application Forms/Lists and Eligibility Fee :
(1) The students should submit the application form for the certificate of eligibility to the College/
Institute/University Department along with requisite documents and fee at the time of
admission.
(2) These lists along with demand drafts of total fees collected should be submitted to the
University or District Centres within four days as mentioned in this circular.
The office of the University or District Centres will retain two copies and Demand draft and
return one copy of such list by endorsing it with his signature and office stamp.
(3) All the application forms arranged course wise as per the list shall be kept in the College/
Institute/University Departments and should be made available to the University officials
at the time of verification scrutiny.
(4) The Principals/Heads of the University Departments/Directors of Instututes are requested
to deposits the fees by way of Demand Draft only. Kindly note that cheques will not be
accepted under any circumstances. Lists of students not accompanied by demand drafts
will not be accepted and Late fee will be charged as per rules.
The Principals/Directors/Heads of University Departments are earnestly requested
to ensure that admissions are given strictly in accordance with rules and regulations.
If the Colleges/Institutes/University Departments Directors of Instututes have any difficulty
while deciding eligibility of any candidate for admission to any course, they may approach
the University Office.
36
Please note that no irregular admissions will be regularised under any circumstances.
Notwithstanding anything contained above Rules made by Govt. of Maharashtra/
Central Councils for eligibility from time to time and approved by the University
Authorities shall prevail and will be binding on students.
Any other additional conditions of eligibility prescribed by University of Pune
from time to time shall also be binding.
Ganeshkhind, Pune-411007.
Ref. No. CLO/186
Date : 14-6-2008 1st Jly, 2002 Director
    B.C.U.D.
Copy forwarded with compliments to :
1. The Principals of all the Affiliated Colleges.
2. The Heads of all the Recognised Institutions.
3. The Heads of all University Departments.
4. The Heads of the Sections in the University Office.
5. Section Officer, Pune University. Sub-centre, Ahmednagar.
6. Section Officer, Pune University, Sub-centre, Nasik.
Eligibility Staff Members :
Section Officer : Shri. S. H. More
Senior Assistant : Shri. A. N. Londhe
Senior Assistant : Shri. K. P. Gaikwad
Assistant : Shri. M. P. Belekar
(i) Professional Courses :
Courses conducted in all professional faculties, Engineering including Architecture,
Print Administration, Pharmacy, Management, Computer, Town Planning, Applied Arts, Law,
Education, Physical Education, Applied Courses in Science such as Bio-informatics, Bio-
Technology, Health Sciences, Environmental Sciences, Electronics, Computer Science, B.B.A.,
B.C.A., B.F.T. or such other courses in the faculty of Arts, mentalmoral & Commerce
designated by the University as  or Professional Courses and courses conducted in the
faculty of Medicine including Dentistry, Nursing, Physiotherapy, Ayurved including Unani,
Homoeopathy and such other Course(s) designated by the University/Maharashtra University
of Health Sciences, State Govt. and such other courses as may be designated to be so by
the State Government, University Grants Commission or Statutory Council such as (AICTE,
M.C.I., B.C.I., Nursing Council, C.C.I.M., C.C.H.M. Pharmacy Council, Council of
Architecture) and any other Statutory Council/bodies as Professional Courses.
(ii) Non-Professional Courses :
1. Courses conducted in the faculties of Arts and Fine Arts (Excluding Applied Arts),
Mental, Moral and Social Sciences including Bachelor and Master Degree in
Social Work, Communication and Journalism, Commerce, Science (excluding
Applied and Computer Science Course) Course in Home Science as Non-Professional
Course.
(iii) (a) Maharashtra State Candidate :
Means a Candidate passing SSC or HSC (Std. XII) or both examination from recognized
Institution in Maharashtra.
(b) Maharashtra Domiciled candidates : Means a Candidate passing HSC (Std. XII)
examination from recognized Institution outside Maharashtra State but Father/Mother
of the candidate or the candidate is domiciled of the State of Maharashtra, subject to
production of domicile certificate from Competent Authority.
(iv) Candidate from Outside Maharashtra State :
Means a candidate whose Domicile Status is Outside Maharashtra and has passed his
qualifying examination from University outside Maharashtra. He will be eligible for admission
as candidate from outside Maharashtra.
A Candidate whose Domicile Status is outside Maharashtra State, but who has passed
his qualifying examination from a Statutory University in the State of Maharashtra, but has
passed his HSC or its equivalent examination from a recognized school outside the
State of Maharashtra will be eligible for admission to an institution which lies in the Jurisdiction
of the University. He will be considered as candidate from Outside Maharashtra State.
A Candidate whose Domicile Status is outside Maharashtra and who has passed
his/her qualifying examination from Pune University but has passed his/her H.S.C.
or equivalent examination from outside Maharashtra State, while filling in the
application form for admission he/she should indicate their Domicile status as ‘‘other than
Maharashtra.’’
37
Instruction for the Final List Of Eligibility & Chart-I, II, & III
1. College should submit Final list of eligible students as per the chart mentioned in part I, II, & III.
2. Part-I & Part-II Should prepare Examination/coursewise.
3. The Information Of all Examinations/courses include in Part-III.
4. True copy of Eligibility fee receipt with acknowledgement of University of Pune on the letter submitted by the college.
5. True copy& receipts of Eligibility fees given University of Pune to colleges.
6. True copy of Demand Draft deposited college to University of Pune.
7. True copies of letters pertaining to permission of Intake Capacity issued by Academic  Section. Of University of Pune.
8. Permission letter of 10% about Intake capacity of Academic section of University of Pune.
9. Final List of Eligibility of eligible students attested with the signature of Principal and seal of college.
3
8
PART-I
Examination/Coursewise Chart
Information regarding admitted (Eligible) students for the academic year 2008-2009
Name of the College :
College Code :
Examination/Course :
Intake Capacity :
Sr. No. Name of the student Name Board/ % of Seat Passing Eligibility Fee Late Addi Total
of the Univers Marks Num Yea Non fee tional
Qualified ity & ber Proff. Proff. Late
Exam State Maha. Out. of Maha Our of fee
Maha. Maha.
Rs.60/- Rs.120/- Rs.120/- Rs.180/- Rs.50/-Rs.200/-
Total=
3
9
4
0
PART-II
Examination/Coursewise Chart
Summary of Students
Sr. No. Particular Within Out of Total
Maharashtra Maharashtra
1. Total No. Of Students admitted
2. Eligible Students
3. Not eligible Students
4. No. Of Students with discrepancy
5. Admission Cancelled
6. Total amount of eligible students
7. Total amount of late fee
8. Total amount of additional late fee
9. Total amount of eligibility fee+Late fee+additional late fee
PART-III
Consolidated Chart
All Examination/Coursewise Chart
University of Pune Eligibility Section Ganeshkhind, Pune-411007
Eligibility Of Affiliated Colleges For The Year 2008-2009
Name of the College :
College Code :
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 Sr. No. D.D.No. Date & Amount Exam Intake No/s. of Eligibility Fee Late Addi- Total
Course Capaci- students Non Proff. Proff. fee tional
ty Maha. Out. of Maha. Our of Late
Maha. Maha. fee
Total Total Total Total
No. of No. of No. of No. of
students students students students
X X X X
Rs.60/- Rs.120/- Rs.120/- Rs.180/- Rs.50/- Rs.200/-
 Total=
4
1
  ANNEXURE  ‘A’ELIGIBILITY  FEE
1. Student passing qualifying examination and seeking admission First Time to First Year
of any Degree/Diploma/Certificate (U.G./P.G.) the Eligibility Fee will be as under :
  Sr. Particulars Fees
  No.
Non-professional Professional
Rs. Rs.
  1. Within the State of Maharashtra 100 200
  2. From outside the State of Maharashtra 200 300
  3. From any foreign country (Out of India) and 500 1000
(NRI/Foreign Citizen-Foreign National, P.I.O.)
  4. A Student passing qualifying examination from
Pune University and seeking admission to
second degree/diploma/certificate U.G./P.G.
of our University and is
  a) Domiciled in Maharashtra 100 200
  b) Domiciled outside Maharashtra State 200 300
  c) NRI/Foreign Citizen/Foreign National, P.I.O. 500 1000
  5. Eligibility fee for issue of provisional
eligibility certificate
For (1) 100 200
and for (2) & (3) 300 500
2. Admission charges for the submission of required documents will be Rs. 300 for non
professional cources & Rs. 500/- for professional courses up to 30 day's from late date
prescribed for submission of documents.
3. If an affiliated College admits students not eligible and who are migrating from other
University/Board and allowing to fill in Examination Form without obtaining
Eligibility certificate, a penalty of Rs.10,000/- per course would be imposed on the College
and the performance of Examination of such students will also be cancelled.
4. If any affiliated College admits any student not eligible for Under-graduate or Post-Graduate
Courses of this University and allows him/her to fill in the Examination Form, a penalty of
Rs.5,000/- per course shall be imposed on the College and
performance of the examination of such student shall be cancelled.
5. the same rule applies to the University Department, Centres/Schools. The Head of University
department/Director of Recognise Institute will have to pay penalty
as above in case  not eligible candidate is allowed to fill in the University Examination form.
42
INSTRUCTIONS TO CANDIDATES FOR MIGRATION CERTIFICATE
Migration Certificate :
(1) The student migrating from the jurisdiction of the Pune University of the University Department
any other University shall apply for migration certificate to the University, through the
Principal/Head/Director in prescribed application form. The concerned Principal/Head/Director
shall forward the application along with the Transference Certificate, after careful verification
of the document so as to avoid unnecessary correspondence.
(2) The application form for Migration Certificate is available in the University on payment of
Rs. 10/. The student shall pay Rs. 150/- as fee Migration Certificate in the form of Crossed
Demand Draft payable to “The Registrar, University of Pune, Pune-411 007” along with the
application form.
(3) In the case of an external student, the Transference Certificate is issued by the Deputy
Registrar (Admission) of this University.
(4) In the case of Post-graduate students enrolled in the University Departments, The Transference
Certificate is issued by the Assistant Registrar (Admission) of this University.
(5) Students are advised to ensure that the Transference Certificate is enclosed to the application
for a Migration Certificate. For this purpose, they should request the Principal of the College
to forward the application for Migration Certificate alongwith original Transference Certificate.
The fee for such Transference Certificate is as prescribed by the University which must be
sent directly to the Principal of the College.
(6) In the case of external students and post-graduate students of this University, they should
simultaneously apply for the Transference Certificate alongwith a Migration Certificate. The
fee for such Transference Certificate is as per prescribed by the University, which must be
directly sent to the Registrar of this University.
(7) The original Transference Certificate received in this University office will not be returned
to the candidate. Similarly the fee paid for the Transference Certificate or the Migration
Certificate cannot be refunded under any circumstances.
(8) The candidate is requested to put his full name and address on the envelope alongwith
required necessary fee to office.
(9) Incomplete form will not be entertained.
(10) Migration Certificate will not be issued personally to the candidate. The same will be sent
by registered post on the address given in the application.
(11) If you are in need of duplicate copy of Transference Certificate, you may write to the
Principal of the College concerned for the same, or to the Asstt. Registrar (Admission and
(Registration) of this University, as the case may be.
A candidate is requested to enclosed self addressed envelope with postal stamps of Rs. 25/-
to his/her application form to this office.
43
44
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Bahadur Shaha  Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110002
List of Recognised Universities
ANNEXURE ‘B’
† Institute of National Importance
1. Acharya N G Ranga Agricultural
University,
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad 500 030
2. Acharya Nagarjuna University,
Nagarjunanagar, (Andhra Pradesh) 522510
3. University of Agricultural Sciences,
G K V K Campus, Bangalore (560065)
4. University of Agricultural Sciences,
Krishinagar,
Dharwad 580 005
5. Alagappa University, Alagappa Nagar,
Karalkudi 630 003 Tamilnadu
6. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh
202 002
7. Allahabad Agricultural Institute,
Allahabad 211 007
8. University of Allahabad, Senate Hall,
Allahabad 211 002
†9. All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Ansari Nagar,
New Delhi 110 029
10. Amravati University, Amravati 444 602
11. Andhra University, Waltair,
Visakhapatnam 530 003
12. Anna University, Sardar Patel Road,
Chennal 600 025
13. Annamalal Tamilnadiu, University,
Annamalainagar 608 002
14. Arunachal University, Rono Hills,
Itanagar 791112 Aurnachal predes
15. Assam Agricultural University,
Jorhat 785 013 Assam
The Association of Indian Universities (AIU) is the apex co-ordinating body that has served
the Universities for over seven decades its membership embraces all types of Institutions viz traditional
universities, agricultural universities, Institutes of national importance, Institutes of technology,
information technology and those devoted to medical education and research. It has provided its
members with a forum for exchange of views and experience; discussion of their common problems:
and also act as a clearing house of information on higher education in the country Information
contained in this directory pertains to Indian universities and university level institutions established
by an Act of Parliament or State Legislature, The institutions classified as “Deemed to be University”
under Section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956, have also been included in the list, Also included is information
of two Associate Members from Nepal and Mauritius. State-wise and city-wise indices have also
been included.
.
45
16. Assam University, Silchar 788 011 Assam
17. Avinashilingam Institute for Home
Science & Higher Education for Women,
Coimbatore, Tamilnadu 641 043
18. Awadhesh Pratap Singh University,
Rewa 486 003 (MP)
19. B N Mandal University, Laloo Nagar,
Madhepura 852 113 Bihar
20. Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University, Muzafarpur,
Bihar - 842001
21. Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar
University, (UP)
Vidya Vihar, Rae Bareli Road,
Lucknow 226 025
22. Baba Farid University of Health Sciences,
Kotkapura Road, Faridkot 151 203
23. Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi 221 005
24. Banasthali Vidyapith,  Banasthali 304 022
Rajasthan
25. Bangalore University, Jnana Bharathi
(Karnataka)
Bangalore 560 056
26. Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya,
Bhopal 462 026 (MP)
27. Bengal Engineering College, PO Botanic
Garden  Howrah 711 103 West Bengal
28. Berhampur University, Bhanja
Dist. Ganjam, Berhampur 760 007, Orisa.
29. Bharathiar University,
Coimbatore 641 046  Tamilnadu
30. Bharathidasan University, Palkalaiperur,
Tiruchirappalli 620 024 Tamilnadu
31. Bharati Vidyapeeth, Lal Bahadur Shastri
Marg. pune 411 030
32. Bhatkhande Music Institute, I.
Kaiserbagh, Lucknow 226 001, U.P.
33. Bhavnagar University, Gaurishankar Lake
Road, Bhavnagar 364 002 Gujrat
34. Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vishwavidyalay,
(W. Bangal)
PO Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, Mohanpu,
Distt Nadia 741 252
35. Bihar Yoga Bharati, Ganga Darshan Fort,
Munger 811 201 Bihar
36. Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra
Ranchi 835 215, Jharkhand
37. Birla Institute of Technology & Science,
Vidya Vihar,
Pilani 333 031, Rajsthan
38. Birsa Agricultural University, Kanke,
Ranchi 834 007  Jharkhand
39. Bundelkhand University, Kanpur Road,
Jhansi 284128 (MP)
40. University of Burdwan, Rajbati,
Burdwan 713 104 W Bengal
41. University of Calcutta,
87/1, College Street, Kolkata 700 073
42. University of Calicut, Calicut University
P.O Kerla  Thenhipalam, Malappuram
Distt 673 635
43. Central Agricultural University,
Iroisemba, Imphal 795 004  Mnipur
46
58. Dev Sanskriti Vishwavidyalaya, Gayatri
Kunj, Shantikunj Haridwar 249 411
59. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, R N Tagore
Marg, MP Indore 452 001
60. Dharmsinh Desai Institute of Technology,
Post Box No 35 College Road,
Nadiad 387 001
61. Dibrugarh University, Dibrugarh 786 004
ASSAM
62. Dr. B R Ambedkar National Institute of
Technology, G T  Road By Pass,
Jalandhar 144 004
63. Dr B R Ambedkar Open Univesity, Prof
G Ram, Andrapredesh Reddy Marg. Road
No. 46 Jubilee Hills, Hyderabad 500 033
64. Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada
University Aurangabad 431 004 (MS)
65. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Open
University, Govt. Bunglow No.9, Near
Dafnala, Shahibag, Ahmedabad 380 003
66. Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological
University (MS) Vidyavihar, P. O.
Goregaon, Lonere 402 103, Dist Raigad
67. Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar University,
Agra 282 004 U.P
68. Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi
Vidyapeeth, Dapoli 415 712 Dist.
Rantnagiri (MS)
69. Dr. C V Raman University of Science,
Technology Commerce and Management,
C. 18, Sector 1, Avanti Vihar,
Mahasdamund Rd, Raipur, Chhatisgarh
70. Dr. Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya,
Sagar 470 003 (MP)
44. Central Institute of English & Foreign
Languages,  O U Campus,
Hyderabad 500 007
45. Central Institute of Fisheries Education,
Fisheries University Road, Seven
Bangalows, Andheri (W) Mumbai 400061
46. Central Institute of Higher Tibetan
Studies, Sarnath, Varanasi 221 007, U.P.
47. Chandra Shekhar Azad University of
Agriculture  U.P.
Technology, Kanpur 208 002
48. Ch. Charan Singh University,
Meerut 250 005 U.P.
49. Ch. Charan Singh Haryana  Agricultural
Univeristy, Hariyana Hisar 125 004
50. Ch. Sarwan Kumar Himachal Pradesh
Krishi Vishwavidyalaya,
Palampur (HP) 176 062
51. Chhatrapati Shahu ji Maharaj University,
Kalyanpur, Kanpur 208 024 U.P.
52. Cochin University of Science &
Technology, Kerla Kochi 682 022
53. Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha,
PB No 1419 Thyagaraya Nagar,
Chennai 600 017
54. Dayalbagh Educational Institute,
Dayalbagh, Agra 282 005
55. Deccan College Post Graduate and
Research Institute, Pune 411 006
56. Deendayal Upadhyaya Gorakhpur
University, Gorakhpur 273 009 U.P.
57. University of Delhi, Delhi 110 007
47
71. Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi
Vidyapeeth, MS Krishi Nagar,
Akola 444 104
72. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Avadh
University, (U.P.)  Faizabad 224 001
73. Dr. Y.S. Parmar University of Horticulture
& Forestry,  Himachal Predesh
Nauni 173 230, Distt Solan
74 Dravidian University, Kuppam 517 425,
District Chtoor (A.P)
75. Fakir Mohan University, Vyasa Vihar,
Balasore, 756 019 Orissa
76. Forest Research Institute, P.O. I.P.E.
Kaulagarth  Road, Dehradun 248 195
Uttaranchal
77. Gandhigram Rural Institute, Gandhigram
PO 624 302 District Dindigul, Tamilnadu
78. Gauhati University Gopinath Bardolol
Nagar, Guwahati 781 014 Assam
79. Goa University Sub Post Office Goa
University, Talwigao Plateau,
Goa, 403 206
80. Gokhale Institute of Politics & Economics
846, Shivajinagar Deccan Gymkhana
Pune 411 004
81. Govind Ballabh Pant University of
Agriculture & Technology, Pantnagar 263
145 Distt Udham Singh Nagar, Urnttarnchal
82. Gujarat Agricultural University, Sardar
Krushinagar, Gujrat Dantiwada Campus,
(Distt Banaskantha) 385 506
83. Gujarat Ayurved University, Jamnagar
361 008 Gujrat
84. Gujarat University, P B No. 4010,
Navrangpura, Gujrat Ahmedabad 380 009
85. Gujarat Vidyapith. P O Navjivan, Ashram
Road, Ahmedabad 380 014 Gujrat
86. Gulbarga University, Jnana Ganga,
Gulbarga 585 106 Karnatak
87. Guru Ghasidas University,
Bilaspur 495 009 (C.G.) Chhattisgad
88. Guru Govind Singh Indraprastha
University, Old Delhi College of
Engineering Building Kashmere Gate,
Delhi 110 006
89. Guru Jambheshwar University,
Hisar 125 001 Haryana
90. Guru Nanak Dev University,
Amritsar 143 005 Panjab
91. Gurukula Kangri Vishwavidyalaya,
Haridwar 249 404 U. P.
92. Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal
University unttarnchal Srinagar 246 174,
Distt Garhwal
93. Himachal Pradesh University, Summer
Hills, Shimla 171 005, Himachal Pradesh
94. University of Hyderabad (AP) Central
University P.O. Hyderabad 500 046
95. Indian Agricultural Research Institute,
New Delhi 110 012
96. ICFAI University, 15, Jalashay Marg,
Chowbey Colony, Raipur 492 001.
97. Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, IIFT
Bhavan, B. 21 Qutab Institutional Area,
New Delhi 110 016
48
98. Indian Institute of Information
Technology, Nehru Science Centre,
Kamla Nehru Road, Allahabad 211 002
99. Indian Institute of Information Technology
& Management, Morena, Link Road,
Gwalior 474 004 (MP)
100. Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560 012
101. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
Powali Mumbai 400 076
†102.Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110 016
†103.Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,
Amingaon North Guwahati,
Guwahati 781 039
†104.Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur,
Kanpur 208 016
†105.Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
Kharagpur 721 302
†106.Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai 600 036
†107.Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,
Roorkee 247 667
108. Indian School of Mines,
Dhanbad 826 004 U.P.
†109.Indian Statistical Institute, 203
Barrackpore Trunk Road, Kolkatta 700 108
110. Indian University Raipur
111. Indian Veterinary Research Institute,
Izatnagar 243122  Distt. Barelly U.P.
112. Indira Gandhi Institute of Development
Research,
Gen A K Vaidya Marg, Santosh Nagar,
Goregaon (E) Mumbai 400 065
113. Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidyalaya
Krishak Nagar,
Raipur 492 006 Chhattisghar.
114. Indira Gandhi National Open University,
Maidan Garhi
New Delhi 110 068
115. Indira Kala Sangeet Vishwavidyalaya,
Khairagarh 491 881, Distt
Rajnandgaon, (C.G.)
116. Institute of Advanced Studies in
Education, Gandhi Vidya Mandir
Sardarshahr, Rajasthan 331 401 District Churu
117. Institute of Armament Technology,
Girinagar, Pune 411 025
118. International Institute for Population
Sciences
Govandi Station Road, Deonar
Mumbai  400088
119. International Institute of Information
Technology; Gachibowil
Hyderabad 500 019
120. Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700 032
121. Jagadguru Rambhadracharya Handicapped
University, Chitrakootdham 210 204 (U.P)
122. Jai Narain Vyas University, Jodhpur 342 001
123. Jai Prakash Vishwavidyalaya,
Chapra 841 301
124. Jain Vishva Bharati Institute,
Post Box  No. 6
Ladnun 341 306 Distt Nagaur
49
125. Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New
Delhi 110 062
126. Jamia Millia Islamia, Jamia Nagar, New
Delhi 110 025
127. University of Jammu, Babasaheb
Ambedkar Road,
New Campus, Jammu (Tawi) 180 006
128. Jaypee University of Information
Technology, Waknaghat
P O Dumehar, Kandaghat 173 215,
Distt. Solan
129. Jawaharlal Nehru Centre Advanced
Scientific Research, Jakkur
Campus, Jakkur, Bangalore 560 064
130. Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi
Vishwavidyalaya, Krishi Nagar,
Adhartal, Jabalpur 482 004
131. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological
University,
Kukatpaliy, Hyderabad 500 072
132. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Mehrauti Road,
New Delhi 110 067
133. Jiwaji University, Gwalior 474 011
134. Kakatiya University, Vidyaranyapuri,
Warangal 506 009
135. University of Kalyani, Kalyani 741 235
136. Kameshwar Singh Darbhanga Sanskrit
University,
Kameshwar Nagar, Darbhanga 846 008
137. Kannada University, Hampi, Vidyaranya,
Hospet Taluk 583 276,
Dist. Bellary .
138. Kannur University, Mangattuparamba,
Kalliassery PO, Kannur 670 562
139. Karnataka State Open University,
Manasagangotri,
Mysore 570 006
140. Karnatak University, Pavate Nagar,
Dharwad 580 003
141. University of Kashmir, Hazratbal,
Srinagar 190 006 (J&K)
142. Kavikulaguru Kalidas Sanskrit
Vishwavidyalaya, Baghele Bhawan,
Sitalwadi, Mauda Road, Ramtek 441 106
143. University of Kerala,
Thiruvananthapuram 695 034
144. Kerala Agricultural University,
Vellanikkara,
Thrissur 680 656
145. Kumaun University, Nainital 263 001
146. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra 136 119
147. Kuvempu University, Gnana Sahyadri,
Shankaraghatte 577 451, Shimoga Disst.
148. Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical
Education,
Shaktinagar, Gwalior 474 002
149. Lalit Narayan University, Kameshwaranagr,
Darbhanga 846 008, Mithila
150. University of Lucknow, Lucknow 226 007
151. University of Madras, Chepauk,
Chennai 600 005
152. Madurai Kamaraj University, Palkalai
Nagar,
Madurai 625 021
50
153. Magadh University, Bodh Gaya 824 234
154. Madhya Pradesh Bhoj (Open) University,
Red Cross Bhavan,
Shivaji Nagar, Bhopal 462 016 (M.P.)
155. M S University of Baroda, Fatehganj,
Vadodara 390 002
156. Maharana Pratap University of
Agriculture &
Technology, P.O. Box No. 171,
New Campus, Udaipur 313 001
157. Maharshi Dayanand University,
Rohtak 124 001
158. Maharshi Dayanand Saraswati University,
Pushkar Bye Pass, Ajmer 305 009
159. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vedic
Vishwavidyalaya, 871 Napier Town
Jabalpur 482 001
160. Maharashtra Animal & Fishery Sciences
University,
High Land Drive Road, Seminary Hills,
Nagpur 440 006
161. Maharashtra University of Health
Sciences,
Gangapur Road, Anandvalli,
Nashik- 422 013
162. Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi
Vishwavidyalaya, Wardha, Camp: B.3/61,
Safdarjung Enclave,
New Delhi 110 029
163. Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramoday
Vishwavidyalaya,
Chitrakoot 485 331, Distt Satna (MP)
164. Mahatma Gandhi University,
Priyadarshini Hills, P.O.
Kottayam 686 560
165. Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapeeth,
Varanasi 221 002
166. M J P Rohikhand University, Dori Lal
Agarwal Marg,
Bareilly 243 006
167. Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth,
Rahuri 413 722,
Dstt Ahmednagar
168. Makhanlal Chaturvedi Rashtriya
Patrakarita Vishwavidyalaya,
E-8, Trilochan Nagar. P.O. Box R S N 560,
Bhopal 462 039
169. Malviya National Institue of Technology,
Jaipur 302 017
170. Mangalore University, New
Administrative Bldg,
Mangalagangothri, Mangalore 574 199
171. Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Madhav Nagar,
Manipal 576 119 Distt Udupi,
172. Manipur University, Canchipur,
Imphal 795 003
173. Manonmaniam Sundaranar University,
Abishekapatti,
Tirunelveli 627 012
174. Marathwada Agricultural University,
Parbhani 431 402 (MS)
175. Maulana Azad National Institute of
Technology,
Bhopal 462 007 (M.P.)
176. Maulana Azad Natioanl University,
Gachiibowli,
Hyderabad 500 032 (A.P.)
51
177. Mizoram University, Mizoram Post Box
No. 190
Aizawi 796 012
178. Mohanlal Sukhadia University,
Pratapnagar,
Udaipur 313 001
179. Mother Teresa Women’s University,
Kodaikanal 624 102
180. Motilal Nehru National Institute of
Technology, Allahabad
181. University of Mumbai, M G Road, Fort,
Mumbai 400 032
182. University of Mysore, Crawford Hall,
Mysore 570 005
183. Nagaland University, P.B. 341, Lumami,
Kohima 797 001
184. Nagpur University, Ravindranath Tagore
Marg.
Nagpur 440 001
185. Nalanda Open University, Reshmi
Complex, Kidwaipuri
Patna 800 001
186. N T R University of Health Sciences,
Vijayawada 520 008
187. Narendra Deva University of Agriculture
& Technology,
Narendra Nagar, Kumarganj,
Faizabad 224 229
188. National Academy of Legal Studies and
Research University,
3.4.761, Barkatpura,
Hyderabad 500 027
189.National Brain Research Centre, SCO 5,
6&7, Sector XV,
Part II, Gurgaon 122 001
190. National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal
132 001 Haryana
191. National Institute of Mental Health &
Neuro Sciences,
P B No. 2900, Hosur Road, Bangalore 560
029  Karnataka
†192.National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Educational and Research,
Sector 67, SAS Nagar (Mohali) 160 062
193. National Institute of Technology,
Calicut 673 601
194. National Institute of Technology,
Hamirpur 177 005
195. National Institute of Technology,
Kurukshetra 136 119
196. National Institute of Technology,
Rourkela 769 008 (Orissa)
197. National Institute of Technology,
Karnataka,
Surathkal, P.O.Srinivasnagar
575 025 Karnataka
198. National Technological University, Raipur
199. National Institute of Technology,
Silchar 788 010
200. National Institute of Technology,
Warangal, Andhra Pradesh
201. National Law Institute University, Bhopal
Bhahdbhada Road,
Barkheri Kalan, Post Box No. 369
Bhopal 462 003
202. National Law School of India University
Nagarbhavi, PB No. 7201,
Bangalore 560 072
52
203. National Law university, Adminstrative
Block, JNV university, New Campus Pali
Road Jodhpur 342 005  Rajasthan
204. National Museum Institute of History of
Art, Conservation and Museology,
Janpath, New Delhi 110 011
205. Netaji Subhas Open University, 1
Woodburn Park, Kolkata 700 020
206. Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences,
Panjagutta,Hyderabad 500 082
207. University of North Bengal, P.O. North
Bengal University Raja Rammohunpur
734 430, District Darjeeling
208. North Eastern Hill University, P.O.
NEHU Campus Mawkynorth Umshing,
Shillong 793 022
209. North Gujarat University, PB. No. 21,
University Road,  Patan 384 265
210. North Maharashtra University,
PB  No. 80,  Jalgaon 425 001
211. North Orissa University, Shri. Ram
Chandra Vihar, Takatpur, Baripada, Distt.
Mayurbhanj 757 003
212. Orissa University of Agriculture and
Technoligy, Bhabaneswar 751 003
213. Osmania University,
Hyderabad 500 007 A. P.
214. Padmashree Dr. D. Y. Patil Vidyapeeth,
Vidyanagar, Sector 7, Nerul Navi
Mumbai 400 706
215. Pandit Ravishankar Shukla University,
Raipur 492 010
216. Panjab University, Chandigarh 160 014
217. Patna University, Patna 800 005
218. Periyar University, Salem 636 011
219. Pondicherry University, R. V. Nagar,
Kalapet, Pondicharry 605 014
†220. Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research,
Chandigarh 160 012
221. Potti  Sreeramulu  Telugu University,
Public  Gardens, Nampally,
Hyderabad 500 004
222. University of Pune, Pune 411 007
223. Punjab Agricultural University,
Ludhiana 141 004
224. Punjab Technical University, PO REC,
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Regional
Engineering College Campus,
Jalandhar 144 011
225. Punjabi University, Patiala, 147 002
226. Rabindra Bharati University, 56 A
Barrackpur, Trunk Road, Kolkata 700 050
227. University of Rajasthan, Jaipur 302 004
228. Rajasthan Agricultural university,
Bikaner 334 006
229. Rajasthan Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaya,
Rajasthan State Text Book Board
Building, 2-2A Jhalna Dungri,
Jaipur 302 017
230. Rajasthan Vidyapeeth, Air Port Road,
Pratapnagar, Udaipur 313 001
53
231. Rajendra Agricultural university, Pusa,
Samastipur 848 125
232. Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki
Vishwavidyalaya, Airport Bypass,
Gandhi Nagar,
Bhopal 462 036 (MP)
233. Rajiv Gandhi University of Health
Sciences, 4th ‘T’ Block, Jayanagar,
Bangalore 560 041
234. Ranchi University, Ranchi 834 008
235. Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya,
Saraswati Vihar,Pachedi,
Jabalpur 482 001
236. Rashtriya Sanskrit Sanstha, 56-57,
Institutional Area Janakpuri,
New Delhi 110 058
237. Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha,
Tirupati 517 507
238. Sambalpur University, Jyoti Vihar, Burla
Dist. Sambalpur, 768 019
239. Sampurnanand Sanskrit
Vishwavidyalaya, Varanasi 221 002
240. Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, PB No. 375 Raebareli
Road, Lucknow 226 014
241. Sardar Patel University, Vallabh
Vidyanagar 388 120 Gujrath
242. Sardar Vallabh Bahi Patel University of
Agriculture and Technology,
Modipuram, Meerut 250 110
243. Sathyabama Institute of Science and
Technology, Jeppiaar Nagar, Old
Mamallapuram Road, Chennai 600 119
244. Saurashtra University, University Road,
Rajkot 360 005
245. School of Planning and Architecture,
4, Block-B, Indraprastha Estate,
New Delhi 110 002
246. Shamugha Arts, Science, Technology and
Research Academy, Tirumalaisamudram,
Thanjavur 613 402
247. Sher-e-Kashmir University of
Agricultural Sciences and
Technology Jammu, Railway Road,
Jammu 180 004 (J&K)
248. Sher-e-Kashmir University of
Agricultural Science and Technology of
Kashmir, Shalimar Campus P.B.No. 262.
Shrinagar 191121 (JK)
249. Shivaji University, Vidyanagar,
Kolhapur 416 004
250. Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thackersey
Women’s University,
1 Nathibai Thackersey Road,
Mumbai 400 020
251. Shri Jagannath Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya,
Srivihar, Puri 752 003.
252 Shri Lal Bhadhur Shastri Rashtriya
Sanskrit Vidyapeeth,
Katwaria Sarai, New Mehrauli Road,
New Delhi 110 016
253 Shri Mata Vaishno Deve University, 5A/
D Extension.II Gandhi Nagar,
Jammu Tawi- 180 004
254 Shri Rawatpura Sarkar International
University, Raipur, 492 001
255 Siddhu Kanhu University, Santal
Pargana, Dumka 814 101
54
256 Sikkim-Manipal University,  of Health
Medical & technological Science,
5th Mile, Tadong-737 101, Sikkim
257 Solapur University
Kegaon Pune Highway,
Solapur-413255 (Maharashtra)
258 South Gujarat University, University
Campus,
Udhna Magdalla Road, Surat 395 007
259 Sree Balaji Dental College and Hospital,
173 Agharam Road,
Selaiyur, Chennai 600 073.
†260 Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical
Science and
Technology, Thriruvananthapiram 695 011
261 S R M Institute of Science & Technology,
2 Veerasamy Road,
West Mambalam, Chennai 600 033
262 Sree Sankaracharaya University of
Sanskrit, P.B. No. 14,
Kalady 683 574 District Ernakulam.
263 Sri Chandrasekharendra Saraswathi
Viswa Mahavidyalaya, Enathur,
Kanchipuram 631 561
264 Sri Krishnadevaraya University,
Anantapur 515 003
265 Sri Padmavati Mahila Visvavidyalayam,
Tirupati 517 502
266 Sri Ramachandra Medical College and
Research Institute,
1, Ramachandra Nagar, Porur,
Chennai 600 116
267 Sri Sathya Sai Intitute of Higher Learning,
Prasanthinilayam, 515 134 district
Anantapur
268 Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical
Sceiences, Tirupati 517 507
269 Sri Venkateswara Universituy,
Tirupati 517 502
270 Symbiosis Internationa Education Centre,
Senapati Bapat Road, Pune 411 004
271 Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada
University,
Dnyanteerth Gautami Nagar, P. Box No.
87, Vishnupuri, Nanaded 431 606
272 Swami Vivekananda Yog Anusandhana
Samsthana,
No.9, Appajappa Agrahara,
Chamarajpet, Bangalore 560 018.
273 Tamil Nadu Agricultural University,
Coimbatore 641 003
274 Tamil Nadu Dr Ambedkar Law
University, Poompozhil,
5 Greenways Road, Chennai 600 028
275 Tamil Nadu Dr M G R Medical University,
P. B. No 1200, No.69, Anna Salai,
Guindy, Chennai 600 032
276 Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal
Sciences University,
Madhavaram Milk Colony,
Chennai 600 051
277 Tamil  University, Thrichy Road,
Thanjavur 613 005
278 Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Homi Bhaba Road,
Mumbai 400 005
279 Tata Institute of Social Science, Sion.
Trombay Road,
Deonar, Mumbai 400 088
55
280 TERI School of Advanced Studies,
Darbari Seth Block,
Habitat Place, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi 110 003.
281 Tezpur University, Napaam,
Tezpur 784 025, Distt Sonitpur.
282 Thapar Institute of Engineering and
Technology,
P.B. No. 32, Patiala 147 004
283 Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth,
Vidyapeeth  Bhavan,
Gultekdi, Pune 411 037
284 Tilka Manhji Bhagalpur University,
Bhagalpur 812 007
285 Tripura University, Suryamaninagar 799
130, Tripura West
286 U P Rajarshi Tandon Open University,
17 Maharshi Dayanand Marg,
(Thornhill Road) Allahabad 211 001.
287 Uttar Banga Krishi Vishwavidyalaya,
P.O. Pundibari, Dist. Cooch
Behar 736 165 West Bengal
288 Uttar Pradesh Technical University,
Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Campus Sitapur Road, Lucknow 226 021
289 Utkal University, Vani Vihar,
Bhubaneswar 751 004
290 Utkal University of Culture, Sardar Patel
Hall Complex,Unit II, Bhuabaneswar-751 009
291 Vardhaman Mahaveer Open University,
Rawat Bhata Road,
Akhelgarh, Kota 324 010
292 Vellore Intitute of Technology, Ranipet
Katpadi Rd Vellore 632 014
293 V B S Purvanchal University,
Jaunpur 222 002
294 Veer Kunwar Singh University,
Arrah  802 301 Bihar
295 Vidyasagar University, West
Midnapore 721 102
296 Vikarm University, University Road,
Ujjain 456 010
297 Vinayaka Mission’s Research
Foundation, Sankari Main Road, NH 47,
Ariyanoor, Salem 636 308
298 Vinoba Bhave University, P.B. No. 31
Hazaribag 825 301
299 Visva Bharati, Santiniketan 731 235
300 Visvesvaraya National Institute of
Technology, Nagpur 440 011
301 Visvesiwaraiah Technological University,
K L E Hospital Campus, Nehrunagar,
Belgaum 590 010
302 West Bengal National University of
Juridical Science, Aranya Bhavan
10 A L A Block Sector III, Salt Lake,
Kolkata 700 098
303  West Bengal University of Animal &
Fishery Sciences. 68, Kshudiram Bose
Sarani, Belgachia, Kolkata 700 037
304 West Bengal University of Technology,
BF-142, Salt Lake, Sector 1,
Kolkata 700 064
305 Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open
University,
Dnyangangotri, Near Gangapur Dam,
Nashik 422 222
56
ASSOCIATE  MEMBERS
306 Katmandu Univerity, Dhulikhel, Kavre
P O Box 6250,
Kathmandu, Nepal
307 University of Mauritius, Reduit,
Maruitius
308 All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Ansarinagar,
New Delhi-110 029.
309 Dakshina Bharati
Hindi Prachar Sabha,
Thyagarayanagar,
Chennai-600 017.
310 Indian Institute of Technology,
Powai, Mumbai-400 076.
311 Indian Institute of Technology,
Hauz Khas, New Delhi-110 016.
312 Indian Institute of Technology
Kanpur-208 016.
313 Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur-721 302.
314 Chhattisgarh Board of Secondary
Education,
Raipur
315 Indian Institute of Technology,
Chennai-600 036.
316 Indian Institute of Technology,
Institution of Engineers Building,
Pan Bazar,
Guwahati-781 001.
317 Indian Statistical Institute,
203, Barrackpore, Trunk Road,
Calcutta-700 035.
318 Victoria Jubilee Technical Institute
Mumbai.
319 Post-Graduate Institute of Medical
Education & Research,
Chandigarh-160 012.
320 Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for
Medical Sciences & Technology,
Thiruvananthpuram-695 011.
321 Lakshmibai Natinal Institute of Physical
Education
Shaktinagar, Gwalior-474 002
57
BOARDS OF HIGHER SECONDARY/INTERMEDIATE EDUCATION IN INDIA
1. Board of Intermediate Education,
Andhra Pradesh, Vidya Bhawan,
Nampally, Hyderabad 500001.
2. Assam Higher Secondary Education
Council, Bamunimaidan
Guwahati 781021.
3. Bihar Intermediate Education Council,
Budha Marg, Patna 800001 Bhihar.
4. Central Board of Secondary Education
(Shiksha Kendra),
2, Community Centre, Street Vihar,
Delhi 110092.
5. Council for the Indian School Certificate
Examinations,
Pragati House, 3rd Floor, 47-48,
Nehru Place, New Delhi 110019.
6. Goa Board of Secondary & Higher
Secondary Education,
Alto Betim Bardez, Goa 403521.
7. Gujarat Secondary Education Board,
Sector 10-6, Near Old Sachivalaya,
Gandhinagar 382010 Gujrat.
8. Haryana Board of School Education
Hansi Road, Bhiwani 125021 Haryana.
9. Himachal Pradesh Board of School
Education,
Gayana Lok Parisara, Civil Line
Dist. Kangda, Dharamsala 176215.
10. The Jammu & Kashmir State
Board of School Education,
Lal Mandi, Srinagar 190008 (Summer),
Rehari Colony, Jammu 180005 (Winter)
C/O Council of Board of Secondary Edu
cation in India (EOBSE)
23, Ashiana Apartments,
Pitampura, Delhi 110034.
11. Board of Pre-University Education,
Technical Edn. Building, Palace Road,
Bangalore 560001 Karnataka
12. Maharashtra State Board of Secondary
& Higher Secondary Education,
Shivajinagar, Pune 411 005.
13. Madhyamik Shiksha Mandal,
Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 462 011
14. Kerala Board of Higher Secondary
Education
Housing Board Building, Shantinagar,
Thiruvananthapuram 695001.
15. Manipur Council of Higher Secondary
Education,
Hafiz Hatta, Minuthong,
Imphal 795 001.
16. Orisa Council of Higher Secondary
Education,
C-2 Pragynapith, Samantapur,
Bhubaneswar 751 013 Orisa.
17. Rajasthan Madhyamik Shiksha Board,
Ajmer 305 001.
18. Punjab School Education Board,
Vidya Bhavan, SAS Nagar, Phase No.8,
Mohali 160059
19. Tamilnadu Board of Higher Secondary
Education
D.P.I. Compound, College Road,
Chennai 600006 (Tamilnadu)
20. Tripura Board of Secondary Education,
Nehru Complex (Gurkha Basti),
PO Kunjaban Agartala
Tripura (W) 799006.
58
21. Board of High School & Intermediate
Education,
Allahabad 211 001
Uttar Pradesh,
22. West Bengal Council of Higher
Secondary Education,
Vidya Sagar Bhavan, 9/2,
D.J. Block, Sector No. 2,
Salt Lake, Kolkata 700091
23. National Institute Open School,
B-31-B, Kailash Colony,
New Delhi-110048.
24. National Open School
39, Community Centre,
W.I.A. Ashok Vihar Road,
Delhi-110052.
25. Jharkhand Intermediate Education Council
Rameshwaram Barayatu Road,
Ranchi, Jharkhand 834 009.
59
LIST OF FAKE UNIVERSITIES
(IDENTIFIED BY U.G.C.)
On the basis of Degree examination of following University student will NOT be eligible for
admission to any course in any faculty :
1. Maithili University/Vishwavidyala, Darbhanga, Bihar
2. Mahila Gram Vidyapith/Vishwavidyalaya, (Women’s University) Prayag, Allahabad (UP)
3. Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaya, Varanasi (UP)/Jagatpuri, Delhi
4. Commercial University Ltd., Daryaganj, Delhi
5. Indian Education Council of U.P., Lucknow (UP)
6. Gandhi Hindi Vidyapith, Prayag, Allahabad (UP)
7. National University of Electro Complex Homeopathy, Kanpur
8. Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose University (Open University), Achaltal, Aligarh (UP)
9. D.D.B. Sanskrit University, Putur, Trichi, Tamil Nadu
10. St. John's University, Kishanattam, Kerala
11. United Nations University, Delhi
12. Vocational University, Delhi
13. Uttar Pradesh Vishwavidyalaya, Kosi Kalan, Mathura (UP)
14. Maharana Pratap Shiksha Niketan Vishwavidyalaya, Pratapgarh (UP)
15. Raja Arabic University, Nagpur
16. Bhartiya Shiksha Parishad (U.P.) Open Vishwavidyalaya, Lucknow (U.P.)
17. Dnyaneshwar Vidyapeeth, Pune (M.S.)
18. Shrimati Mahadevi Varma Open University, Mughal Sarai (U.P.)
19. Arya University Shrinagar, (J. & K.)
20 National University, Nagpur.
—————
P.U.P.—1000-6-2008 (2960) [PC-1\ eligibi, eligi-a]
Published by : Registrar, University of Pune, Ganeshkhind, Pune-411007.
Printed at : Pune University Press, Ganeshkhind, Pune-411007
P.U.P.—1000-6-2008 (2960) [1/eligi,eligi-a]

