 
 
 
Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems 
 
 
VISION and GOALS  
 
Towards a flourishing eco-system for industry and 
academia, excelling in embedded systems  
education, research and innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
INNOVATIVE CENTER FOR EMBEDDED SYSTEMS 
 
September 2010 
 
Authored by the ICES Director and Board 
 
Martin Törngren with Barbro Claesson Tor Ericson, Björn Fjellborg, Jan-Erik Frey, Axel Jantsch, Patric 
Jensfelt, Karl Henrik Johansson, Hans Nyström, Tony Sandberg, Hans Schmekel, Jan Wikander and 
Johnny Öberg  
 
 
www.ices.kth.se
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 2 (22) 
 
Executive Summary 
Embedded systems enable innovation through intelligent products and at the same time pose a paradigm 
shift where existing product technologies are more or less completely replaced or complemented with 
embedded software, electronics, networks, sensing devices and actuators. A key fundamental challenge in 
developing embedded systems is that of managing their complexity while providing products of the 
desired quality, and at the right cost considering the whole life-cycle.  
Embedded systems are of strategic relevance the world over, but in particular for Sweden, where they are 
key to those industrial areas where Sweden is highly successful. To maintain the leading edge of 
companies like ABB, Ericsson and Scania, more emphasis is required on embedded systems research and 
education. There are also many opportunities for new niches and businesses in this embedded arena 
because of the current lack of methods and tools, and the new emerging technical platforms. 
Embedded systems require industry and academia to create new competences, product architectures, 
supporting processes, methods and tools. The fragmented situation facing academia and industry today 
needs to be overcome through new collaborative schemes to facilitate and enable the potential of 
embedded systems. 
ICES – the Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems - was established in 2008 at KTH, driven by the 
need to better prepare KTH (Sweden’s largest technical university) and Swedish industry to deal with the 
opportunities and challenges posed by embedded systems. The industrial partners are system integrators 
and subsystem developers in the areas of automation, automotive and telecom, as well as tool, service and 
competence providers. 
The guiding vision of ICES is to achieve a flourishing eco-system for industry and academia, 
excelling in embedded systems education, research and innovation .   
To reach this vision, ICES has adopted the role of networker and catalyst, reaching out to Industry 
(engineers and management), KTH students (undergraduate and graduate) and KTH faculty as the main 
stakeholders.  
The focal technical areas of ICES are embedded systems architecture, software verification and 
methodology. 
Concrete goals for ICES include the development of a new Masters program in embedded systems; 
creating an active network for cross-domain exchange and learning; developing a graduate school; 
developing a research roadmap; and initiating research projects. An important future challenge for 
universities is to provide skilled embedded systems designers who have the additional necessary 
understanding of industrial applications. The long term goal of ICES is to be the preferred partner in 
embedded systems education and research in Sweden, and to become one of the leading centres in 
Europe. 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 3 (22) 
 
Contents 
1. Setting the scene: Why an embedded systems centre at KTH? 
The blessing and the curse of embedded systems – making the case for ICES 
2. How ICES relates to KTH and other initiatives 
3. Embedded systems application examples and challenges 
Future automotive systems 
Future automation systems 
Future telecom systems 
Common embedded systems characteristics and challenges 
4. Focus and vision of ICES 
5. Detailed description of ICES goals, stakeholders and strategies 
Strategies and the motto of ICES 
References 
Appendix 1. ICES relations to KTH and other efforts 
 
 
 
 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 4 (22) 
 
1. Setting the scene: Why an embedded systems centre at KTH? 
ICES, the Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems, was established at KTH in September 2008 in 
collaboration with Swedish industry, driven by the need to better prepare KTH, Sweden’s largest 
technical university, to deal with the opportunities and challenges posed by embedded systems.  
This document, developed by the ICES Board, explains the vision, focus and goals of ICES, and places 
ICES in the context of other KTH and external efforts. The document additionally introduces the area of 
embedded systems, provides an assessment of the current KTH situation, and a review of industrial and 
scientific challenges in the context of ICES. The document is relevant for all interested in embedded 
systems and KTH education/research in this area. 
Embedded systems constitute integrated software and hardware, digital and analog based subsystems 
that include physical world interaction through sensors, actuators, networks. An embedded system is 
tightly integrated inside a physical product and interacts with its environment, which may include other 
embedded systems, physical systems and humans. An embedded systems based product is normally not 
thought of as a computer (think of a car or a microwave oven), and in contrast to general purpose 
computers, is designed to perform a few dedicated functions with strict requirements on performance, 
robustness and dependability. 
As a technology enabler, embedded systems provide vast opportunities for improving the performance 
of existing products and for developing entirely new products. The means brought by embedded systems 
include their abilities for low-cost, miniaturized and flexible computing, data storage and communication. 
Embedded systems are closely associated with innovation, both in established and in entirely 
new products and services, and promise to provide important contributions to the sustainable 
society of tomorrow. These opportunities and promises are nicely illustrated by the variety of new terms 
coined such as ubiquitous computing, the disappearing computer, cyber-physical systems, social 
telematics and smart-its.  
Embedded systems are of strategic relevance the world over, but in particular for Sweden, where they are 
key to those industrial areas where Sweden is highly successful - transportation, automation and telecom. 
The industrial landscape includes product developing companies, component suppliers as well as cross 
domain systems competence and tool providers. To maintain the leading edge of companies like ABB, 
Ericsson and Scania, more emphasis is required on embedded systems research and education. There are 
also many opportunities for new niches and businesses in this embedded arena because of the current 
lack of methods and tools, and the new emerging technical platforms.  
The importance of embedded systems strongly emphasized at the European level. One of the initiatives 
within the Europe 2020 strategy, launched by the European Commission in March 2010, is the Digital 
Agenda for Europe, [1]. The agenda defines the key enabling role that the use of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) will have to play if Europe wants to succeed in its ambitions for 
2020. The agenda for example states the following: 
“Given that ICT represents a significant share of total value-added in European industrial 
strengths such as automobile (25%), consumer appliances (41%) or health and medical (33%), the lack of 
investment in ICT R&D is a threat to the entire European manufacturing and service sectors.” 
“The ICT sector is directly responsible for 5% of European GDP, with a market value of € 660 
billion annually, but it contributes far more to overall productivity growth (20% directly from the ICT 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 5 (22) 
 
sector and 30% from ICT investments). This is because of the high levels of dynamism and innovation 
inherent in the sector, and the enabling role the sector plays in changing how other sectors do business.” 
Another European initiative is the Artemis Joint Undertaking1, which represents a new forum for 
networking in the area of embedded systems and in funding collaborative research projects. 
The evolution of embedded systems technology and applications is occurring at a fast pace. 
Technology-wise, this is illustrated through Moores law2, and in applications is illustrated for example 
through the evolution of vehicles, which have been transformed to embedded computing systems with 
hundreds of embedded computing devices and several network.  Today, about 3 billion embedded units 
are delivered per year and the world market for embedded systems encompasses approximately 160 
billion euros with an annual growth of around 9 percent [1, 3]. 
Enhancements in communications technology further pave the way for extended embedded systems with 
connections to the external world through sensors, GPS, wireless communication, including the internet. 
The introduction of multicore technology will provide for massively parallel computing systems, with 
systems-on-chip being produced on a wafer scale. Future embedded systems are likely to exhibit 
larger degrees of autonomy, adaptability, ad-hoc group building and intelligence. 
Given a period of about 40 years, from the advent of the first microprocessor in the early 70s to the 
highly integrated circuits and software technologies today, our society has changed radically. Never before 
have we relied so heavily on software and electronics, embedded into products that are used directly or 
indirectly by everyone. Stories from the field of science fiction, with fully autonomous robots and virtual 
reality connected to human bodies, no longer seem completely out of reach. Embedded systems are 
contributing to a change of life-styles and social habits, and thus on the broad scale require research by 
the technical, social and economical sciences. 
The blessing and the curse of embedded systems – making the case for ICES 
Embedded software combined with various hardware platforms makes it possible to deploy a greater 
variety of products that promise to increase sustainability, quality of life and competitiveness. The use of 
embedded systems technology in advanced applications does however produce a side effect; that of an 
increased product complexity. One aspect of this complexity is that of an increased design space and run-
time state-space. The increased flexibility can be seen as a curse, and yet at the same time as a blessing, by 
enabling late or even on-line fixing of bugs and the addition of new features. Concurrently, customer 
requirements and legislation are evolving, and high expectations are placed on embedded systems to be 
dependable and cost-efficient. Products which just ten years ago contained limited amounts of embedded 
systems now contain hundreds or thousands of lines of code and networked embedded systems. This 
implies that the major part of the development effort is being shifted to the embedded software, testing 
and debugging, and systems integration. This is reflected by the increase in the number of people in the 
corresponding organizations, with new responsibilities and roles emerging. There is an immediate need to 
approach the development in a more structured way in order to increase productivity, quality and time to 
market. 
Many industries are as a consequence facing a paradigm shift where existing product technologies are 
replaced or complemented with embedded systems, requiring new personnel competences, product 
architectures, and methods and tools. The consequences of adopting embedded systems are far-
                                                            
1 https://www.artemis‐ju.eu/ 
2 Moore’s law has so far well predicted the doubling of computer performance (processing speed and memory size) each 
18th month. Continued evolution is now turning to multicore systems to maintain the increase. 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 6 (22) 
 
reaching and include the need to deal with the increased technological complexity and with the new risks 
induced by the new technology in terms of security, safety, reliability/availability and cost. 
These opportunities and challenges together form an essential background and support the 
establishment of ICES. KTH provides academic excellence in many areas related to embedded systems. 
However, synergies between these areas (and also in systematic cooperation with industry, cross 
schools/groups and industrial domain borders) have rarely been exploited. A further driver is the scarcity 
of longer term research funding, in particular for multidisciplinary research. Moreover, at KTH education 
is dominated by research, often underfinanced and not as prioritized within the academic system. Given 
the needs for new competences, this is one of the key areas for ICES to address. 
2. How ICES relates to KTH and other initiatives 
KTH is Sweden’s largest technical University. In 2008, KTH had 268 professors and 197 associate 
professors, tutoring some 1507 PhD students. In total, 35% of the research at KTH can be traced to the 
area of information and communication technology, of which a large portion is directly or closely related 
to the area of Embedded Systems, [4]. 
KTH is organized in schools, where each school is responsible for a research area and one or several 
Master programs, as well as 5-year engineering programs (“Civilingenjör”) within its competence area. 
Most schools are then sub-divided into departments and research groups. Orthogonal to the school-
organization are the KTH centers, which are a means for KTH to set-up cross-disciplinary activities 
across departments and schools. KTH has also in 2008 initiated the start-up of five so called platforms, to 
better synchronize research and educational activities at a higher level than the centers. The five platforms 
are in the areas of Energy engineering, Materials development, Information and communication 
technology, Transport research, and Engineering for medicine and health. Embedded systems and ICES  
are most closely related to the ICT platform, but  clearly also relate to the Energy, Transportation and 
MedTech platforms. 
ICES sprang from the need to coordinate research and education relating to embedded systems. In the 
current KTH structure there are several departments and research groups carrying out embedded systems 
or related research. A summary of an inventory of KTH, including research groups, KTH based centers 
and platforms, as well as external centers, are given in Appendix 1. 
About 20 research groups have shown interest in participating in ICES, consisting of more than 200 
senior researchers involved in embedded systems-related research. KTH is a member of several 
Embedded System organizations, the most prominent and ICES related ones being ArtistDesign3 and 
Artemisia4 - constituting important European embedded systems forums.  
Compared to other Swedish universities, KTH provides deep as well as broad academic excellence5 in 
many areas related to embedded systems. The range of competences spans human-machine interaction, 
sensors, electronics, software, communication, control and systems engineering.  
                                                            
3 The European Network of Excellence on Embedded Systems Design ‐ http://www.artist‐embedded.org/artist/ 
4 ARTEMISIA is the association for research and developer actors in ARTEMIS: Advanced Research & Technology for 
EMbedded Intelligence and Systems, where Artemis is the new European joint undertaking in embedded systems ‐ 
https://www.artemisia‐association.org/ 
5 This is for example manifested by the fact that KTH in the EU 6th framework program as only Swedish university was part 
of all the three networks of excellence in the area of embedded systems; Hycon (http://www.ist‐hycon.org/), ARTIST2 – a 
predecessor of ArtistDesign, and HiPeac (http://www.hipeac.net/).  
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 7 (22) 
 
 A general conclusion from our inventory of KTH is that there is a lack of coordination and concentrated 
effort in the area of embedded systems. The area is of strong relevance for industry and the KTH groups 
have the right competences which, if coordinated in the right way, can provide a useful niche for KTH.  
Given that embedded systems competence is spread over several schools, ICES serves to bring them 
under one organizational umbrella. 
3. Embedded systems application examples and challenges 
The development of embedded systems based products, calls for multiple hard and soft competences. 
The area of embedded systems is vast and comprises many technologies, application domains and types 
of systems. Several efforts have been made to formulate and summarize the needs and challenges posed 
by embedded systems, [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].  
In the following we first exemplify and concretize futuristic embedded systems products from the 
automotive, automation and telecom domains and their challenges. Given these challenges, basic needs 
for the application domains induced by embedded systems are discussed, forming the basis for defining 
the focal points and vision of ICES.  
Future automotive systems 
Future automotive systems will improve transportation logistics, contribute to the zero accidents vision 
and provide greener transport by the aid of information and communication technologies, where 
embedded systems will play a key role. As illustrated in Figure 1, a futuristic vehicle will communicate 
with other vehicles and the traffic environment, assessing the context and incorporating autonomous 
operations in order to avoid hazardous situations and improve transport efficiency.  
Challenges posed on future embedded systems in order to realize future automotive systems are listed in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Future automotive systems: Cooperative services through networked vehicles and infrastructure. 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 8 (22) 
 
 
Future automation systems 
In the world of automation the trend is towards more distributed intelligence, regardless of whether one 
is thinking about factory automation, substation automation or process automation. This means that 
embedded systems will be used in large numbers in industrial automation systems, not only in the central 
control units, but also in networked peripheral equipment such as sensors and actuators. These embedded 
systems will all be networked to enable safe, secure, and highly optimized operation of the installations 
(quality and reliability of the production, emissions, energy consumption, maintenance and service, fast 
production changes, etc). 
An application where this trend is very prevalent is the substation automation systems of the future, so 
called Smart Grids. Smart Grid is a vision of the future evolution of the entire power network. It involves 
both transmission and distribution, and focuses on the integration of renewable and distributed 
generation, the reliability and efficiency of the grid. Furthermore, it includes the demand response and the 
potential of new technologies such as large scale integration of electric vehicles. Smart Grid includes both 
automation/IT and controllable power devices in the whole value chain from production to consumption. 
Figure 2 shows the main difference between today’s grid systems and those of the future. 
An example of new innovative applications enabled by embedded systems within the smart grids context 
is the large scale integration of electric vehicles. A large number of electrical vehicles are connected to the 
grid at any given point in time. The batteries in these vehicles pose a large “spinning reserve” of power 
that can be used to handle short peaks in power usage. In order to use power from these vehicles to cover 
such peaks, intelligent equipment has to be available which can supervise the input and output of energy 
and communicate real-time information regarding charge-status, billing information, etc. 
 
Figure 2: From traditional to smart grids. Courtesy of ABB. 
Challenges posed on future embedded systems to realize a Smart Grid scenario include: 
 Real-time communication between networked, distributed embedded systems 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 9 (22) 
 
 Cheap, reliable embedded systems to be used in peripheral nodes in the grid 
 Safe and secure networked embedded systems, which are able to operate in an unprotected 
environment (to withstand hacking attempts of various types) 
 Long life embedded systems (40+ years of lifetime), which can be updated in the field without being 
taken out of service 
Future telecom systems 
One of the difficult challenges in the wireless telecom industry is the aggressive reduction of price, at a 
time when we have a drastic increase of throughput in the system. Prices are reduced substantially every 
year and throughput has evolved from 384 kbps in WCDMA to 150 Mbps in LTE and to several Gbps 
with LTE Advanced. At the same time, the number of mobile users has increased to several billion. An 
Internet of things by the year 2020 (Figure 3) with 50 billion wireless devices, built into notebooks, 
vending machines, security systems, household appliances, etc, is not unrealistic. That calls for a 
challenging reduction of cost/functionality for terminal devices and cost/capacity for infrastructure. as 
well as a tight integration of traffic and control software with domain specific hardware devices. 
 
Figure3: Internet of things. 
An example of an embedded system in the infrastructure part of a wireless system is the baseband board 
of a radio base station. The board consists of CPUs, DSPs, FPGAs, and ASICs which in turn may 
contain multiple CPU and DSP cores. On this board executes multiple layers of embedded software for 
traffic, control and management functions. There are high requirements on reliability, capacity, 
upgradeability, maintainability, energy efficiency, and not least, low cost. Many of these requirements lead 
to an evolution towards increased integration and use of application specific hardware. One could 
envision a future with more or less all software running on a single ASIC. Such a future ASIC, with 
perhaps 100 billion transistors and harboring 50 million lines of software code, poses a tremendous 
hardware design and verification challenge as well as software/hardware integration challenge. 
 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 10 (22) 
 
Common embedded systems characteristics and challenges 
Common properties of the application examples considered in the previous section include long life-time, 
relatively large series, and critical applications (severe consequences in terms of cost and/or damage if not 
operating properly). The application domains of automation, automotive and telecom all rely on 
embedded systems and the stakeholders 6  are required to deal with the following product related 
phenomena and characteristics: 
 Real-world interaction in real-time. Embedded systems products have to act in synchrony with the 
systems they interact with and obey different types of timing constraints.  
Challenges include the architecting of embedded systems and components to facilitate predictable 
integration and thereby desired timing.   
 Heterogeneity. Embedded systems have many stakeholders, developers and technologies that all - 
despite their differing properties7 and heterogeneity - need to be harmonized and integrated.    
Challenges include the reconciliation of multiple competences and technologies, and developing 
appropriate supporting methods and tools. Reconciling software with hardware remains a challenge 
considering their different characteristics and needs. 
 Large design and run-time state space – the variability challenge. Digital solutions in advanced 
products provide large state spaces, for example in terms of the number of modes and internal data 
values they can exhibit. The state space is increasing as embedded systems are becoming distributed 
systems and implement more functions. Another facet of the state space is that of finding optimal or 
even near optimal designs among many design alternatives. The state space and variability is becoming 
even more complex for product lines where components are reused over a range of products.   
Challenges include that of providing methodologies that can guide design to suitable architectures, 
means for describing variability in a broad sense, and in systematically dealing with testing and 
debugging.  
 Limited and shared resources. Production cost pressure can result in solutions where resources (e.g. 
processing and communication) are shared and limited in capacity (e.g. memory, speed and power).  
Challenges include methods to assist designers in ensuring that nominal design goals are still met and 
in avoiding, or dealing with, side-effects (interference) caused when several applications compete for 
resources.  
 Evolvability and maintenance. Embedded systems have limited access points, contain third party 
developed and legacy components/sub-systems. Inspection and debugging is therefore difficult, and 
becomes even more so when the products are dispersed to distant customers. The long life time 
means that embedded systems should be able to continue operating despite evolving environments, 
new operators and owners, and thus need to accommodate changes in requirements. 
Challenges include product design, developing system and environment abstractions, and coming up 
with architectures, methods and tools for evolution and maintenance.  
 
 Humans in the loop. Humans are “in-the-loop” in several ways with respect to embedded systems, 
including as developers, potential operators and users.  
                                                            
6 The stakeholders considered in this context include mainly system integrators, developers, testers, operators, service 
engineers and certifiers.  
7 Different time spans of technologies and time constants for hardware vs. software development are prime examples. 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 11 (22) 
 
Challenges include the development of appropriate methods, tools and human machine interfaces 
that adequately support and stimulate humans, while preventing mistakes. 
 Emerging properties, in particular safety, security and performance. The behavior of an 
embedded system depends ultimately on the final physical composition of software, electronics and 
their integration into the product. It is difficult to predict all properties of the end product a priori. 
The reasons include limited knowledge of certain components, non-linear dependencies between 
design parameters (such as resource allocation schemes) and end qualities )such as performance), and 
the system complexity as discussed in the previous bullets.  
 
Challenges include the development of architectures, methods and tools that can assist designers in 
predicting the emerging properties of embedded systems based products or design them into the systems 
in the first place (correct by construction). These challenges are of particular importance for crucial 
product qualities such as safety and performance. 
Clearly, the combination of these characteristics makes embedded systems truly challenging to design, 
verify and maintain. Other constraints unfortunately make these basic challenges even tougher to meet. 
Figure 4 illustrates some of the contextual aspects that need to be taken into account. Such constraints 
have to do with market competition, the evolving technology, user expectations, and legislation, leading 
to tight requirements on time to market, overall lifecycle product cost and product qualities, e.g. safety, 
security, performance, reliability/availability and maintainability. In many cases, new business models are 
also enabled and/or required to deal with embedded systems based products.  
 
 
Figure 4. Main concerns and drivers for embedded system design. Courtesy of ABB. 
Science has not been able to keep pace with the fast evolution of embedded systems. Although there is a 
significant gap between theory and practice, even the available theory does not comprehensively deal with 
the above mentioned challenges. Architecting is still an art. Cost-efficient and systematic testing and 
debugging are still beyond the reach of scientists and practitioners. The implications are that embedded 
systems today are well characterized by the term “art and science” – for the future,we wish to make it 
more of a science. 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 12 (22) 
 
4. Focus and vision of ICES 
The focal areas address themes that are common and central for the involved domains and disciplines,  
having been chosen in light of the scientific and industrial challenges facing ICES member companies and 
the involved research groups at KTH.  
The key focal areas of ICES include the thematic areas System architecture,  Software verification and 
Methodology, with particular attention given to the embedded systems properties, characteristics and 
industrial domains, as illustrated in Figure 5.  
The focus on design and methodology encompasses integrated software and hardware systems. 
Methodology is used here to denote the study of methods and tools, their suitable use and combination 
to support systematic and efficient embedded systems design and verification. 
 
Figure 5. ICES focal points. 
 
Complexity management is seen as a major embedded systems challenge, see for example [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], 
relating to the characteristics described in Section 3. Embedded systems’ architecture8 lies at the core in 
dealing with the corresponding challenges.  
By shifting the focus towards architecting with the aid of supporting methods and tools, much of today’s 
integration problems should become more manageable.  
An important future challenge for universities is to provide skilled embedded systems designers who also 
have the necessary understanding of industrial applications.. It is essential to understand that 
programming is only one part of the necessary knowledge. Understanding analogue electronics, software 
modeling, real-time behavior, communication and overall system architecture are all key components in 
                                                            
8 One definition of architecture: The fundamental organization of a system, embodied in its components, their relationships 
to each other and the environment, and the principles governing its design and evolution. [11]. 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 13 (22) 
 
the education of tomorrow’s embedded systems designers. Educators must confront engineering students 
with real-world challenges and thus ingrain a true engineering spirit of solving complex problems. Vital 
competences include:  
 Systems and software architects with understanding of real time embedded systems 
 Computer Science engineers with understanding of real time embedded systems 
 Embedded system designers with knowledge in the fields of hardware-close programming 
programmable logic and electronics design. 
 Improved connections between theory and practice 
Competence provision related to the focus points is of immediate relevance to industry. The technical 
focus areas are also highly relevant from a scientific viewpoint, with plenty of longer term research 
challenges.  
A concentrated multidisciplinary and multidomain effort is required to make KTH and its industrial 
partners better prepared for dealing with the opportunities and challenges posed by embedded systems. 
This is even more relevant if we consider that we are currently facing only the beginning of the revolution 
offered by embedded systems technology. 
This leads to the formulation of the ICES vision, that of achieving 
A flourishing eco-system for industry and academia excelling in embedded systems  
research, education and innovation. 
A long term goal of ICES is to become the preferred partner in embedded systems education and 
research in Sweden, and to become one of the leading centres in Europe. 
5. Detailed description of ICES goals, stakeholders and strategies 
To reach this vision, ICES has adopted the role of networker and catalyst, reaching out to Industry 
(engineers and management), KTH students (undergraduate and graduate) and KTH faculty as the main 
stakeholders. For these stakeholders the following “services” have been identified, as depicted in Figure 6.  
Figure 6: ICES stakeholders and services.   
Industry 
 Courses 
 Well educated students 
 Contacts 
 Research 
 Experts 
 Exchange of people 
Students 
 Courses 
 MSc programmes 
 Contacts 
 International 
 Industry 
 Research 
 
Academia: Synergies & Opportunities for Funding 
 Contacts with Industry 
 Exchange of people 
 International Member Organizations 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 14 (22) 
 
Intermediate goals for Education, Networking and Research have been formulated as steps 
towards reaching the vision. Since its inauguration in 2008, the goals of ICES are:  
Goals Short term: -2011  
(3 years)  
Mid term: -2014  
(6 years) 
Performance indicators 
New Master 
program at KTH 
Developed a new master 
program in Embedded 
Systems at KTH 
Successful and attractive 
program running  
30 participants with 
successful completion. At 
least 90% recommend the 
program 
Information  to 
stake-holders 
Improved  information to 
students, researchers and 
industry in finding courses, 
programs, projects, etc. 
Enhanced services including 
interactive web (terminology, 
web courses, …)  
Number of web accesses, no. 
of persons subscribing to the 
newsletter 
ICES 
attractiveness 
and visibility 
Recruited at least 10 
additional members. 
Initiated popular technical 
press presentations. 
Recruited at least 20 
additional members by end of 
2014 
Number of membership 
applications, seminar 
attendance, incoming 
requests, articles, press 
events, other activities 
Stimulate 
exchange across 
domains & 
disciplines 
Established a seminar series 
and a faculty club. Defined 
means for systematic 
follow-up of seminars. 
Established a PhD student 
forum. Initiated mobility 
pilots. 
Greatly enhanced support for 
student, industry and faculty 
interactions, well established 
channels for mentoring, work 
groups, exchange and 
practical work periods. 
Cross-domain seminar 
participation, spin-off 
activities with least two 
domains / disciplines. Work 
task contributions, 
publications.  Mobilities. 
Newsletter subscriptions.  
Research 
initialization and 
funding 
Initiated at least one 
project: new combination 
of KTH groups & 
companies 
Three additional projects.  
Excellence centre funding or 
similar resources. 
No. joint applications for 
funding and started projects.  
Post-graduate 
and continued 
education 
A few courses developed 
and given as pilots. Plan for 
regular provision of 
courses. 
Graduate school including 
regular courses adapted to 
suit industrial participation 
Number of courses, no. of 
participants in total, per 
discipline and from industry. 
Quality metrics to be added. 
Coop. with other 
initiatives. 
Make inventory of other 
relevant initiatives at KTH, 
initiate connections 
Extend inventory to 
international entities. 
Establish formalized coop. 
with selected centers; joint 
projects, mobility etc. 
No. of joint meetings and 
workshops/seminars ; jointly 
initiated projects. 
State of the art 
lab 
Define goals and means 
(e.g. connection to new 
masters program) 
New/upgraded Embedded 
systems lab(s) at KTH 
 
Flagship project Develop concepts and 
solution concepts 
Flagship project initiated  
New KTH 
professors 
 Suggest new embedded 
systems chairs at KTH 
 
During the first phase of ICES (-2011), the first six of the mentioned goals are prioritized.  
KTH currently has no coherent arrangements for education in embedded systems. Research ideas and 
propositions also end up with individual groups, and the breadth of KTH is seldomly exploited. It is 
today difficult to find collected information about ongoing events in the area, and in general, meetings 
and synergy effects across the KTH-schools are rare. Moreover, contacts with industry are rarely 
systematic or shared, thus reducing the chances of achieving cross-fertilization.  
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 15 (22) 
 
For industry and KTH students, the bewildering situation today can be greatly improved by providing 
structured networks and a map of the available embedded systems resources and competences, including 
courses and programs, at KTH.  
A new embedded systems masters program at KTH will provide competent engineers in this area whilst 
at the same time requiring KTH to oversee and harmonize the education. A new masters program will 
benefit from the breadth and depth of educational capabilities across KTH schools 9 . A common 
denominator has to be found, and then specializations using existing (or new) profiles will be offered. A 
flagship project has the important intention of stimulating close cross-discipline cooperation on 
industrially relevant problems. Such an initiative can also contribute to several of the other above stated 
goals! Flagship projects may be closely connected to the new Masters program and involve project 
courses. With respect to member companies, ICES has the goal to include several domains, system 
integrators, subsystem suppliers, component developers in the Masters programme as well as consultants 
and tool suppliers.  By adapting graduate courses to include industrial participants, additional experience 
exchange and continued education can be achieved. 
A central hypothesis guiding the work of ICES is that of achieving synergies over industrial domains, 
academia and industry (and within KTH), across academic disciplines as well as between research and 
education. We believe that this is particularly important for the emerging field of embedded systems and 
the fragmented situation in academia (including KTH). 
Key considerations and strategies in accomplishing the ICES vision and goals are as follows:  
 Well chosen stakeholders, activities and business model. This point, relating to the 
implementation of ICES, is essential in order to stimulate involvement and synergetic effects. 
Appropriate services must be provided to the right stakeholder using a viable approach. This point 
should be revisited and reprioritized annually, taking available resources into account.  
 Well defined communication and marketing strategy. Information distribution is an essential 
part of ICES’ work. Therefore, the types of information, who needs to know and how best to share 
are all aspects to be elaborated. As part of making ICES visible, collaboration schemes and direct 
channels with relevant media have to be established. 
 Longer term funding and efforts. Within ICES, it is possible to formulate long term research 
challenges and to pursue them through collaborative efforts. For this purpose it is also necessary to 
gather longer term funding, such as for example, through excellence center funding. 
 The need for strong integration mechanisms. Industry is more or less fully occupied with their 
daily work and the individual KTH groups are already well recognized and fully occupied with 
disciplinary research and education. There are thus needs to provide exceptionally strong drivers for 
integration in order to accomplish the desired interactions and new developments. Informal 
networking and formalized cooperation schemes are required. One useful means is to provide 
support for ICES related constellations for their work in creating applications for funding. Such 
support is rarely available today.  Industrial applications as integrators. Industry-like applications 
and demonstrators, suitably arranged in terms of concrete and collaborative case studies, can 
constitute powerful integration mechanisms and at the same time serve as useful research work (e.g. 
technology evaluations and demonstrators) and provide publicity.  
 Bridging gaps from theory to practice. Academia/research collaboration through concrete 
applications, similar to the above, is useful for bridging the gap from theory to practice; both in terms 
                                                            
9 Time constants for launching a new masters program are two years (earliest possible in the autumn of 2011). 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 16 (22) 
 
of demonstrating novel capabilities but also to investigate their limitations and scalability to real 
applications. Researchers actively participating in industrial projects and  introducing research 
methods/results is seen as beneficial. Another challenge is to try to address the gaps from new results 
to industrial adoption. Experience shows that longer term commitments, involving industry, 
academia/institutes and funding agencies are required to effect this. 
 Incorporating industrial stakeholders from a systems integration perspective. ICES strives to 
incorporate representatives from several industrial domains with similar challenges, and also from the 
vertical design chain including system developers, subsystem suppliers, component developers, tool 
suppliers, and consultants. The strategy is to accomplish learning and achieving synergies across the 
domains. 
 Strategic cooperation/alliances. As outlined in this document, there are a number of embedded 
systems related efforts in Sweden and internationally. Strategic cooperation will be sought and 
synergy aimed for. ICES has already organized seminars in cooperation with INCOSE and 
VINNOVA and there is a plan for joint seminars together with SWEDSOFT.  During the first year,  
ICES initiated KTH joining ARTEMISA as a member. 
 Innovative approaches and Innovation within ICES. Innovation is an integral part of the ICES 
vision, and ICES will benefit from the strengths of KTH in this area, including the Product 
Innovation Engineering program (PIEp)10 and the KTH Innovation organization which includes an 
incubator that will help to bridge the gap from the ICES creative environment to spin-offs. ICES will 
also strive to incorporate various aspects of innovation in its education efforts. While innovation is 
currently not highlighted as a goal in its own right, considerable innovation, in terms of creating novel 
product and service concepts, is expected to arise from ICES’ multidisciplinary and multidomain 
networking and research efforts. ICES strategy is to also to be innovative in its form by adopting and 
developing useful mechanisms and initiatives in order to fulfill ICES Vision in creating a flourishing 
eco-system.  
 Student involvement. Students want to connect to research and industry, and in turn offer a unique  
resource. Student involvement can take many forms, including project based education in relation to 
research and industry, and also through PhD studentsequipped with funding becoming actively 
involved in ICES tasks.  
 
ICES strives to recognize the need to learn from earlier efforts; to initiate what can be achieved right 
away, so as to improve the current situation as far as possible; and finally, to identify the right means 
to best accomplish the ICES vision.  Thus the ICES motto is as follows: 
 
 
Honor the past, Enable the present, and Innovate the future! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.ices.kth.se/ 
                                                            
10 PIEp ‐ http://www.piep.se/?language=2 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 17 (22) 
 
References 
1. A  Digital Agenda for Europe - COM(2010)245 final - 19.5.2010). 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/digital-agenda/documents/digital-agenda-communication-
en.pdf 
2. Christof Ebert and Capers Jones. Embedded software: Facts, Figures and Future. IEEE Computer, 
April 2009. 
3. Christof Ebert and Jürgen Salecker. Embedded Software - Technologies and Trends. Guest editors' 
introduction. IEEE Software, May/June 2009,  
4. KTH-RAE, 2008. Final project report for the KTH Research Assessment Exercise. 
http://www.kth.se/forskning/rae?l=en_UK 
5. ITEA, Technology Roadmap for Software-Intensive Systems, 2nd ed., 2004; 
www.itea2.org/itea_roadmap_2 
6. Små som sandkorn, stora som städer. Strategy document by the Strategic Research foundation (in 
Swedish). Strategidokument om komplexa mjukvarubaserade system. Rapport till styrelsen vid 
stiftelsen för strategisk forskning, 1 okt. 2007. Författad av strategipanelen för informations-, 
kommunikations- och systemteknik med inriktning mot mjukvara. 
7. Report from the Cyber-Physical Systems, St. Louis, Missouri/US, April 24-25, 2008. 
http://varma.ece.cmu.edu/summit/CPS_Summit_Report.pdf 
8. The ICT framework program of the European Commission - FP7 ICT Work Programme 2009-2010. 
Available at http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/programme/home_en.html (Aug. 2009). 
9. ARTEMIS Strategic Research Agenda. 1st edition, March 2006, prepared by the members of the 
ARTEMIS Strategic Research Agenda Working Group. https://www.artemisia-association.org/sra 
(Accessed Oct. 5). 
10. ARTIST Roadmap for Research and Development (Lecture Notes in Computer Science). B. 
Bouyssounouse, J., Sifakis (Eds). Springer; 1 edition, May, 2005. ISBN-10: 3540251073. 
11. The IEEE 1471 conceptual framework for architecture description. Accessible from 
http://standards.ieee.org/reading/ieee/std_public/description/se/1471-2000_desc.html (Aug. 2009). 
 
 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 18 (22) 
 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 19 (22) 
 
 
Appendix 1. ICES relations to KTH and other efforts 
 
ICES groups 
ICES is sprung from the need to coordinate the research and educational needs in building Embedded 
Systems. Within the current KTH structure there are several departments and research groups carrying 
out embedded systems or embedded systems-related research. A map of the KTH groups and their 
relationships is shown in Figure 7. ICES was founded by five research groups from four different schools 
and departments. The founding groups are marked with thicker lines in the figure below. Apart from the 
five founding groups, there are fifteen additional groups that so far have expressed interest in 
participating in ICES activities. In total, these 20 groups consist of more than 200 senior researchers with 
a PhD degree doing embedded systems-related research. 
 
Figure 7. A map of KTH groups and how they relate to ICES and Embedded Systems research. 
 Table 1. List of Abbreviations shown in Figure 7. 
 
CSC-School of 
Computer Science 
and 
Communications 
  CVAP Computer Vision and Active 
Perception 
HCI Human-Computer Interaction TCS Theoretical Computer Science 
EE – School of 
Electrical 
Engineering 
AC Automatic Control ICS Industrial Information and 
Control Systems 
SIPL Sound and Image Processing  SP Signal Processing 
ICT – School of 
Information and 
Communication 
Technology 
COS Communications Systems SCS Software/Computer Systems 
ES Embedded Electronic and 
Computer Systems 
EKT Semiconductor Components 
TSLAB Telecom Systems Laboratory  DSV Data och Systemvetenskap 
(shared with SU) 
NI 
MST STH 
SIPL 
SP 
AC 
ICS
EE 
TCS
DSV
CVAP 
   HCI 
CAS 
OPTSYS 
SU 
CSC
EKT
COS
SCS
TSLAB
ES 
ICT
IIP  ECS 
ITM 
Science 
ICES
Science
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 20 (22) 
 
ITM- School of 
Industrial 
Engineering and 
Management 
ECS Embedded Control Systems IIP Production Engineering 
Science – School of 
Engineering 
Sciences 
OptSys Optimization and Systems 
Theory 
  
SU- Stockholm 
University 
DSV Data och Systemvetenskap 
(shared with KTH/ICT) 
  
STH – School of 
Technology and 
Health 
NI Neuronic Engineering MST Medical Engineering 
 
KTH platforms 
KTH has recently gone through a Research Assessment Evaluation. As a result of this evaluation, five 
topic areas were pointed out where KTH is particularly strong, namely Energy engineering, Materials 
development, Information and communication technology, Transport research and Engineering for 
medicine and health. To better synchronize research and educational activities, at a higher level than the 
centers, five corresponding “platforms” have been set-up and initiated. Embedded systems – and thus 
ICES – is most closely related to the ICT platform, but is clearly also related to the Energy, 
Transportation and MedTech platforms. 
There are currently about 50 active centers at KTH11.  
Several centers have activities that in one way or another are related to embedded systems, especially CAS 
(Center for Autonomous Systems), iPack (intelligent Packaging) and Access (Autonomic Complex 
Communication Networks, Signals and Systems) centers. Other centers touch upon other related issues 
such as innovation (PIEp) and application domains such as the vehicular technology center.  
 CAS performs research in (semi-) autonomous systems including mobile robot systems for 
manufacturing and domestic applications. 
 iPack is a Vinnova Centre of Excellence. One of iPack’s focal points is on ubiquitous intelligence, 
which aims to embed tiny and intelligent systems in almost everything including artifacts, the 
human body, paper and packaging.  
 ACCESS is developing fundamental understanding and engineering principles for designing self-
managed and scalable communication networks in which applications may share real-time 
information and cooperate in an efficient, affordable, and reliable manner. 
ICES relationships with different KTH and external embedded systems organizations are shown in 
Figure 8. A strong relationship with ICES interests is indicated in the figure using a thick solid line, while 
weaker relationships are marked with a dotted line. 
 
                                                            
11 An overview of the KTH centers is available here: 
http://www.kth.se/forskning/forskningsorganisation?l=en_UK 
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 21 (22) 
 
 
Figure 8. ICES relationship with KTH focus areas, KTH centers and Embedded System Organizations. 
Table 2. Explanation of Abbreviations and Acronyms used in Figure 8. 
CAS Centre for Autonomous Systems ArtistDesign European Network of Excellence in 
Embedded Systems 
SUS Centre for Sustainable 
Communications 
Artemisia The European Association for R&D 
actors in the field of Artemis (The 
European Embedded Computing Systems 
Initiative) 
SIAM  HiPEAC European Network of Excellence on 
High Performance and Embedded 
Architecture and Compilation 
EKC2 Swedish Center of Excellence in 
Electric Power Engineering 
Incose International Council on Systems 
Engineering 
iPack Intelligent Packaging Sesam Swedish organization on safety critical 
software (military industry mainly) 
Wireless 
@KTH 
Centre for Mobile Systems for Mobile 
Services 
Swedsoft Swedish interest organization on Software 
Intensive Systems, Services and Products 
Access Autonomic Complex Communication 
Networks, Signals and Systems 
Snart Swedish National Real-Time Association 
CTMH Centre for Technology, Medicine and 
Health 
SMI Swedish Multicore Initiative 
DMMS Design and Management if 
Manufacturing Systems 
  
PIEp Product Innovation Engineering 
program 
  
 The KTH railway group  coordinates 
railway competence at KTH. 
  
ECO2/ 
FTC 
A VinnExcellence Centre performing  
research to support a sustainable 
vehicle design development, focusing 
on vehicle mechanics design. FTC is a 
corresponding KTH centre. 
  
Mtrl   Energy    MedTech  ICT  Fordon 
CAS 
SUS 
SIAM 
EKC2 
iPack 
Wireless 
Access 
 
CTMH 
DMMS 
            PIEp 
Järnvägsgruppen 
FCO2/FTC 
ArtistDesign 
Artemisia 
HiPEAC 
Incose 
SESAM 
Swedsoft 
Snart 
SMI 
ICES
 
ICES: Vision and goals, September 2010                                            Innovative Centre for Embedded Systems – ICES
  Page 22 (22) 
 
KTH is a member of several Embedded System organizations, the most prominent and ICES related 
ones being ArtistDesign and Artemisia. On the Multicore side, KTH is part of the HiPEAC network of 
excellence and the ENIAC12 Joint Undertaking. KTH is also part of two embedded systems related 
Swedish networks, Swedsoft - the recently started initiative on software engineering, and Snart – the 
Swedish real-time systems association.  
In general, Sweden has strong universities in the area of embedded systems. In for example the 
ArtistDesign network of Excellence, five Swedish universities are core partners (KTH, LTH, LIU, MDH 
and UU) and in Artemisia, currently KTH as well as LUTH and MDH are members. 
A brief outlook on other Swedish universities and related centers is as follows: 
LTH  Vinnova Excellence Centre: SoS – System Design on Silicon 
 SSF Competence Center for High Speed Wireless Communication 
 LUCAS - http://www.lucas.lth.se/ 
LIU  CENIIT – Centrum för industriell informationsteknologi 
 ISIS – Vinnoave Excellence Center : Information Systems for Industrial Control and 
Supervision 
 CMIV - Center for Medical Image Science and Visualization  
 NVIS – Norrköping Visulatisation and Interaction Studio 
LTU  CASTT – Center for Automotive System Technologies and Testing (?) 
 EISLAB – Embedded Internet Systems 
 Process IT Innovations – Samverkanscentrum för informations och 
kommunikationsteknik för process och basindustrin. 
JTH 
 
 CRE – Centrum för Robust Elektronik 
 Fraunhofer ISST – Samarbete med Fraunhofer ISST i Berlin inom 
Informationsteknik (?) 
Chalmers 
 
 Vinnova Excellence: GigaHertz Centrum 
 SAFER – Fordons och trafiksäkerhetscentrum 
 SMIT – Swedish Microsystem Integration Technology Center (?) 
 Wingquist laboratoriet – Methods and Tools for Global Product and Production 
Development (?) 
MDH  Centrum för produktrealisering 
 The PROGRESS Centre for Predictable Embedded Software Systems (MRTC) 
MIUN 
 
 STC@MIUN: Sensible Things that Communicate 
 
UU 
 
 UPMARC – Uppsala Programming for Multicore Architectures Research Center 
 WISENET – Uppsala Center for Wireless Sensor Networks 
 UPPMAX – Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science 
(?) 
 
                                                            
12 European Nanoelectronics Initiative Advisory Council ‐ ENIAC JU ‐ http://www.eniac.eu/. 

