EDITORIAL BOARD
 
Rajesh K, Gupta, UC San Diego 
Editor-In-Chief 
 
Anand Raghunathan, Purdue  
Embedded Security 
 
Tarek Abdelzaher, University of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
Cyber-physical Systems, Real-Time 
Systems 
 
Sandeep Shukla, Virginia Polytechnic  
Embedded Systems Specification and 
Modeling 
 
Tom Conte, Georgia Tech 
Embedded Processor Architectures 
and Microarchitectures 
 
Peter Corke, CSIRO, Kenmore, 
Australia 
Embedded Sensor Platforms 
 
Ryan Kastner, UC San Diego 
Reconfigurable Systems 
 
David Atienza, EPFL, Switzerland 
 Multi-Processor Systems 
 
Donatella Sciuto, Politecnico Milano 
Design Methods for Embedded 
Systems 
 
Paulo Tabuada, UC Los Angeles 
Embedded Control & Hybrid Systems 
 
Sanjit Seshia, UC Berkeley 
Dependable Systems, Design 
Automation, Verification 
 
Hiroyuki Tomiyama, Nagoya Univ. 
Embedded Processors 
 
Tulika Mitra, NUS, Singapore 
Compilers 
 
S Ramesh, GM Automotive Research, 
Bangalore, India 
Automotive Embedded Systems. 
IEEE Embedded Systems Letters seeks to provide a forum for quick 
dissemination of research results in the domain of embedded systems with a 
target turn-around time of three months. Submissions are welcome on any 
topic in the broad area of embedded systems and embedded software, 
especially but not limited to: 
 Architectural and micro-architectural design of embedded systems: 
micro-architectures, customizable processors, signal processing, multi-
processor SOC and NOC architectures; 
 Design automation algorithms, methods, and tools for VLSI 
implementations: specification languages, models and synthesis 
methods; 
 Component modeling and component-based development 
methodologies; hardware-software co-design, co-design 
methodologies, design exploration tools; 
 Compilation and managed runtime environments for embedded 
systems; Profiling, measurement, analysis techniques for embedded 
applications; OS, middleware and support systems for embedded-
system design; 
 Programming languages and software engineering for embedded or 
real-time applications; 
 Non-functional aspects of embedded systems including low power, 
reliability, dependability and availability. Low power design and power 
management; 
 Testing, validation, and verification of embedded software; 
 Embedded sensor networks and embedded control systems: design, 
analysis and application to cyber-physical systems; 
 Embedded systems security; 
 Applications of embedded systems and software: military, avionics, 
and automotive: case studies, applications of new methodologies and 
tools to applications with increased system heterogeneity and scale. 
Submitted letters must be four pages or fewer, including all figures, tables, and 
references. Submissions exceeding this length will be returned without review. 
Papers should use 7.875in x 10.75in (20cm x 27.30cm) trim size and the IEEE 
transactions two-column format in 9-pt. font. In word counts, this corresponds 
to roughly 2200 words.  
 
Submissions to IEEE ESL must consist of original work that has not been 
previously published nor is currently under review elsewhere.  
Please submit at http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/les‐ieee. 
Inaugural Issue Deadlines: 
Manuscript Due: June 6, 2009 
Notification to Authors: June 27, 2009 
Final Draft Due for Publication: July 3, 2009 
 
 
IEEE ESL: Publication Style and Types 
To guarantee a fast review and publication; we require a strict page limit for all papers in this journal, without 
any exception. This strict limit is 4 pages, and the format is required to be exactly as stated in this guideline. 
Research findings and results whose fast dissemination will spark interest in the academic and industrial 
communities, and whose main points can be captured within this page limit are best targeted for this journal. 
Research papers that require elaborate context, elaborate formalization, and large amount of data or formal 
proofs to convince the readers will be better targeted for other archival journals in the field. If you are writing 
for IEEE ESL, a general guideline is to minimize the motivational text and point to directly relevant 
background work without, of course, any omissions. In some cases, directly stating the problem that you are 
attempting to address may be an appropriate starting point.   
Manuscript can be one of three types: regular manuscripts, letters to the editor and a Response Manuscript. Per 
IEEE policy, all published manuscripts should be peer reviewed for originality and technical soundness. If you 
are writing a “Response Manuscript” that is a follow up of an earlier published work, use the introductory text 
to capture the main points of the manuscript for the reader who may not have the benefit of having read the 
prior work. 
Concurrent or Overlapping Submission & Originality of Work 
Submissions to IEEE ESL must consist of original work that has not been previously published nor is currently 
under review elsewhere. Concurrent or overlapping submission to ESL and other publications is viewed as a 
serious breach of ethics and, if detected, will result in immediate rejection of the submission. 
Contributions beyond prior work must be clearly articulated. Letters submissions that extend or are otherwise 
closely related to prior publications must also include copies of those prior papers for the reviewers' and 
editors' reference. 
However, due to the short format, we expect that publication in IEEE ESL should not preclude later publication 
in top-quality conferences or full-length journals. However, we expect that the later publication is substantially 
extended as per IEEE guidelines, and follows guidelines as specified by the conference organizers. 
Review Process 
Submissions are accepted on a continuing basis. Each submission will be assigned to an appropriate member of 
the Editorial Board to manage the review process. Upon acceptance, authors will have one week to make 
revisions. The first two issues of the IEEE ESL will be assembled by vote from the entire editorial board after 
conclusion of the review process. 
Call for Participation 
We are looking for authors, reviewers and guest editors for the new journal. Start by 
registering at http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/les‐ieee! 
Instructions for the Reviewers 
As a reviewer, you play a critical role in the peer review process. The guiding principles for our peer review 
process are to conduct a thorough, fair and timely evaluation of the submitted manuscripts. Only those 
manuscripts that meet the criteria for highest quality should be recommended for publication. In plain English, 
we are looking to publish articles that are technically sound, present a new idea, new method or new insight to 
the reader and are understandable to researchers or practitioners in the specific topic area. This can be hard 
especially in case of submission to IEEE ESL due to the space constraints. Clearly, a manuscript needs to be 
direct about the problem being addressed, method taken, results obtained and conclusions reached. In your 
review, even on manuscripts that you are recommending a clear reject recommendation, provide sound and 
constructive reviews that the authors can use to improve their research endeavor. 
Please email esl‐info@cs.ucsd.edu or any member of the editorial board for more information. 

