 
 
Embedded 
Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
••• Portfolio of FP7  projects  
Dir. G: Components and Systems 
Unit G3: Embedded Systems and Control. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
This brochure contains an overview of 
our projects 
 
 
STREPs- Specific Targeted 
Research Projects: 
ACTORS 
ALL-TIMES 
COCONUT 
COMBEST 
COMPLEX 
DESTECS 
EMBOCON 
ENOSYS 
ERA 
GALAXY 
MADES 
MADNESS 
MEDEIA 
MNEMEE 
MOBY-DIC 
MOGENTES 
MULTICUBE 
PREDATOR 
PROARTIS 
Quasimodo 
SATURN 
TERESA 
 
IPs- Integrated Projects: 
COMPLEX 
INTERESTED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSA- Coordination and Support 
Action: 
ADAMS 
ARCADIA 
COSINE2 
ProSE 
 
 
 
NoE- Network of Excellence: 
ArtistDesign 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For further information: 
European Commission - Information Society and Media DG 
Directorate G – Components and Systems 
Unit G3 – Embedded Systems and Control 
Office: BU31 05/03 B-1049 Brussels 
Email: infso-g3@ec.europa.eu 
Tel: +32 2 296 64 07 
Fax: +32 2 296 83 89 
http://europa.eu/information_society 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ACTORS 
 
Adaptivity and Control of Resources in 
Embedded Systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator/ Technical 
Manager: 
Name: Johan Eker 
Institution: Ericsson AB 
Email: johan.eker@ericsson.com 
 
Project website: www.actors-project.eu  
 
Partners: 
Ericsson AB (Sweden) 
Scuola Superiore Sant’ Anna (Italy) 
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern 
(Germany) 
Evidence S.r.l. (Italy) 
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (Switzerland) 
Lund University (Sweden) 
AKAtech SA. 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008.02.01  
Total Cost: 3412454 € 
EC Contribution: 2479214€  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT- 216586 
 
ACTORS 
Adaptivity and Control of Resources in Embedded Systems  
KEYWORDS: Adaptivity, Resource Management, Reservation based scheduling, 
MPEG, Data flow modeling, Code generation, FPGA 
 
Main Objectives 
 
ACTORS addresses the challenging problem of efficient 
design of embedded systems for complex and 
demanding high-performance applications. The project 
approach is to raise the abstraction level of the project 
approach is to raise the abstraction level of the 
specifications and computing models, to include 
resource-constrained design exploration stages and 
real- time resource adaptation by developing the 
appropriate models and tools supporting the design 
from the specification down to the embedded 
implementation. Three main innovative technologies will 
be employed: high level dataflow specification and 
programming models for design space exploration, 
virtualization and feedback-based resource scheduling. 
The targeted execution platforms are Linux-based 
multiprocessor/multicore systems and FPGAs. Three 
design cases will be developed to validate and 
demonstrate the new approach: multimedia processing 
on cellular phone terminals, embedded control, and 
high-performance video systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
The project is based on a set of main observations and 
ideas: 
• Embedded systems are vital to Europe's industry 
and society. In parallel with miniaturization and the 
necessity to handle severely resource-constrained 
implementation platforms, the functionality and 
complexity of large classes of embedded systems 
continue to increase making them from many 
respects comparable to ordinary desktop PCs. A 
mixture of different types of timing, application 
driven QoS constraints and the migration to the new 
generation of multi-core and SoC platforms make 
overall system architecture design, resource 
allocation and scheduling more important and 
challenging topics than ever before. 
The ACTORS consortium is 
led by Ericsson. It contains 
two SMEs (AKAtech and 
Evidence) and four university 
beneficiaries (SSSA, TUKL, 
ULUND, and EPFL). 
Associated partner to the 
project is Xilinx, US.  
 
ACTORS focus on 
design of adaptive 
and efficient real-
time applications 
for multicore 
hardware using  
data flow tools and 
methodologies. 
 
 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
• While the success of Si CMOS scaling has been the 
main driving force for performance progress of 
embedded systems in the last 30 years, it has at the 
same time practically restricted the way system 
specification SW development, HW design and all 
related tools and formalisms have evolved so far. No 
common formalism, language or design methodology is 
available to map concurrency and parallelism for 
embedded SW and HW from the specification level 
down through all the different levels of abstractions to 
final system design/implementation. A radical change in 
necessary in order to master the complexity of future 
generations of embedded systems and to utilize the 
possibilities of new multicore platforms. Parallelism and 
resource allocation must be included in the design flow 
from the very beginning. A unified approach is required 
that combines ideas from computer science, control 
systems, and electronic engineering. 
• Execution efficiency as well development efficiency 
requires abstractions on a higher level than what is 
provided with C and threads/priorities. For a large class 
of embedded system applications including feedback 
control, signal processing and multimedia streaming 
and processing, dataflow models and dataflow 
languages, in particular actor languages have superior 
properties. Actors provides the proper foundation for 
implementation of efficient, component based, parallel 
and adaptive algorithms for both media applications in 
embedded consumer electronics and embedded 
control and signal processing applications. 
• Virtualization techniques such as reservation-based 
scheduling is a very good way of providing temporal 
and spatial isolation between different functions and, 
hence improve dependability, predictability, 
composability, security and development productivity 
for embedded systems. Important research advances 
have been made in the area, which ACTORS will build 
upon, but much remains before this becomes industrial 
practice. 
• Adaptivity to changes and uncertainties in resource 
requirements, objectives, external conditions and use 
cases is a necessity in large classes of embedded 
systems. This requires a unification of approaches from 
computer science and control. Adaptivity and 
virtualization is a natural match. Control techniques can 
be used globally to dynamically adapt the reservation 
budgets to changes, as well as locally, within each 
reservation to adjust the resource requirements. 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The project consists of three fundamental 
components: 
• Data-flow programming using actors 
o Actor programming is suitable for 
applications that perform sequential 
operations on data (signal processing, 
control, media processing, etc), i.e. operate 
on streams. 
o Actors are implemented using the CAL Actor 
Language and the OpenDF compilation and 
simulation framework. CAL is part of coming 
MPEG RVC standard.  
o Actors provide a programming model that is 
well suited for building components that are 
parametric in resource requirements  
enable adaptivity 
o The design of the CAL Actor Language 
allows for generation of efficient code. 
o Actors is the fundamental user level 
component 
• Feedback based resource management 
o Distribute resources based on execution 
conditions and application requirements 
o Will allow for dynamic, yet predictable, 
system behavior 
o Based on control theory 
• Reservation based scheduling 
o Provide a logical abstraction layer for 
distribution of system resources  
o Fundamental mechanism for distributing 
resources among applications 
o Extend and improve current implementation 
available in the main line Linux kernel 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The project will show how to build flexible and 
efficient system using dataflow technologies. The 
resulting systems will be robust due to the 
underlying feedback based resource 
management. Project members work closely with 
the MPEG standardization body on tools and 
methodologies for data flow programming. The 
work on scheduling will be done with the explicit 
goal of acceptance of the open source 
community. All developed software will, as far as 
possible, be made available as free open source, 
and this includes compilers and runtimes for the 
CAL actor language. Our intention is to through a 
set of powerful use cases and a working, free 
tool-chain demonstrate the superiority of our 
approach. 
 
 
CPU reservation #1 CPU reservation #2 
CPU reservation #3 
Resource Manager 
RBS Kernel 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ADAMS 
 
Action for the Dissemination and Adoption 
of the MARTE and related Standards for 
component based middleware 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Dr. Sébastien Gérard 
Institution: CEA LIST 
Email: sebastien.gerard@cea.fr 
 
Project website: www.adams-project.org 
 
Partners:  
Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique (France) 
THALES Group (France) 
Universidad de Cantabria (Spain) 
Volvo Technology Corporation (Sweden) 
 
Duration: 24 months 
Start: 2008-05-01 
Total Cost: € 300000 
EC Contribution: € 300000  
 
Contract Number: Grant agreement n°224330  
 
ADAMS 
Action for the Dissemination and Adoption of the MARTE and 
related Standards for component based middleware 
The ADAMS project aims at promoting the usage of the MARTE standard for the 
development of real-time and embedded systems using both model and component 
design paradigms. 
KEYWORDS: UML, MARTE, MDE/MDD, real-time and embedded applications, 
component-based design. 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The recent adoption of the UML MARTE standard is a 
great success issued from an intensive work launched 
four years ago by THALES, CEA LIST and INRIA and 
supported by a large international and representative 
consortium including important tool editors (ARTISAN, 
IBM/Rational/ Telelogic/I-Logix, MathWorks, Mentor 
Graphics…), users (Alcatel-Lucent, France Telecom, 
Loocked-Martin, THALES…) and academics (CEA 
LIST, INRIA, SEI/Carnegie Mellon Univ., Univ. 
Cantabria, Univ. Carleton…). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These activities are by essence strongly linked to the 
modelling approaches, in particular regarding 
architecture descriptions and non-functional 
requirements. 
The two domains automotive and avionics have 
developed their own specification and execution 
platform standards (AADL, ARINC, AUTOSAR, EAST-
ADL2, OSEK…) and are looking to integrate some 
other related approaches such as LwCCM or 
UML/SysML profiles with particular interests on non-
functional property descriptions (this covers, namely, 
resource, timing, and safety requirements). 
Interfaces to these standards have already been 
proposed and defined in MARTE. However, the 
knowledge of MARTE in the embedded community, 
both on industry and on academia side, is not sufficient 
to ensure a good level of understanding of its 
capacities and its use. 
The objective of ADAMS is thus to trigger the 
knowledge dissemination by exploiting MARTE in 
industrial practice amongst others by restructuring or 
refining MARTE methods and tools based on feedback 
from practice. 
 
In parallel we observe an 
intense activity in embedded 
domains, in particular for 
automotive and avionics, to 
standardise and deploy 
component-based 
middleware technologies. 
ADAMS will focus on 
promoting the usage 
of the OMG’s MARTE 
standard for MDD in 
both avionics and 
automotive domains. 
COORDINATION AND SUPPORT ACTION
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
WP2 - MARTE and automotive domain 
WP3 - MARTE and avionics domain 
EAST-ADL2 AUTOSAR (OSEK) 
Continental Corporation 
Support for extern analysis 
Non Functional 
Properties 
Point of view Architecture description 
Point of view 
Execution infrastructure 
Point of view 
Airbus 
SAE-AADL IMA, ARINC 
MARTE 
Support for extern analysis 
 
Key Issues 
 
MARTE has been a great success resulting mainly 
from a European initiative. The challenge now is to 
disseminate and promote its adoption through the 
European industry and trigger enhancements 
reflecting the practitioners’ needs. This is valuable for 
Europe due to its very strong economic activity in 
development of embedded, real time and distributed 
systems. Key point for its adoption is to demonstrate 
and convince about its conformance, usability and 
efficiency to deal with current middleware 
technologies used by the embedded system industry, 
and adapt it as necessary to related standards of the 
automotive and avionics domain (strongly structured, 
respectively, on AUTOSAR, EAST-ADL2, 
IMA/ARINC, and SAE-AADL). 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The emergence and dissemination of high quality 
standards supporting modelling, design and 
deployment of embedded systems software is a key 
factor for the emergence of new services as well as 
cross domain products and solutions. As such, the 
MARTE OMG standard has the potential to support 
and standardize future embedded systems design 
flows and middleware for several application 
domains, especially automotive and avionics. By 
being proactive in the dissemination and feedback 
gathering of MARTE through a series of concrete 
tasks as indicated above in the work-package 
description, the ADAMS project will effectively 
contribute to deliver the value of the MARTE 
standard. 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
Several projects have been and are being launched 
to enhance, evaluate, and demonstrate the benefits 
of MARTE and other standards. The analysis of the 
ADAMS partners is that the current entering point 
for ensuring successful deployment of the MARTE 
standard is a focussed effort to disseminate 
knowledge on MARTE and to coordinate feedback 
and update proposition on MARTE from the 
practice. This is why the instrument chosen to push 
the dissemination of MARTE was “Support Action”. 
By structuring the ADAMS project around the two 
target industrial domains, automotive and avionics, 
the ADAMS project will more specifically commit 
itself to achieve its objectives. 
The main objective of ADAMS is to favour the 
exploitation of the MARTE standard in domains 
having requirements similar to those that have 
triggered the standard elaboration process four 
years ago. Two domains are particularly active to 
standardize modelling approaches and deploy 
them on component-based middleware 
technologies: automotive and avionics. They share 
a large set of requirements with MARTE and thus 
are particularly relevant for focused dissemination 
and critical analysis of the current standard version. 
In addition, ADAMS will work on promoting MARTE 
on the one hand to the whole embedded systems 
community. On the other hand, ADAMS will also 
use all developed results to influence the related 
standardisation bodies, in order to close the 
feedback loop by organizing and delivering the 
feedback gathered from the automotive and 
avionics domains in the form of recommendation 
actions towards both OMG for MARTE evolution 
and domain initiatives and standards for 
convergence and evolution towards MARTE. 
To ensure a pertinent dissemination to both 
automotive and avionics domains, the specific work 
performed within ADAMS is organised around two 
working groups of experts from the corresponding 
domain. These working groups will deal with the 
concerns of the three following technical points of 
view: 
• The ways to specify non-functional properties. 
• The ways to describe application architecture 
and deployment. 
• The ways to specify the execution and 
communication infrastructure (middleware & OS). 
Project organisation for both working groups will be 
similar as denoted in following picture: 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ALL-TIMES 
 
Integrating European Timing Analysis 
Technology 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Björn Lisper 
Institution: Mälardalen University 
Email: bjorn.lisper@mdh.se 
 
Project website: www.ICT-ALL-TIMES.eu 
 
Partners:  
AbsInt Angewandte Informatik GmbH 
(Germany) 
Vienna University of Technology (Austria) 
Gliwa GmbH (Germany) 
Symtavision GmbH (Germany) 
Rapita Systems Ltd (UK) 
 
Duration: 27 months 
Start: 2007-11-01 
Total Cost:  € 2 094 492 
EC Contribution: € 1 600 000 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-215068 
ALL-TIMES 
Integrating European Timing Analysis Technology 
The ALL-TIMES aims at interoperability of tools from SMEs and universities, and 
integrated tool chains using open tool frameworks and interfaces and thus an increase 
the productivity of embedded systems development projects by 25%  
KEYWORDS: timing analysis, WCET, worst case execution time, timing tools, 
integrated tool chains, scheduling analysis 
  
Main Objectives 
 
The ALL-TIMES project aims at combining and 
developing research results and timing tools currently 
available and thus to strengthen the European lead in the 
timing analysis area. The ALL-TIMES project will enable 
interoperability of tools from SMEs and universities, and 
develop integrated tool chains using open tool 
frameworks and interfaces. By combining research 
results and commercial tools, ALL-TIMES will ensure the 
flow of ideas from basic research to practice. The two 
principal project objectives are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of the overall objectives of the project is the 
provision of new integrated toolsets for timing analysis 
targeted at the embedded real-time systems market. This 
relates to the advancement of new analysis techniques 
for integrated scheduling analysis, WCET analysis and 
measurement. In particular, the project will deliver new 
methods for timing analysis at both the system level and 
the code level in an open framework.  
Another objective is achieving demonstrable increase of 
25% in productivity in the timing domain of embedded 
systems development by enabling a quick, safe, and 
automatic efficient mechanism for deriving timing data as 
opposed to the manual, laborious traditional approach.  
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The project will provide a detailed requirements study 
with the aim at setting the scene for future timing analysis 
research. A secondary objective is therefore the increase 
in productivity of embedded systems development by 
enabling a quick and automatic efficient mechanism for 
deriving timing data as opposed to the manual, laborious 
traditional approach.  
 
• Integration of timing 
analysis tools 
• Increase of productivity 
of embedded systems 
development projects by 
25% of the design time 
pertaining to timing 
issues 
ALL-TIMES will focus 
on combining and 
developing research 
results and timing 
tools currently 
available and thus to 
strengthen the 
European lead in the 
timing analysis area.
 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
Theme 2: Integration into build process 
The adoption of a new technology implies change, 
which demands clear demonstrable benefits in 
perspective, and may be costly. Thus, new 
technology may be slow to deploy and integrate 
into the end-customer process. Academic 
prototypes are not usable by large companies that 
require commercial quality tools with long-term 
support guarantees. A second issue is the large 
number of evolved procedures and constraints, 
which can make it difficult to exploit a technology 
simply because required input data cannot be 
obtained, or because parameters yielding the 
biggest improvements cannot be changed. This 
project will address these issues by targeted pilot 
studies to demonstrate the added value that 
investing in timing analysis tools brings to 
customers.  
Theme 3: Education, and dissemination of 
knowledge 
The number of experts in timing analysis is 
fragmented over universities and small companies, 
and their impact to reach a wider audience is 
limited.  
The current level of education and knowledge of 
timing issues of engineers is not sufficient. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
ALL-TIMES will strengthen the competitiveness of 
several key industries in Europe, most notably the 
automotive and aerospace areas. Beyond these 
industries, automation, manufacturing, robotics, 
medical, communication, and multimedia are 
markets where timing is important. The ALL-TIMES 
project will thus  
• Interface the five different analysis techniques 
listed above (three code-level and two system-
level techniques) that are represented in the 
project 
• Provide an open (quasi-standard) interface to 
integrate additional timing analysis techniques 
and tools, aiming at becoming a de-facto 
standard. 
• Provide solutions for timing analysis/estimation 
in early design phases as part of design-space 
exploration and architecture optimization. 
The technological objectives relate to the actual 
implementation of the theories, analysis methods, 
and tools developed in this project. These will be 
validated with prototypes and demonstrated with 
targeted pilot case studies at industrial companies 
towards the end of the project. A key component is 
the investigation of methods for the interoperability of 
tools, to facilitate easier integration into the customer 
build processes. An important objective of the project 
is the validation and dissemination of the technology 
to a wide potential customer base as a mechanism 
for providing a path to exploitation of the results 
developed within the project. These dissemination 
activities will be accompanied by publication of 
results in form of guidelines for non-expert users on 
applying timing analysis technologies, as well as 
other means such as academic conferences and 
participation in trade shows. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
EU industries face a difficult task to improve the 
reliability, safety, performance and resource 
efficiency of systems with regard to timing. Even 
though EU is leading in research and development, 
as well as technology transfer, the take up by 
industry is still low. This project aims at improving the 
lead of EU in the development and provision of 
advanced timing analysis techniques.  
There are several aspects to this problem; we 
classify them in the following themes: 
Theme 1: Interoperation, scale and automation  
There are fundamental research problems that need 
to be fully addressed to ensure that Europe continues 
its lead in the technology adoption process.  
The first one is the interoperation of tools. 
Furthermore, some of the current analysis techniques 
have serious scalability issues relating to the size of 
the programs to be analysed. Finally, a major issue is 
the full automation of the analysis process. 
Timing analysis
Code analysis 
Measurement 
based analysis Measurement 
Tracing and 
displaying 
Static code 
analysis
Static scheduling 
analysis
System analysis 
Figure 1 Relations between different timing analysis techniques 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ARCADIA 
 
Aligning ResearCh AgenDas In ARTEMIS 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Sergio bandinnelli 
Institution: ESI-Tecnalia 
Email: Sergio.Bandinelli@esi.es 
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Inaki Eguia 
Institution: ESI-Tecnalia 
Email: Inaki.eguia@esi.es 
 
Project website: www.arcadia-project.eu 
 
Partners:  
ESI-Tecnalia (Spain) 
Thales (France) 
SafeTrans (Germany) 
NKTH (Hungary) 
TU Vienna (Austria) 
UJF Filiale (France) 
Siemens (Germany) 
Eutema (Austria) 
ST-Microelectronics (Italy) 
 
Duration: 24 months 
Start: 2010.11.01 
Total Cost: 750.000€ 
EC Contribution: 750.000€ 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-247912 
ARCADIA 
Aligning ResearCh AgenDas In ARTEMIS 
The ARCADIA project main objective is to have better and effective coordination of 
the efforts in order to optimize the use of the resources for the Embedded System 
field to strengthening Europe´s future growth, competitiveness and sustainable 
development. 
KEYWORDS: Alignment of Strategic Research Agendas, aligning roadmaps in 
Embedded Systems, identifying international, national and cluster programs. 
 
Main Objectives 
 
European companies and other research and 
development organisations active in the field of 
Embedded Computing Systems took the lead 
in establishing, under the Sixth Framework 
Programme, the European Technology 
Platform on Embedded Computing Systems 
(referred as the "ARTEMIS Technology 
Platform"). 
 
One of the main ambitions of ARTEMIS, the 
Advanced Research and Technology in the 
Embedded Intelligent Systems Technology 
Platform when started in 2004, was to 
overcome the fragmentation in the Embedded 
Systems, by cutting barriers between 
application sectors so as to ‘de-verticalize’ the 
industry, sharing across sectors tools and 
technology that are today quite separate and 
establishing a new embedded system industry 
that supplies tools and technology that are 
applicable to a wide range of application 
sectors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ARCADIA project main objective is to have 
better and effective coordination of the efforts 
in order to optimize the use of the resources, 
and to contribute in to the advance of an ERA 
for the Embedded System field to 
strengthening Europe's future growth, 
competitiveness and sustainable development. 
The ARTEMIS Technology 
Platform developed a 
Strategic Research 
Agenda based on an 
extensive consultation with 
public and private 
stakeholders. An update of 
this SRA is planned for 
end of 2010. 
ARCADIA will 
focus on 
aligning 
National and 
Regional 
European 
Agendas in 
Embedded 
Systems 
COORDINATION AND SUPPORT ACTION
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
Indeed, there is a strong need to pursue the efforts 
to consolidate these achievements in order to 
advance the European Research Area building, 
particularly for coordinating national, regional and 
EU-wide R&D strategies and in undertaking actions 
and initiatives to advance the European Research 
Area and to align research agendas in the field of 
embedded systems. 
 
 
 
ARCADIA – Joining forces 
ARCADIA Project aims at building on top of these 
solid grounds. ARCADIA is conceived as an 
effective coordination among these initiatives, using 
the results obtained so far and closely collaborating 
in the execution of the project tasks. This will be 
achieved by:  
 
• Joining the multiple initiatives in the embedded 
system field, benefiting from the work done so 
far, avoiding duplication of efforts and aiming at 
ONE common vision.  
• Mobilising resources from partners that are 
active members of ARTEMISIA representatives 
of the SME, academia and research 
organisations as well as large industrial groups. 
• Actively seeking coordination with on-going 
initiatives, in particular COSINE2 and 
ARTEMISIA SRA WG, facilitating the bridge 
between a large number of National/regional 
authorities in Europe and industrial groups.  
• Establishing relationships with embedded 
systems education and training, linking with the 
working groups in ARTEMISIA. 
• Giving more visibility to all stake holders of the 
different perspectives (political, technical, 
national and European) through common 
dissemination events  
 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
ARCADIA process will follow the next key issues 
in order to success:  
 
1. Transparency: as the decision taking 
procedures within the process are clearly and 
openly stated and each decision is properly 
justified on the basis of pre-defined criteria. 
 
2. Open participation: that are public and 
known to every participant will allow the 
participation of all relevant stakeholders and 
any interested party  
 
3. Commitment: the Participants will explicitly 
accept the rules and commit to the process, 
which involves supporting the outcome of it.  
 
4. Consensus building: As the overall idea of 
the process is not to find an equidistant point 
from different positions but to reason 
together to enlarge the area of agreements: 
making the pie larger, rather than playing a 
zero sum game. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The benefits for embedded systems research 
gained through ARCADIA can be summarised as 
follows:  
 
• Advice on an effective and efficient use of the 
scarce R&D resources to advance the 
European Research Area 
• Make particular focus on research priorities, 
such as the Embedded Systems Design, to 
advice on the best funding scheme to 
address them: FP7, ARTEMIS JU, 
National/Regional, Eureka 
• Practical approach for aligning national and 
regional programmes sharing a common 
vision, but addressing specificities in their 
areas of competence. 
• A comprehensive understanding of expected 
impact of R&D programmes in business and 
society. 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ArtistDesign 
 
ArtistDesign Network of Excellence  
on Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
Project Scientific Coordinator  
Name: Joseph Sifakis 
Institution: Verimag Laboratory 
Email: Joseph.Sifakis@imag.fr  
 
Project Technical Coordinator  
Name: Bruno Bouyssounouse 
Institution: Verimag Lab/UJF Filiale 
Email: Bruno.Bouyssounouse@imag.fr  
 
Project website: http://www.artist-embedded.org/  
 
Partners: 
Univ. Joseph Fourier/VERIMAG 
UJF Filiale SAS – Floralis 
RWTH Aachen, Aalborg University 
Univ Aveiro 
Univ of Bologna, TU Braunschweig 
Univ of Cantabria 
CEA 
TU Denmark 
TU Dortmund 
EPFL 
ESI 
ETHZ 
IMEC 
INRIA 
Univ of Kaiserslautern 
KTH 
Linköping 
Univ of Lund 
Mälardalen Univ 
OFFIS 
PARADES 
Univ of Passau 
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna 
Porto Polytech 
Saarland Univ 
Univ of Salzburg 
Uppsala University 
TU Vienna 
Univ. of York 
 
Duration: 48 Months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
EC Contribution: € 4.5 M 
 
Contract Number: NoE 214373  
NETWORK OF EXCELLENCE 
Embedded Systems Design 
ArtistDesign 
 ArtistDesign Network of Excellence on Embedded Systems Design 
The ArtistDesign NoE is the visible result of the ongoing integration of a community. It 
builds on existing international visibility and recognition, to play a leading role in 
structuring the area. 
KEYWORDS: Embedded Systems Design, Systems Architecture, Systems Engineering, 
Real-Time Programming, Applications, SoC, Dependability, Modelling, Model-based Design, 
Hard Real Time, Adaptive Real Time, Component-based Design, Compilers, WCET, Timing 
Analysis, Execution Platforms, Control for Embedded, Testing, Verification, Integrated 
Modular Avionics, Autosar, Wireless Sensor Networks, Distributed Systems 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The central objective for ArtistDesign is to build on 
existing structures and links forged in Artist2, to 
become a virtual Center of Excellence in 
Embedded Systems Design. This will be mainly 
achieved through tight integration between the 
central players of the European research 
community. Also, the consortium is smaller, and 
integrates several new partners. These teams have 
already established a long-term vision for 
embedded systems in Europe, which advances the 
emergence of Embedded Systems as a mature 
discipline. ArtistDesign is the 
main focal point for 
dissemination in 
Embedded Systems 
Design, leveraging 
on well-established 
infrastructure and 
links.   
 
ArtistDesign will extend its 
dissemination activities, 
including Education and 
Training, Industrial 
Applications, as well as 
International Collaboration. 
 
 
ArtistDesign will establish durable relationships with 
industry and SMEs in the area, especially through 
ARTEMISIA / ARTEMIS. 
ArtistDesign will build on existing international 
visibility and recognition, to play a leading role in 
structuring the area. 
The research effort aims to integrate topics, teams, 
and competencies, grouped into 4 Thematic Clusters: 
“Modelling and Validation”, “Software Synthesis, 
Code Generation, and Timing Analysis”, “Operating 
Systems and Networks”, “Platforms and MPSoC”. 
“Transversal Integration” covering both industrial 
applications and design issues aims for integration 
between clusters. 
 
 
Technical Approach 
The ArtistDesign NoE implements a Joint Programme 
of Activities, composed of: 
 Joint Programme of Management Activities 
(JPMA) plan, organize, direct and monitor the 
integrated effort to efficiently achieve the technical 
objectives within the ArtistDesign constraints of 
time schedule and budget.  
 Joint Programme of Activities for Spreading 
Excellence (JPASE)  These activities serve as a 
relay between the NoE and the international 
embedded systems design community at large. 
They are managed at the NoE level, and are 
mostly not specific to any cluster.  
 Joint Programme of Integration Activities 
(JPIA) The JPIA activities are carried out on a 
global, NoE level, transcending the clusters. They 
form the supporting background for integration of 
the NoE, and are executed in phase and in 
interplay with the JPRA research activities.  
 Joint Programme of Research Activities 
(JPRA) The JPRA is structured into 4 Thematic 
(horizontal) Clusters, and a Transversal 
Integration workpackage. Thematic clusters are 
autonomous entities, with specific objectives, 
teams, leader(s), and a dedicated yearly budget. 
  
The set of Thematic Clusters cover all the main 
topics in Embedded Systems Design. The 
thematic activities in the Transversal Integration 
workpackage focus on Design methodologies, 
with specific objectives (Predictability, Adaptivity). 
Expected Impact 
 
The ArtistDesign NoE actions target the embedded 
systems community as a whole, at 2 levels: 
1. Actions targeted towards the affiliated 
partners   Affiliated partners are not core 
members in the consortium, but receive support 
for travelling to ArtistDesign meetings, and 
actively contribute to the implementation of the 
Joint Programme of Activities (JPA). These 
affiliated partners include industrial, SME, 
academic, and international affiliates. 
2. Targeted towards the scientific and technical 
community in the large 
This is achieved mainly bottom-up through the 
organization of scientific events, publications, 
distribution of tools and components, industrial 
partnerships (not funded by ArtistDesign), 
education; and through the Artist2 web pages.
  
Regarding Scientific events, we distinguish 
between conferences and workshops, schools, 
and high-level events mainly for International 
Collaboration. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
The research effort aims to integrate topics, teams, 
and competencies, grouped into 4 Thematic Clusters: 
“Modelling and Validation”, “Software Synthesis, 
Code Generation, and Timing Analysis”, “Operating 
Systems and Networks”, “Platforms and MPSoC”. 
“Transversal Integration” covering both industrial 
applications and design issues aims for integration 
between clusters. 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: COCONUT 
 
A Correct-by-Construction Workbench for 
Design and Verification of Embedded 
Systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Franco Fummi 
Institution: University of Verona 
Email: franco.fummi@univr.it 
 
Project Technical Managers:  
Name: Graziano Pravadelli, Tiziano Villa 
Institution: University of Verona 
Email: graziano.pravadelli@univr.it ,  
tiziano.villa@univr.it 
 
Project website: www.coconut-project.eu 
 
Partners:  
Aerielogic (France) 
CEA-LETI (France) 
Certess S.A. (France) 
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (Italy) 
University of Southampton (UK) 
Graz University of Technology (Austria) 
Universität Paderborn (Germany) 
Università di Verona (Italy) 
 
Duration: 30 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: € 3.348.224 
EC Contribution: € 2.550.000 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-IST-1-217069 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
COCONUT 
A Correct-by-Construction Workbench for Design and 
Verification of Embedded Systems 
The COCONUT project is intended to propose a modelling and verification flow to 
enhance and speed-up embedded platform’s design and configuration of mixed 
continuous/discrete models 
KEYWORDS: embedded systems, hybrid systems, modelling, verification 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The COCONUT methodology follows the entire 
embedded platform design flow starting from 
specifications through all TLM levels down to RTL 
synthesis for hardware components, and compilation 
for software modules. The project addresses 
refinements related to the design of hardware, 
software and middleware with particular regards to 
application fields related to mixed continuous/discrete 
models, like for example networked multimedia and 
sensor network management. 
In this context, the S&T objective of the COCONUT 
project consists of developing a systematic 
methodology and a set of tools to integrate correct-
by-construction refinement/abstraction and post-
refinement verification methods into a platform-based 
design flow. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. To define a methodology, supported by tools, to 
identify system requirements for platform 
modelling and verification by identifying a 
connection between hybrid and discrete 
domains. 
2. To provide a methodology to express useful 
properties at the hybrid and TLM domains, 
validate their consistency and completeness and 
use them for semi-automatically synthesizing 
critical components. 
3. To improve and integrate different modelling 
techniques operating at both hybrid and discrete 
domains, based on correct-by-construction 
abstraction/refinement of models and properties. 
4. To integrate dynamic and static post-refinement 
verification around a coherent assertion-based 
approach. 
5. To apply the COCONUT methodology and tools 
to a real platform for validating the approach and 
showing its effectiveness in the industry. 
COCONUT will focus on 
the definition of a formal 
framework based on a 
tight integration of design 
and verification through 
all refinement steps of an 
embedded platform 
design flow. 
Hereafter, a list of 
high-level 
requirements to be 
considered for the 
success of 
COCONUT project 
follows. 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The embedded platform market is converging on a 
limited but more powerful set of embedded platforms, 
mainly due to increasing design cost which requires 
higher production volume. Differentiation among 
effective platform configurations is thus a key 
advantage for a platform user to approach the market 
with innovative solutions. 
Design and verification of such a kind of embedded 
platforms are two highly related problems which are still 
mainly faced by using unrelated methodologies. The 
complexity of both platform design and platform 
configuration requires an innovative design and 
verification flow able to effectively reduce the number of 
design errors and design recycles. This is a key factor 
for increasing system development productivity while 
achieving predictable system properties. 
Moreover, an incremental and hierarchical verification 
strategy is fundamental to manage the huge complexity 
of this embedded platform that cannot be verified in the 
whole at a structural level such as the RTL. 
Even at TLM the platform modelling would be difficult 
due to the presence of complex networks and 
continuous-time information. As a result, the addition of 
hybrid automata to SystemC TLM models will be 
proposed for tackling the modelling complexity. 
In both platform design and platform configuration, this 
very abstracted platform description requires correct-
by-construction refinements and/or automatic 
verification of manual refinements, to translate, without 
design errors, the abstract description into an actual 
application. This is the main objective of the 
COCONUT project. 
In this context, the key idea of COCONUT is depicted 
in the next Figure. Platform design and platform 
configuration are considered as a continuous mix of the 
following processes: 
 
• definition and validation of properties that 
represent the specification; 
• automatic synthesis of properties into code; 
• mapping of models between hybrid and discrete 
domains; 
• correct-by-construction abstraction/ refinement; 
• post-refinement verification with respect to the 
specification. 
Such activities will be implemented in a set of tools 
working on more than one abstraction level whose 
correctness will be formally proved. Each 
model/property can be refined to a lower abstraction 
level or abstracted to a higher abstraction level, and 
verification should not be only a post-refinement step, 
but it should guide the design with a correct-by-
construction methodology. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
The key issue of the COCONUT project can be 
summarized in the following aspects: 
1. Definition of system requirements and validation 
of specifications. 
2. Automatic synthesis of properties. 
3. Mapping between hybrid and discrete domains. 
4. Correct by construction abstraction/refinement 
5. Post refinement verification 
6. Proof of correctness of the COCONUT activities. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The COCONUT project is in line with the general 
target of ensuring “improving the competitiveness of 
European industry and research”, and particularly it is 
expected to: 
• Increase the quality of both European research 
and industry by putting academia in touch with 
industrial challenges and allowing SMEs to 
access the research results they need for 
anticipating clients’ demand. 
• Let European research centres and SMEs 
increase the productivity of the embedded 
platform configuration phase, thus allowing a 
more effective design of innovative embedded 
systems. 
• Fit the objective of “greatly improve industrial 
production processes” thereby “increasing 
productivity” and final quality. Indeed, the goal of 
the project is to ensure system quality at design 
phase and detect design errors and faults when 
they are easy to repair. 
System
ModelProperties
Synthesis
Verification
Validation
Abstraction
Level i
A
bstraction
R
efinem
ent
Hybrid/discrete 
domain
mapping
Proofof correctness
A
bstraction
R
efinem
ent
Proofof correctness
 
 
 
Duration: 36 Month 
Start: 2008.01.01 
EC Contribution: 2.75 M€ 
 
Contract Number: STREP 215543 
 
At a Glance: COMBEST 
 
COMponent-Based Embedded Systems 
design Techniques 
 
 
 
Project Scientific Coordinator:  
Name: Joseph Sifakis 
Institution: Verimag Laboratory 
Email: Joseph.Sifakis@imag.fr  
 
Project Technical Coordinator:  
Name: Bruno Bouyssounouse 
Institution: Verimag Lab/UJF Filiale 
Email: Bruno.Bouyssounouse@imag.fr  
 
Project website: http://www.combest.eu/   
 
Partners:  
Univ. Joseph Fourier UJF/VERIMAG (France) 
UJF Filiale SAS - Floralis (France) 
TU Braunschweig (Germany) 
EADS (Germany), EPFL (Switzerland) 
ETHZ (Switzerland) 
INRIA (France) 
IAI (Israel), OFFIS (Germany) 
PARADES (Italy) 
Università Trento (Italy) 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
COMBEST 
COMponent-Based Embedded Systems design Techniques 
COMBEST will provide a formal framework for component based design of complex 
embedded systems: 1) formal integration of heterogeneous components; 
2) encapsulation of components; 3) prediction of emergent key system characteristics; 
4) corresponding certificates. 
KEYWORDS: formal frameworks, component based design, complex embedded 
systems, formal integration, heterogeneous components, models of communication, 
models of execution, encapsulation functional properties, extra-functional properties, 
composability,  compositionality, system characteristics, performance, robustness, 
distributed HW-architectures, design theory, heterogeneity, interface specifications, 
SPEEDS, rich components, compositional analysis 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
COMBEST will provide a formal framework for 
component based design of complex embedded 
systems. This framework will: 
1. Enable formal integration of heterogeneous 
components, such as with different models of 
communication or execution; 
2. Provide complete encapsulation of components 
both for functional and extrafunctional properties and 
develop foundations and methods ensuring 
composability of components; 
3. Enable prediction of emergent key system 
characteristics such as performance and robustness 
(timing, safety) from such characterizations of its 
subcomponents; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To achieve these objectives, COMBEST will: 
• Develop a design theory for complex embedded 
systems, fully covering heterogeneity, interface 
specifications, composability, compositionality, 
and refinement for functional and extra-functional 
properties. 
• Build on substantial highly recognized 
background results of the academic partners, 
partly carried out within the integrated project 
SPEEDS. 
COMBEST will focus 
on formal 
integration of 
heterogeneous 
components. 
4. Provide certificates for 
guarantees of such key 
system characteristics when 
deployed on distributed HW-
architectures 
 
 
• Extend results of the Integrated Project SPEEDS, 
both regarding heterogeneous rich components 
and compositional analysis methods. 
• Collaborate with the best US groups in embedded 
system design to build critical mass in a strategic 
area of vital interest to the European industrial 
ecosystem 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The project pursues a dual approach, combining 
fundamental work with methods and tools for rigorous 
embedded systems design. 
The fundamental work in COMBEST studies 
component-based design, by tackling two main 
problems: 
• Developing frameworks for the composition of 
heterogeneous components. 
• For such frameworks, develop theory allowing 
constructivity: inferring global properties of a 
system from the properties of its components. 
The methods and tools developed use results of the 
theoretical work, to ensure a rigorous design for 
heterogeneous systems.  
The tools cover modelling, verification, and 
performance analysis. Their use is supported by a 
global design methodology. 
In addition, we use two case studies, provided by 
industrial partners, to evaluate the relevance and 
applicability of the tools. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
For embedded systems, component-based design 
techniques should address both hardware and software 
components in a unified way. They should be able to 
handle hard constraints on performance and 
dependability as well as dissimilarities between levels 
of abstraction and communication primitives. The two 
main difficulties to handle are: 
• The presence of heterogeneous components. In 
software engineering, components are mainly used 
for structuring functions and associated data. In 
contrast, hardware components are inherently 
parallel, and synchronous.  
• Predictability of basic properties of the designed 
system. We argue in favour of constructivity, which 
is reasoning about global system properties based 
on properties of its individual components. 
Constructivity should allow satisfaction of essential 
properties by construction, to avoid costly a 
posteriori global system validation. 
Providing formal frameworks which overcome these 
difficulties is only a first step towards disciplined system 
design. It is essential that theoretical results be 
integrated in coherent component-based design flows, 
validated through comparison with existing industrial 
practice. Furthermore, theoretical results should be 
implemented in scalable supporting methods and tools. 
 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
COMBEST will deliver significantly advanced 
technology for strengthening European excellence in 
embedded systems design. COMBEST will provide 
the basis for mastering holistic design methodologies, 
allowing European industries to maintain and even 
improve their technological leadership. 
More specifically, we expect a positive impact for: 
• Component re-use and domain 
independence. The emergence of component-
based design as the primary design method for 
embedded system should allow component reuse 
across multiple domains. A concentration of the 
efforts in the European supplier industry will 
become possible due to emergence of cross-
domain tools and methods. This reduction of 
fragmentation and the focused use of resources 
will speed up the development cycles in the 
supplier industry. 
• Decreased development cost. Decreasing the 
development cost is of particular importance in 
Europe, which tends to have a competitive 
disadvantage due to high cost of labour. 
• Decreased time-to-market. A shorter time to 
market will give the European industry is a 
decisive competitive advantage in today’s fast 
paced business world. 
 
 
At a Glance: COMPLEX 
COdesign and power Management in 
PLatform-based design space EXploration 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Wolfgang Nebel 
Institution: OFFIS e.V. 
Email: wolfgang.nebel@offis.de  
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Kim Grüttner 
Institution: OFFIS e.V. 
Email: kim.gruettner@offis.de  
 
Project website: http://complex.offis.de  
 
Partners:  
OFFIS (DE) 
STMicroelectronics (IT) 
STMicroelectronics (CN) 
NXP (NL) 
Thales Communications (FR) 
GMV (ES) 
CoWare (BE) 
ChipVision (DE) 
EDALab (IT) 
Magillem (FR) 
Politecnico di Milano (IT) 
Universidad de Cantabria (ES) 
Politecnico di Torino (IT) 
IMEC (BE) 
ECSI (FR) 
 
Duration: 36 Month 
Start: 2009.12.01 
Total Cost: 7.2 M€  
EC Contribution: 4.8 M€ 
 
Contract Number: IP 247999 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
COMPLEX 
COdesign and power Management in PLatform-based design 
space EXploration 
The primary objective of COMPLEX is to develop an innovative, highly efficient and 
productive design methodology and a holistic framework for iteratively exploring the 
design space of embedded hardware/software (HW/SW) systems. 
KEYWORDS: Design Methodology, Electronic System-Level, Design Space Exploration, 
Timing, Power Consumption, Platform-based Design, Virtual Platform, UML, MARTE, 
SystemC™, TLM, IP-XACT 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The COMPLEX consortium develops a new design 
environment for platform-based design-space 
exploration offering developers of next-generation 
mobile embedded systems a highly efficient design 
methodology and tool chain. The integrated 
environment allows iterative exploration and refinement 
of advanced applications to meet market requirements. 
The design technology in particular enables fast 
simulation and explores the use of different 
implementations at Electronic System Level (ESL) with 
up to bus-cycle accuracy at the earliest instant in the 
design cycle. The main objectives are: 
 Highly efficient and productive design 
methodology and holistic framework for design 
space exploration of embedded HW/SW systems. 
The framework will be platform independent and 
application domain independent and will provide 
open interfaces for new industry players. 
 Combination and augmentation of well 
established ESL synthesis & analysis tools into 
a seamless design flow enabling performance & 
power aware virtual prototyping of the HW/SW 
system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Multi-objective co-exploration for assessing 
design quality and optimizing the system platform 
with respect to performance, power, and reliability 
metrics. 
 Fast simulation and assessment of the platform 
at ESL with up to bus-cycle accuracy at the earliest 
instant in the design cycle. 
 Optimization benefits from run-time mode 
adaptation techniques, such as dynamic power 
management or application adaptation to varying 
workloads.
COMPLEX will focus 
on early, fast yet 
accurate platform-
based design space 
exploration at the 
system-level. 
 Interfacing next-
generation model-
driven SW design 
approach and 
industry standard 
model-based design 
environments.  
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The COMPLEX framework is a design flow with 
performance and power aware virtual prototyping of 
an embedded HW/SW system. Several well 
established ESL synthesis and analysis tools from 
vendors such as CoWare, ChipVision, EDALab, and 
Magillem will be augmented and combined into the 
seamless COMPLEX design flow. 
For co-development the COMPLEX framework 
follows a new approach using a unified internal 
representation of the HW and SW, called block 
annotated C++ (BAC++). It is generated by SW 
cross-compilers and HW behavioural synthesis tools. 
In the COMPLEX framework, the generated BAC++ 
code is integrated into a SystemC™/TLM2 virtual 
platform model, enabling fast system simulation. 
The hardware/software co-exploration considers both 
the architecture design space and the application 
space to assess trade-offs when designing next-
generation embedded systems. The co-exploration is 
multi-objectively assessing the design quality and 
optimizing the system platform with respect to 
performance, power, reliability metrics, etc. The 
optimization benefits from run-time mode adaption 
techniques, such as dynamic power management or 
application adaption to evolving workloads, can be 
maximised and reported to successive synthesis 
steps using standardized output formats. 
The framework combines several standards for 
system modelling and integration: Possible design 
entry is either in C++/SystemC or a MARTE/UML 
model, offering seamless integration into a model-
driven design approach. 
Key Issues 
 
Existing barriers between HW and SW developers 
are lowered, allowing SW designers to explore 
various HW implementations and hiding irrelevant 
technical details, thus having a clear view on the 
results of the application code transformations in 
terms of timing behaviour and power consumption. 
The COMPLEX framework enables system 
integrators to find the ideal technology platform. 
Technology providers benefit from COMPLEX since 
they can now offer fast and accurate platform models 
to their customers. EDA companies are offering a 
more complete solution to their customers with the 
COMPLEX framework. 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The COMPLEX results are expected to support the 
overcoming of technology roadblocks by reinforcing 
Europe's industrial strengths for building increasingly 
smaller, cheaper, more reliable and less power 
consuming electronic components and systems, 
taking into account the alternative paths to next 
generation technologies and sustainable 
development. 
The provision of environmentally friendly sustainable 
systems is a key differentiating factor in various 
applications.  Moreover, this will support the 
competitiveness of industrial players such as 
automotive, avionics, industrial automation, 
consumer electronics, telecoms, and health. 
Consequently, COMPLEX will lay the foundations for 
innovation in various major products and services. 
executable 
SystemC™ model
power
controller
HW/SW task separation &
testbench generation
custom HW
estimation
custom SW
estimation
virtual system generator with
TLM2 interface synthesis
power & timing aware
SystemC simulation
model
simulation
trace
B
A
C
++
B
A
C
++
H
W
ta
sk
s
S
ys
te
m
C
es
tim
at
io
n 
&
 m
od
el
 g
en
er
at
io
n
si
m
ul
at
io
n
ex
pl
or
at
io
n 
&
 o
pt
im
iz
at
io
nSW tas
ks
ex
ec
ut
ab
le
sp
ec
ifi
ca
tio
n
Multi-Objective 
Design Space 
Exploration 
Framework
sy
st
em
m
et
ric
s
MARTE & Matlab/Simulink Model
de
si
gn
 s
pa
ce
 d
ef
in
iti
on
design space
instance 
parameters
M
od
el
-D
riv
en
de
si
gn
 e
nt
ry
architecture/
platform
description
IP
components
S
ys
te
m
C
at specification 
level
at system
level
at virtual architecture
level
de
si
gn
 s
pa
ce
in
st
an
ce
IP-XA
C
T
 
 
At A Glance: COSINE2 
 
Co-ordinating Strategies for Embedded 
Systems in the European Research 
Area Follow-up Project 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator  
Name: Dr. Erich Prem 
Institution: eutema Technology  
Management GmbH 
 
Project Technical Manager  
Name: Martin Marek 
Institution: eutema Technology 
Management GmbH 
Email:marek@eutema.com 
 
Project website: www.cosine-ist.org 
 
Partners: 
Eutema (Austria) 
Tekes (Finland) 
DLR (Germany) 
ISERD (Israel) 
UTIA (Czech Republic) 
VINNOVA (Sweden) 
BMVIT (Austria) 
NKTH (Hungary) 
IWT (Belgium) 
MUR (Italy) 
CEA (France) 
 
Duration: 30 months 
Start: 2007.12.01 
Total Cost: € 600.000 
EC Funding: € 600.000  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-215594 
COSINE2 
Co-ordinating Strategies for Embedded Systems in the European 
Research Area Follow-up Project 
COSINE2 aims to enhance the impact of European RTD strategies in the area of 
Embedded Systems. To achieve this, it will be necessary to better align national 
research strategies with each other, with the EC programmes, and with new initiatives 
such as the ARTEMIS ETP (European Technology Platform) and the JTI (Joint 
Technology Initiative) on Embedded Systems. 
KEYWORDS: European Research Area (ERA), ERA-Net, Embedded Systems, Embedded 
Intelligence, National research funding programmes. 
Main Objectives 
 
The core aim of the Support Action is to improve co-
operation between EU, national, and regional ES 
RTD programmes and policies and to realize the 
vision of European Embedded Systems Research 
Area. One particular aim is to open more national EU 
ES programmes for participants from other EU 
member states. COSINE2 will offer support for policy 
representatives and programme managers willing to 
co-operate. COSINE2 aims at offering a service to all 
European RTD policy actors willing to co-ordinate their 
programmes, regardless of their representation in the 
Support Action.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An important sub-goal of COSINE2 is to install a 
process for continuous monitoring of ES strategies, 
policy and programme actors, and funding 
opportunities. This should also include links to 
selected international activities to allow informed 
decision making and to inform the research community, 
policy actors, and programme managers. In close co-
operation with other EU projects such as ARTIST, 
COSINE2 aims to improve co-operation in the areas 
of education and training which are rather isolated 
today in the EU’s member states. COSINE2 aims at 
establishing and maintaining close contacts with 
the ARTEMIS Joint Technology Initiative taking 
opportunity of the representation of COSINE members 
in the ARTEMIS public authorities institutions. 
 COSINE2 aims to interact with EU ES industry, to 
support the member states’ actors, and to assist at the 
level of national public policies. Also, COSINE aims at 
monitoring SME issues in ARTEMIS and in the JTI on 
Embedded systems.  
 
 
COSINE2 also intends to 
collect success stories of 
other co-operative 
programmes. Alignment and 
co-ordination of strategies 
requires information on ES 
policies at EU and member 
states level.
COSINE2 will 
further improve co-
operation between 
EU, national, and 
regional Embedded 
Systems 
programmes and 
policies. 
COORDINATION AND SUPPORT ACTION
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
COSINE2 will achieve its goals based on linking 
Embedded Systems programme managers and 
policy makers, the EC and regional actors and 
creating the basis for informed strategic policy 
choices. It will distribute best-practice examples for 
trans-national co-operation and facilitate focused 
interaction with the industry driven ARTEMIS 
technology platform. COSINE2 will support countries 
developing or implementing Embedded Systems 
RTD strategies regardless of their participation in the 
project. Dedicated co-operation with regional 
organisations will improve the involvement of small 
and medium sized enterprises in research actions 
and accelerate the take-up of ES technology. 
COSINE2 will create wide impact with information 
services on ES RTD initiatives for policy makers, 
programme managers, and the research community. 
In this way, COSINE2 will realize the vision of a 
European Embedded Systems Research Area. 
Work is structured in four packages and project 
management. WP1 addresses European strategies 
and programmes for Embedded Systems. WP2 deals 
with the important relation to the ARTEMIS initiative. 
WP3 targets public relation and dissemination of 
project results. And WP4 tackles strategies for small 
and medium sized enterprises.  
Although COSINE2 as a Support Action cannot 
address SMEs individually, COSINE2 aims at getting 
the attention of important regional actors in the 
innovation system for the ES topic. COSINE2 aims at 
receiving public awareness and interaction with the 
stake holders. Instead, COSINE2 aims at linking and 
pinpointing existing information and combining it with 
newly collected and generated information for 
research policy makers but also for researchers. Also 
in this line, COSINE2 aims at fostering a discussion 
with the ES research on community on strategic 
research areas. COSINE2 aims at an efficiently 
managed policy support action that remains sensitive 
to the individual interests of the member states.  
 
Key Issues 
 
Embedded Systems are a key driving innovation 
factor in leading European industry sectors such as 
consumer electronics, automotive, or aerospace. As 
a reaction, policy makers in the EU and members 
states have created a collection of dedicated RTD 
initiatives. It is now time to improve their impact 
through opening, co-operation, and co-ordination with 
key strategic initiatives such as the ARTEMIS 
technology platform. COSINE2 will facilitate the 
opening of national research programmes, and 
create synergy among EU, national, and regional 
programmes and policies to improve the European 
Research Area for Embedded Systems. 
While the advent of the ARTEMIS technology 
platform and the Joint Technology Initiative have 
generated considerable dynamics in the area of 
embedded systems research and technology, many 
member states or regions in Europe still run their own 
programmes. COSINE2 is an effort to align these 
programmes. Also, COSINE2 aims at supporting 
countries in developing their first or new ES 
programmes and, most importantly, in trans-national 
co-operation of programmes. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
COSINE2 will enhance research and technology in 
the area of Embedded Systems in Europe through 
optimizing the alignment of national research 
strategies. COSINE2 also aims at leveraging the co-
operation of research programmes to a new level. It 
will tune RTD policies optimally to the new European 
Embedded Systems Research environment currently 
under significant change in the EU.  
The consortium joins national authorities and 
research agencies with the power to durably 
influence the European research area.COSINE2 is a 
strategic initiative to maintain Europe’s strong 
international position in the area of Embedded 
Systems technologies.  
WP 5
Management
WP 2
ARTEMIS(IA) 
support
ES RTD Strategies
WP 1 Policies
Programmes
WP 4
SME 
support
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: DESTECS 
 
Design Support and Tooling for 
Embedded Control Software 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator 
Name: Jan F. Broenink 
Institution: University of Twente 
Email: J.F.Broenink@utwente.nl 
 
Project website: www.destecs.org 
 
Partners: 
University of Twente (Netherlands) 
Newcastle University (United Kingdom) 
Engineering College Aarhus (Denmark) 
CHeSS B.V. (Netherlands) 
Controllab Products B.V. (Netherlands) 
Neopost Technologies B.V. (Netherlands) 
Verhaert New Products & Services N.V. 
(Belgium) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2010.01.01 
Total Cost: € 3 622 190 
EC Contribution: € 2 739 175 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-248134 
 
 
1 Co-simulation is running executable, heterogeneous models of parts of the system and its environment 
in one harness together, allowing communication between them with the aim of understanding how well 
or badly the resulting embedded system may perform in practice. 
1 Fault injection means explicitly modelling abnormal behaviour of the environment and introducing faults 
to certain primitives. This allows early exploration of the consequences of defects and errors, and hence 
improved selection of design alternatives, including fault tolerance strategies. 
Main Objectives 
 
The goal of DESTECS is to improve the productivity 
of innovative embedded system design by providing 
new methods and tools that can be used to design 
fault-tolerant, embedded systems using a 
multidisciplinary, collaborative model-driven 
approach, with the following objectives: 
• To reduce the effort spent in design iterations 
compared to current best practice for fault-
tolerant embedded control systems by means of 
multidisciplinary collaborative modelling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• To evaluate, in an industrial setting, the 
effectiveness of collaborative modelling methods 
and tools for rapid design exploration and tool 
support. 
• To build a user and research community in 
collaborative modelling and co-simulation for 
embedded systems development. 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
We will develop methods and tools for the construc-
tion, co-simulation1, multi-domain fault injection2 tests 
and maintenance of collaborative models of control 
systems. Maintenance encompasses managing the 
evolution of models under change (including 
refactoring) so as to maintain their compatibility and 
traceability. 
DESTECS will focus 
on model-driven 
methods & tools for 
fault-tolerant 
embedded control 
software design 
• To demonstrate the 
viability of industry-
strength open tool 
support for 
collaborative 
modelling and co-
simulation. 
DESTECS 
Design Support and Tooling for Embedded Control Software 
 
DESTECS will develop a methodology that combines continuous-time models with 
discrete-event models through co-simulation and multi-domain fault injection tests to 
faster build more dependable real-time embedded systems.  
 
KEYWORDS: embedded control software, dependability, fault-injection co-simulation, 
model-based design, design tools, formal methods. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
Leading research challenges are: providing   
support   for    potentially    large    multi disciplinary 
models, and describing faults and fault tolerance 
mechanisms. In effect, we develop a specification 
of a “Model Base” for collaborative design. 
In DESTECS, we will develop tools and methods in 
three phases of 1 year each, thus giving annual 
intermediate results. 
Industry-led evaluations (industrial case studies) 
run concurrently with the methods and tool 
development work. In each phase, the same case 
studies are conducted, but using increasingly 
developed methods and tools. In phase 1, existing 
tools (20-sim and Overture/VDM++) are used for 
the cases; in phases 2 and 3, the methods and 
tools developed within DESTECS in the previous 
phase are used. Feedback from these test cases is 
used in the next methods / tool development 
phase. 
The industrial case studies are: (1) modular 
document handling system, to be made more 
reconfigurable using DESTECS results; (2) an 
inertial measurement unit, to be faster incorporated 
in applications; and (3) a bi-wheeled personal 
transporter, being a demanding test case for 
DESTECS model-driven approaches, as the 
system is intrinsically unstable.   
Additionally, new examples will be gathered from 
industry via the Industry Follow Group (IFG), in 
order to gain an evaluation of the potential benefits 
and challenges of deploying collaborative modelling 
and co-simulation in real industrial contexts. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
DESTECS will advance model-driven development 
by focusing on two engineering domains: (1) 
discrete event modeling of controllers and 
architectures and (2) continuous-time modeling of 
physical systems. By coupling these domains 
through co-simulation, cross-domain design issues 
can be tackled even in the early stages of a design 
process. 
 
DESTECS will exploit co-simulation as a basis for 
modelling faults and analysing fault tolerant 
designs for embedded systems that need to be 
predictably resilient. We will develop an Integrated 
Development Environment (IDE) with plug-in tools 
that support the integration of continuous and 
discrete modelling tools. This helps to close the 
gap between the discrete-event and the 
continuous-time models. 
DESTECS will not replace current practice but it 
will support the heterogeneity of tools and 
encourage collaborative design by allowing best 
practices in different engineering domains to be 
integrated. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The DESTECS technology will increase 
productivity because it will provide a common 
framework (methods and tools) in which models 
may be developed and simulated rapidly together 
at an early stage. This means that the most 
abstract models in both worlds can be co-simulated 
and feedback can be provided between the 
different disciplines “up front”. This common 
framework makes it natural and easier to explore 
fault tolerance of the full system at a much earlier 
stage, potentially saving significant amounts of 
rework. So the DESTECS technology impacts the 
cost of development (due to reduced rework), the 
time to market (due to better ability to do the 
development in parallel and synchronise across 
disciplinary boundaries) and the dependability 
(through earlier and more reliable handling of 
potential faults and fault tolerance) of the product. 
 
 
 
At A Glance: EMBOCON  
 
EMBedded Optimization for resource 
CONstrained platforms 
 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Dr. Paul Goulart 
Institution: Imperial College London 
Email: p.goulart@imperial.ac.uk 
 
Project website: www.embocon.org 
 
Partners: 
Imperial College London (UK) 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (Belgium) 
ETH Zurich (Switzerland) 
University of Heidelberg (Germany) 
University Politehnica Bucharest (Romania) 
Technische Universität Dortmund (Germany) 
LMS International LMS (Belgium) 
IPCOS NV (Belgium) 
BASF SE (Germany) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2010.01.15 
Total Cost: € 4514950 
EC Contribution: € 3249814 
 
Contract Number: ICT-248940 
EMBOCON 
EMBedded Optimization for resource CONstrained platforms 
The EMBOCON project aims to radically expand the scope of embedded systems 
applications to which embedded optimization and control methods can be applied. 
KEYWORDS: Embedded systems, real-time optimization, numerical algorithms. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
Main Objectives 
 
An embedded system must be able to make 
reliable decisions with limited or no human 
assistance, often in real-time, drawing on 
observations made of its environment. This applies, 
for example, to ABS in cars, engine controllers, 
aircraft autopilots, dispatching systems in electrical 
and gas networks and to various medical systems. 
To date, most of these decisions are computed 
either with simple algorithms or by look-up tables 
generated through simulation and extensive 
testing. The simplicity of these algorithms facilitates 
an intuitive understanding as well as their real-time 
implementation, often on low-cost and low-
performance hardware. 
 
In contrast, an 
embedded optimizer 
takes sensor input and 
chooses the best action 
to follow based on 
criteria specifying 
desirable outcomes and 
a model of how the 
environment would respond to system actions. This 
procedure would typically be repeated periodically, 
or be triggered by external stimuli, thus enabling 
the embedded system to adapt to changes in its 
environment. This optimization-based embedded 
system design paradigm has been proven to 
offer dramatic improvement over traditional 
schemes, which are largely designed around 
heuristic rules requiring extensive tuning and 
experience. 
 
Widespread deployment has been hindered 
primarily by the non-determinism of current 
algorithms, the inability of existing optimizers to 
function on competitively priced hardware and a 
lack of robust design methods. EMBOCON 
addresses these issues through a comprehensive 
work program focused on optimization under real-
time, resource and reliability constraints. 
EMBOCON is founded 
on close collaboration 
between mathematical 
algorithm developers, 
control theorists, 
hardware specialists 
and industrial partners. 
 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
In order to enable the use of real-time optimization 
on embedded systems, it is not possible to 
consider the behaviour and performance of 
optimization and control algorithms in isolation for 
the particular embedded systems hardware on 
which they are implemented. Instead, it will be 
necessary to bring about a unification of methods in 
control theory, mathematical optimization, 
electronic engineering and computer science. 
 
Optimization for Embedded Systems 
The challenges addressed by the EMBOCON 
consortium focus on systems that are pushing the 
boundaries of what is possible: either very fast or 
complex dynamics and/or very limited 
computational resources.  The consortium will 
focus specifically on developing optimization 
algorithms that provide firm run-time guarantees, 
stability and robustness guarantees, and graceful 
performance degradation in the presence of tight 
computational constraints.   A variety of algorithmic 
methods, tailored to embedded systems 
applications and addressing the most common 
classes of optimization problem, will form a set of 
EMBOCON core optimization modules.  
 
 
An Open Platform for Embedded Optimization 
Uptake of embedded optimization methods in 
European industry, including the EMBOCON core 
modules, will be enabled through the release of an 
open-source software platform for embedded 
optimization.  This platform will serve as a common 
interface for algorithm developers and industrial 
practitioners, enabling rapid prototyping of 
optimization-enabled systems.  EMBOCON will act 
as a driver for the development of this platform, 
whose lifetime will far exceed that of the proposed 
program.   
 
Industrial Benchmarks 
EMBOCON will demonstrate that embedded 
optimization is ready for widespread industrial 
application across many sectors. A selection of 
industrial benchmarking studies, drawn from the 
automotive, process control, aeronautics and 
robotics industries, will demonstrate the feasibility 
and benefits of real-time optimization. These 
demonstrators will show both the benefits of 
embedded optimization in real-world settings, as 
well as the ease of application and effectiveness of 
the EMBOCON open software platform. 
 
Expected Impact 
 
Real-time optimization has already revolutionized 
industrial practice in some industries, particularly in 
process control.  Advances in modern computing 
hardware and algorithmic methods now offer an 
opportunity to bring these same benefits to a huge 
range of new industries.   
 
The EMBOCON project will bring embedded 
optimization into standard practice on ubiquitous 
resource-constrained hardware found in real-time 
and mission-critical applications across Europe.  
The creation of a standard software platform for 
developers and practitioners will improve 
substantially the uptake of embedded optimization 
in industrial practice.  
 
The EMBOCON consortium will strengthen a 
network of world-leading academic and industrial 
partners with complementary expertise in control, 
optimization and embedded systems in a range of 
industrial applications. Particular emphasis is 
placed on close collaboration between 
mathematical algorithm developers, control 
theorists, hardware specialists and industrial 
application engineers. The consortium will 
consolidate and extend Europe’s position as the 
world research leader in these areas and foster 
strong collaborative links between European 
academia and industry.  
 
 
 
At A Glance: ENOSYS 
 
intEgrated modelliNg and synthesis tOol 
flow for embedded SYStems design 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator  
Name: Dr. Andrey Sadovykh 
Institution: SOFTEAM 
Email: andrey.sadovykh@softeam.fr 
 
Project website: www.enosys-project.eu 
 
Partners:  
SOFTEAM, Thalès Communications (France) 
Axilica, Loughborough University (United 
Kingdom) 
Intracom Telecom, University of Peloponnese 
(Greece) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2010.01.01 
Total Cost: €3,97 M€ 
EC Contribution: €2,6 M€  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-248821 
ENOSYS 
intEgrated modelliNg and synthesis tOol flow for embedded 
SYStems design 
ENOSYS will provide an integrated design flow for a rapid development of SoC 
embedded systems a) by the automated generation of SystemC code from the high-
level specification; b) by rapidly determining near-optimal solutions for 
hardware/software partitioning. 
KEYWORDS: MARTE, SysML, SoC, integrated design flow, co-design, design space 
exploration, automated partitioning, automated hardware and software synthesis 
Main Objectives 
 
The aim of the ENOSYS project is to specify and 
develop a tool supported design flow for designing 
and implementing embedded systems by seamless 
integration of high-level system specifications, 
software code generation, hardware synthesis and 
design space exploration. 
ENOSYS will provide an integrated workbench 
combining SysML, MARTE and FalconML. The 
OMG SysML and MARTE will be evaluated and 
extended to address end-user demands and 
requirements for integration. The approach and the 
tool flow will be evaluated and validated with 
representative scenarios from the telecoms domain. 
The results will be reported and presented at OMG 
in order to influence standardization and improve 
opportunities for adoption. 
The specific scientific and technological objectives 
include: 
• Develop MARTE extensions that address the 
needs for capturing high level specification 
and for design synthesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Develop the means for the rapid and 
automated determination of near-optimal 
embedded system implementations using 
design space exploration. 
• Develop the tool support required for seamless 
software/hardware co-design. 
ENOSYS will focus on 
an integrated design 
flow including 
advanced system 
modelling, design 
space exploration and 
hardware/software 
synthesis of SoC 
systems. 
• Integrate the 
MARTE profile into 
the existing tool 
flow, permitting the 
automatic 
generation of 
SystemC and the 
hardware synthesis 
of HDL. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The proposed ENOSYS integrated tool chain will 
allow the development of arbitrary-complexity 
silicon processing platforms using both automatic 
and semi-automatic methodologies. Starting at the 
specification level, design intent is captured 
precisely and unambiguously in an object-oriented 
language based on UML MARTE profile. In 
addition, existing hardware and software 
intellectual property (IP) blocks are seamlessly 
accommodated in the design flow. The later is 
driven by graphical design entry at the UML level. 
The ENOSYS tool chain undertakes the process of 
code generation for a programmable platform, 
including the SoC interconnect backbone and the 
multi-level wrappers, resulting in a high-
performance simulation engine and more 
importantly, the behavioural synthesis of the non-
CPU mapped UML objects into hardwired, 
streaming engines. The tool chain (fully automatic 
mode) or the designer (semi-automatic mode) can 
quickly analyze the performance of candidate 
architectures and determine which will be the most 
effective, according to the given optimization 
criteria, such as embedded memory optimisation 
and interconnect architecture, bandwidth, silicon 
area, operating frequency and power consumption. 
The tool will prune and perform exploration of the 
design space using a search-based approach, such 
as a genetic algorithm, to analyse candidate 
architecture and micro-architecture solutions at 
rates of tens of configurations per minute. Finally, 
the few configurations that satisfy the performance 
criteria will be presented and further refined in the 
process of converging to a near-optimal solution. 
 
 
Key Issues 
Today, SoC vendors realize that critical decisions 
must be made long before development teams 
engage in the hardware and software design for 
new SoC and programmable SoC-based products. 
It is becoming clear that hardware-software 
design and verification must form part of a 
single, unified effort, whereas the methodologies 
currently available were intended to aid either 
hardware-only or software-only development. That 
these tools are no longer adequate for modern 
SoC designs is confirmed by the recent 
emergence of new concepts that are disrupting 
the traditional design flow; these include system-
level specification (specification capture), 
functional and architectural analysis, and high-
level estimation, partitioning and software 
synthesis.   
Sy
st
em
 M
od
el
lin
g 
Fl
ow
EN
O
SY
S
Sy
st
em
 M
od
el
lin
g 
Fl
ow
System and Requirements 
Modeling
System Model Refinement 
(MARTE conceptual 
modelling)
Detailed System Modeling 
(Action code insertion) Native Code Generation
Native mode execution
Vectors 
passed?
N
Automatic Action Code 
Source-Source transformation 
(1)
Ve
rif
ic
at
io
n 
(P
ha
se
 1
)
System 
Specification 
(Textual)
Hardware System 
Behavioural Synthesis
Target Platform Model
Automatic Hardware/Software 
Partitioning
Software System 
Synthesis
Cycle/Bit-true System Model 
(Software and Hardware)
Multicore CPU 
System Synthesis
Performance Evaluation (System 
Execution, RTL/SystemC)
Area/Performance 
objectives achieved
Y
SystemC Execution
Vectors 
passed?
NY
N
Y
Software 
Component
Hardware 
Component
Downstream Implementation Flow Standard-Cell/FPGA)
EN
O
SY
S
Sy
nt
he
si
s 
an
d 
D
es
ig
n 
Ex
pl
or
at
io
n 
Fl
ow
M
od
el
in
g
Sy
nt
he
si
s 
an
d 
D
es
ig
n 
Sp
ac
e 
Ex
pl
or
at
io
n
Ve
rif
ic
at
io
n 
(P
ha
se
 2
)
SMF: 1
SMF: 2
S F: 3
SMF: 4
SDF:1
SDF:2a
SDF:2b SDF:2c
SDF:3
SDF4
System Area/Power/
Performance 
constraints
 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
ENOSYS targets the following main impact 
objectives: 
• Significantly increased productivity of 
embedded system development and 
shorten time-to-market for SoC systems. 
• Reinforced European scientific and 
technological leadership in the design of 
complex embedded systems. 
• Improved competitiveness of European 
companies that rely on the design and 
integration of embedded systems in their 
products by reducing design costs and time 
to market. 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ERA 
 
Embedded Reconfigurable Architectures 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator  
Name: Stephan Wong 
Institution: Delft University of Technology 
Email: J.S.S.M.Wong@tudelft.nl 
  
Project website: www.era-project.eu 
 
Partners: 
Delft University of Technology (The 
Netherlands) 
Industrial Systems Institute (Greece) 
University of Siena (Italy) 
Chalmers University of Technology (Sweden) 
University of Edinburgh (United Kingdom) 
Evidence s.r.l. (Italy) 
ST Microelectronics (Italy) 
IBM Research Laboratory (Israel) 
Federal University of the Rio Grande do Sul 
(Brazil) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2010.01.01 
Total Cost: € 4.014.513,00 
EC Contribution: € 2.8 M  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-249059
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ERA 
Embedded Reconfigurable Architectures 
ERA aims at investigating and developing new methodologies in both tools and 
hardware designs to break through current power and memory walls for the next-
generation embedded systems platforms. The proposed strategy is to utilize 
adaptive hardware to provide the highest possible performance for given power 
budgets. The envisioned ERA platform is adaptive and employs a structured 
design to integrate the necessary computing, networking, and memory elements. 
KEYWORDS: reconfigurable/adaptive computing, memory hierarchies, power 
models, parameterized processor designs, dynamic reconfiguration, power 
awareness, structured embedded systems design, application profiling and 
benchmarking, embedded Linux, reconfiguration-aware compilation algorithms, 
fault-tolerance, dynamic parallel execution, gcc compiler. 
Main Objectives 
 
In the Objective ICT-2009.3.4 "Embedded 
Systems Design", a strong focus is placed on the 
development of novel (generic) design 
methodologies that can be applied to several 
application areas. In the ERA project, we 
describe a platform that can adapt itself through 
coarse-grain reconfigurable hardware to tailor the 
hardware itself for changing environments and 
needs of the applications running on the platform, 
for different application markets and platform 
usage. We identified the following main 
objectives:  
• to define and develop a dynamically 
reconfigurable integrated platform composed 
by the following components: a 
parameterized VLIW processor, a 
reconfigurable NoC, and a memory 
subsystem - taking into account power 
consumption as design parameter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• to provide the needed hardware monitoring 
and low-level OS support to efficiently control 
the hardware reconfiguration. 
ERA will focus on 
the development of 
an adaptive 
embedded system 
platform to handle 
the challenges of 
current embedded 
processor designs 
• to provide the 
support for flexible 
and fast 
reconfiguration of 
the platform by using 
direct hardware 
support as well as 
partial FPGA 
reconfiguration. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
• to benchmark and analyze a set of existing 
applications in the area of mobile processing to 
extract a set of off-line and on-line measurable 
parameters. 
• to build a supervisor which will be able to 
monitor the parameters and react to online 
application changes to appropriately 
reconfigure the hardware. 
 
The envisioned adaptive ERA platform employs a 
structured design approach that allows integration 
of varying computing elements, networking 
elements, and memory elements. For computing 
elements, we will utilize a mixture of commercially 
available off-the-shelf processor cores, industry-
owned IP cores, and application-specific/dedicated 
cores, and we will dynamically adapt their 
composition, organization, and even instruction-set 
architectures to provide the best possible 
performance/power trade-offs. Similarly, the choice 
of the most-suited network elements and topology 
and the adaptation of the hierarchy and 
organization of the memory elements can be 
determined at design-time or at run-time. 
Furthermore, the envisioned adaptive platform 
must be supported by and/or made visible to the 
application(s), run-time system, operating system, 
and compiler exploiting the synchronicities between 
software and hardware. We strongly believe that 
having the complete freedom to flexibly tune the 
hardware elements will allow for a much higher 
level of efficiency (e.g., riding the trade-off curve 
between performance and power). Finally, an 
additional goal of the adaptive platform is to serve 
as a quick prototyping platform in embedded 
systems design. 
 
 
Technical approach 
 
In the ERA project, we identified four key areas to 
pursue innovations in order to achieve our 
objectives: 
• definition and characterization of application 
benchmarks for embedded systems employing 
reconfigurable architectures. 
• definition of a reconfigurable and 
parameterized processor architecture. 
• definition of a reconfigurable memory 
subsystem. 
• definition of the software/compiler tools and OS 
support for the ERA platform. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The applications exhibit behaviour that can be 
exploited for more efficient processing (at given 
power budgets) by adapting the hardware (processor 
and memory) to them. This paradigm shift requires 
new approaches in compiler algorithms and tools and 
advanced (embedded) OS-level support. All partners 
have expertise in one or several of the mentioned 
areas. 
 
Key Issues 
 
We believe that the run-time adaptive behaviour of 
the ERA platform is the key to develop embedded 
platforms for the new, heterogeneous and multi-
applications embedded market. A major concern is 
the power utilization. This translates in several key 
issues that must be addressed in order to achieve a 
breakthrough. To cope with the reconfiguration power 
problem, in this project we focus on the development 
of accelerators using a coarse-grain 
reconfigurable fabric, composed of a 
reconfigurable VLIW processor, a flexible 
memory organization and an interconnection 
network that can provide better usage of power 
resources by distributing its routing resources online. 
A software stack consisting of a compiler and OS 
will provide the means to drive both static and 
dynamic reconfiguration decisions according to 
the application characteristics and the user objectives 
(in terms of power and performance). 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The industrial partners clearly identified the benefits 
of the ERA project expressed in their involvement in 
and commitment to the project. All the solutions 
proposed in this project will be combined in a 
demonstrator platform that we expect will allow the 
industrial partners fast access to new products 
developed on top of it. The intended platform will 
serve several purposes:  
• Quick development platform for the industry: the 
clear interfaces defined in this project should 
allow the industrial partners to take from the 
platform everything they need and still 
incorporate their own IPs. Moreover, for low 
volumes even the prototype can be used as a 
commercially viable product, since the 
consortium will use available FPGA technology to 
validate its contribution.  
• Academic purposes: the ERA platform can be 
easily used to build different instances of 
embedded processing solutions and we foresee 
and will actively pursue the possibility of 
incorporating the ERA platform as a teaching tool 
in embedded courses or labs.  
 
 
 
At A Glance: GALAXY 
 
GALS InterfAce for CompleX Digital 
SYstem Integration 
 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Dr. Milos Krstic 
Institution: IHP  
Email: krstic@ihp-microelectronics.com 
 
Project website: www.galaxy-project.org 
 
Partners: 
IHP (Germany) 
The University of Manchester (UK) 
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (Switzerland) 
Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di 
Bologna (Italy) 
Silistix UK Limited (UK) 
Infineon Technologies AG (Germany) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2007.12.01 
Total Cost: € 4.079.489 
EC Contribution: € 2.900.000  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-214364 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The increased complexity, performance requirements, 
and the need for power and EMI reduction present almost 
unsolvable challenges to designers of complex 
embedded systems. The continued technology 
improvement generates additional problems for 
embedded system design. The combination of complex 
application requirements and technology imperfections 
exacerbate the problems of timing closure and clock tree 
generation requiring additional design iterations. It is 
imperative to deal with these issues; one very promising 
option is the use of a Globally Asynchronous Locally 
Synchronous (GALS) design methodology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Firstly, the design-flow for GALS chip interconnect is not 
mature enough to guarantee reliable and comfortable 
chip design. Secondly, the main strengths of GALS 
design, such as improvement of system integration, 
better EMI characteristics and power reduction, were 
never completely exploited and proven in practice. Lastly, 
the targeted GALS applications were sometimes not a 
perfect match with the GALS techniques. 
In this project, we address these problems and intend to 
prove that the GALS methodology offers powerful 
solutions for modern embedded system design 
integration. We aim at promoting the development of 
GALS system design by providing an interoperability 
framework between the existing open or commercial CAD 
tools for rapid design and prototyping. We will explore 
and evaluate the ability of GALS to solve system 
integration issues as well as building on its reduced EMI 
and low-power properties. A promising target platform 
can be seen in the area of Networks on Chip (NoC). In 
this project we intend to investigate different approaches 
of implementing GALS-enabled NoC platforms, 
comparing them with fully synchronous implementations, 
and of integrating the NoC design flow into the GALS 
design flow.  
GALAXY 
GALS InterfAce for CompleX Digital SYstem Integration 
The project evaluates the ability of the GALS approach to solve system integration 
issues and implement a complex GALS system on an advanced 40 nm CMOS 
process.  
KEYWORDS: GALS, Asynchronous Design, System Integration, NoC 
GALAXY will focus on the 
GALS low EMI properties, 
inherent low-power 
features and robustness to 
process variability 
problems in nanoscale 
geometries 
When analyzing why a 
GALS approach has not 
been adopted by 
industry we observe that 
several issues have not 
been fully addressed 
until now.
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, nanoscale technologies have their own 
issues such as process variability and reliability. In the 
framework of this project we will explore these critical 
issues in the context of GALS. Additionally we intend to 
evaluate the effectiveness of a GALS system design for 
a highly complex wireless communication application in 
a very advanced 40 nm CMOS process.  
 
 
Technical approach 
 
On the basis of the previous discussion, we are 
planning to analyse existing GALS solutions. During the 
project we will select optimal GALS architectures for 
the target applications and define the communication 
interfaces.  
In this project, a GALS framework providing 
interoperability between design tools for rapid design 
and prototyping will be proposed. This design flow will 
be based on commercial CAD tools and on the existing 
Balsa framework with extensions to mixed 
synchronous-asynchronous systems. The main idea is 
to integrate the Balsa language and tools in a system 
level design environment, where Balsa will be seen just 
as any other language, in order to allow mixed 
descriptions of synchronous and asynchronous circuits. 
Consequently, we will generate a system level design 
tool that is able to handle IP blocks referring to Balsa, 
Verilog, VHDL and SystemC specifications with an 
open plug-in interface to easily accept new languages 
and tool flows.  
Our GALS design flow will be based on an open format 
for mixed synchronous-asynchronous IPs in order to 
consolidate asynchronous IPs dissemination and re-
use. The IP format will be able to describe 
hardware/software entities at multiple levels of 
abstraction in multiple languages (SystemC, C, Verilog, 
VHDL, Balsa, etc.), with both synchronous and 
asynchronous interfaces.  
We will establish a library of the important GALS 
components scalable to different applications. This 
library of GALS interface IPs should enable a plug-and-
play type of approach when designing a system with a 
heterogeneous mixture of synchronous and 
asynchronous IPs.  
It is planned to investigate the possibilities for lowering 
EMI and power with a GALS methodology. We plan to 
build an abstract model of the GALS circuit and 
generate the optimal algorithms for reducing the EMI. 
Additionally, the developed EMI reduction algorithms 
will be evaluated theoretically and in practice. We will 
investigate application of dynamic voltage and 
frequency scaling in conjunction with GALS in order to 
reduce power in comparison with standard 
synchronous low-power solutions. 
The project also intends to deploy the power-aware 
nature of GALS technology to bring NoC architectures 
to maturity. GALS-based NoCs would allow the 
synchronous design of network nodes at their optimum 
clock frequency, while facilitating asynchronous 
communication between modules.
 
 
 
 
The project intends to consolidate GALS-NoCs as the 
enabling technology for widespread adoption of 
network-centric architectures for highly integrated 
MPSoC platforms in the nanometer regime. 
 
Key Issues 
Practical IC implementations will be the key issue of the 
GALAXY project, as it will provide the best way to 
evaluate the developed GALS solutions and compare 
them against traditional circuits. We plan to have two 
separate ASIC implementation runs within the GALAXY 
project. 
The first chip will be specifically designed to be a test 
chip containing structures to evaluate GALS 
components. This chip will be used to evaluate the 
advantages of GALS-based design in reducing power 
consumption, reducing EMI, and improving process 
variation tolerance.  
Finally, we plan to build a complex target system using 
both a standard synchronous CMOS design flow and 
the GALS design flow developed in this project in a 
cutting edge 40 nm CMOS process. Selecting a 
suitable target platform for the second design is 
important. Since wireless communication is an 
application domain which is gaining more and more 
popularity and which poses significant technical 
challenges to system designers (performance- and 
power-wise), and since several group members have 
prior experience in this field, we will consider target 
platforms from this field. For example, one candidate 
will be an accelerator for an OFDM baseband 
processor with data rates up to 1 Gbps for 
communication systems in 60 GHz range which is 
currently under development in IHP. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The realization of the ambitious goals defined by the 
project will result in improved design-to-market time, 
fewer design iterations and finally in a lower cost of the 
system design process. The GALAXY project has 
ambition to further confirm the leadership of Europe in 
a GALS system-on-chip design and CAD support. This 
leadership is already established with previous 
realization of complex asynchronous and GALS 
demonstrators and tools. The involvement of our 
industrial partners will guarantee the success of the 
project and the impact to the embedded system design 
methodology and practice. 
 
 
SYNCHRONOUS 
BLOCK 2 
SYNCHRONOUS 
BLOCK 1 
SYNCHRONOUS 
BLOCK 3 
data 
Handshake 
signals 
 
 
 
At A Glance: INTERESTED 
 
INTER-operable Embedded Systems 
Toolchain for Enhanced rapid Design, 
prototyping and code generation 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator: 
Name: Eric Bantegnie 
Institution: Esterel Technologies 
Email: eric.bantegnie@esterel-technologies.com 
 
Project website: www.interested-ip.eu 
 
Partners:  
ESTEREL Technologies SA (France) 
AbsInt Angewandte Informatik (Germany) 
TTTech Computertechnik AG (Austria) 
Evidence S.r.l. (Italy) 
Symtavision GmbH. (Germany) 
UNIS, spol. s r.o.(Czech republic) 
Artisan Software Tools Ltd (United Kingdom) 
Sysgo AG (Germany) 
Airbus SAS (France) 
Magneti Marelli Powertrain SpA (Italy) 
Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique (France) 
Thales SA (France) 
Siemens AG (Germany) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: 7364057€ 
EC Contribution: 5388995€ 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-214889 
Main Objectives 
 
The INTERESTED project has been built to 
exactly match the goals defined within the 
Objective ICT-2007-3.3b (“Suites of 
interoperable design tools for rapid design and 
prototyping”), namely creating a reference and 
open interoperable embedded systems tool-
chain, fulfilling the needs of the industry for 
designing and prototyping embedded systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high tech innovative SMEs, as well as 
European Major Tool Users representing 
several industries that are both integrating 
massively embedded systems and contributing 
to the overall competitiveness of Europe: 
Aerospace, Automotive, Railway and 
Transportation and Energy. 
 
INTERESTED 
INTER-operable Embedded Systems Toolchain for Enhanced 
rapid Design, prototyping and code generation 
INTERESTED aims at realizing the first European-wide tool reference development ever, 
validated by Major Tool Users thru real life industrial validators, ensuring an integrated, 
lower cost, highly dependable, safe and efficient development process for the benefit of 
critical European industries) 
KEYWORDS: refrence tool suite , interoperability, integration, safety and dependability 
of embedded systems. 
INTERESTED will 
focus on delivering 
and integrated 
embedded systems 
toolchain 
This project regroups a 
consortium of leading 
edge European 
embedded systems 
Tools Vendors, all 
being 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
Technical approach 
 
The method followed in the project is to: 
• Integrate the requirements of Major Tool Users of 
embedded systems tools to realize a reference and 
open interoperable embedded systems tool-chain, 
having in mind a broad socio-economic benefit for the 
European citizens, the performance of Embedded 
Systems generating long term societal benefits such as 
increased aircraft and transportation safety, reduced 
fuel and energy consumption and competitiveness of 
key European industries. 
• Cover the full scope of Embedded Systems and 
Software engineering disciplines, spanning: 
o System and Application Software Design 
Modelling, Verification and Code Generation 
o Networking and RTOS execution platforms, 
Hardware-Dependent Software verification and 
Code Generation 
o Timing analysis and code execution verification 
• Validate the use of the INTERESTED tool-chain on 
real-life demonstrators (the “Industrial Validators”) 
representing key application domains for European 
leading industries: Aerospace, Automotive, Railway 
and Transportation and Energy. 
 
From a technical standpoint, the INTERESTED reference 
Tool-Chain will integrate, using standards-based integration 
and interoperability solutions the following tools: 
• Architecture definition tools (UML/SysML tools from 
ARTISAN Software Tools as well as demonstrated 
interoperability with Open Source UML, SysML and 
AADL Modellers such as TOPCASED and Papyrus 
provided as interoperability demonstration case by 
Airbus and CEA (a convergence process is being 
initiated between these 2 tools and is funded outside of 
INTERESTED). 
• Embedded GUI design tools (SCADE Display from 
Esterel Technologies), 
• Application Software Design, Verification and Code 
Generation tools (SCADE Suite from Esterel 
Technologies),  
• Hardware-Dependent Software Design and Code 
Generation tools (Processor Expert from UNIS) 
• Networking Infrastructure support tools (FlexRay and 
TTP tools from TTTech) 
• RTOS execution platforms (PikeOS from SYSGO as 
well as demonstrated interoperability with domain 
specific execution platform such as the OASIS 
environment from CEA) 
• WCET and Stack Analysis Tools (aiT from ABSINT) 
• Schedulability analysis tools (SymTA/S from 
Symtavision and RT-Druid from Evidence), as well as 
numerical precision analysis tools (Fluctuat from CEA) 
 
Key Issues 
 
Major Tool Users (AIRBUS, THALES, MAGNETI 
MARELLI, SIEMENS RAIL TRANSPORTATION 
and CEA) will bring their requirements for the 
Tool-Chain content, structuring, features, 
interoperability architecture and characteristics, 
as well as real-life demonstration cases for their 
use of relevant parts of the tool-chain and 
interoperability demonstration cases with in-
house or open source tools. They will ensure, 
thru appropriate metrics defined during the 
progress and evaluation of the cost reduction 
target that the INTERESTED reference tool-chain 
will enable. 
Tool Vendors within the INTERESTED project 
have established a preliminary list of Integration 
Technical Business Cases for the integration of 
their tools, will review them against the Major 
Tool Users requirements and will ensure that all 
selected Integration Technical Business Cases 
specifications and developments are architected 
in an interoperable way with 3rd party tools, such 
interoperability being verified within the Industrial 
Validators. 
One Major Tool User (CEA), due to its mission, 
enjoying strong links with academics partners, 
will steer an Academic Advisory Board to make 
sure that innovative and proper advice from 
academic Networks of Excellence such as 
ARTIST2 are clearly taken into account. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
In summary, INTERESTED aims at realizing the 
first European-wide tool reference development 
environment ever, validated by Major Tool Users 
through real-life Industrial Validators, ensuring an 
integrated, lower cost, highly dependable, safe 
and efficient development process to the benefit 
of critical European industries. 
INTERESTED will thus contribute securing 
Europe’s competitiveness and independence 
in the critical Embedded Systems field. 
 
 
 
At A Glance: MADES  
 
Model-based methods and tools for 
Avionics and surveillance embeddeD 
SystEmS 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Alessandra Bagnato 
Institution: Txt e-solutions – Corporate 
Research Division 
Email: alessandra.bagnato@txt.it 
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Andrey Sadovykh 
Institution: Softeam 
Email: andrey.sadovykh@softeam.fr 
 
Project website: www.mades-project.org 
 
Partners: 
TXT  e-solutions (IT) 
Softeam (FR) 
University of York (UK) 
Politecnico di Milano (IT) 
The Open Group (UK) 
EADS Deutschland GmbH (DE)  
 
Duration: 30 months 
Start: 2010.02.01 
Total Cost: € 3623931 
EC Contribution: € 2450000 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-FP7-248864 
Main Objectives 
 
The project covers all the phases of the 
development process: from design to code 
generation, validation and deployment. Design 
activities will exploit a dedicated language 
developed on top of the OMG standard MARTE 
(Modeling and Analysis of Real-time and 
Embedded systems), and foster the reuse of 
components by annotating them with properties 
and constraints to ease their selection and enforce 
overall consistency.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Code generation will address both conventional 
programming languages (e.g., C) and hardware 
description languages (e.g., VHDL), and will adopt 
compile-time virtualization techniques to smooth 
the impact of the diverse elements of modern 
hardware architectures and cope with their 
increasing complexity.  
All these aspects will be fully supported by 
prototype tools integrated in a single framework, 
and will be thoroughly validated on real-life case 
studies in the surveillance and avionic domains.  
The project also aims to develop a handbook to 
provide detailed guidelines on how to use MADES 
tools in the development of embedded systems and 
promote their adoption. 
 
MADES 
Model-based methods and tools for Avionics and surveillance 
embeddeD SystEmS 
MADES aims to develop the elements of a full-fledged model-driven approach for the 
design, validation, simulation, and code generation of complex embedded systems to 
improve the current practice in the field.  
KEYWORDS: Embedded Systems Design, Advanced Model-Driven Development. 
MADES will focus on a 
full-fledged model-
driven approach for 
the design, validation, 
simulation, and code 
generation for 
Avionics and 
surveillance 
embeddeD SystEmS 
Validation activities will 
comprise the 
verification of key 
properties of designed 
artifacts and of the 
transformations used 
throughout the 
development process, 
and also the closed-
loop simulation of the 
entire system. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Technical Approach 
 
The MADES technical approach is based on the 
following: 
• Adapt and Develop Modelling Languages 
and Tools for Co-Design of Embedded 
Systems in the Avionics/Surveillance 
Domain 
• Develop Advanced Methods and Tools for 
Verification and Simulation for the Co-
Design  
• Develop Advanced Methods and Tools for 
Code and Hardware description Co-
Generation 
• Integrate developed MDE tools in a single 
framework for the seamless modelling, 
validation, and code generation 
• Validate with Case Studies from the 
Avionics/Surveillance Domains 
 
Error! Reference source not found. depicts a 
preliminary overview of the   components to be 
developed in the project. All tools are plugged 
into the MADES framework based on Eclipse 
platform and its EMF based MDD Technologies. 
SOFTEAM’s CASE Tool implements dedicated 
MARTE extensions and is integrated with other 
tools. The Component Repository is used to 
store and locate generic UML Case Tools 
system components used for building embedded 
systems.  The Verification and Simulation tools 
are integrated with the modeller and provide the 
validation features. The Traceability tool keeps 
track of changes happening during modelling 
and model transformations. The Software Code 
and HDL description generation is insured by 
Transformation and Generation engine. 
 
 
Generic
UML Case 
Tool
HDL 
Description 
Generation
Verification 
and 
Simulation  
<<Embedded 
System Designer>> 
<<Embedded System
Tester>> 
MADES Integration framework –
Eclipse and MDD Technologies 
Based on EMF
Components
repository
Objecteering:
MARTE, UML
<<Embedd
Verification
Transformation
and Generation
with Platform  
Virtualization 
Traceability
Software 
Code 
Generation 
 
Figure 1 MADES Components Integration  
Key Issues 
 
The ideas of MADES are directly based on the 
needs for increased help demanded by developers 
and industry in embedded system design. As the 
systems that employ embedded software becomes 
more complex, they tend to contain more errors, 
and it becomes more relevant to provide tools to 
aid the developers to overcome the increased 
difficulties.  
The project will give a key help in this direction with 
its development efforts specifically dedicated to  
RTES (Real Time Embedded Systems).  
Major players in the Avionics and Surveillance 
Embedded System domain (Txt e-solutions and 
EADS) will provide key requirements to achieve 
projects objectives. 
  
Expected Impact 
 
MADES expects to achieve impact through: 
 
Increasing productivity of embedded system 
development. 
The Advanced Model Driven Architecture MADES 
Tools and Methodologies targets a significant 
reduction in embedded system development time. 
The MADES approach is intended to significantly 
reduce the efforts required in all the embedded 
system development phases, from modelling by 
composition to automated verification and 
generation of code and HDL. 
The impact will be particularly proved in the 
MADES selected test cases where the MDA 
processes already in place would be very much 
benefiting of the proposed technology.  
 
Supporting emergence and growth of new 
companies that supply design tools and 
associated software. 
The project will rely on open models and standard 
will be easily usable by European SMEs that are 
already offering innovative product and services for 
embedded system design. The project will produce 
the MADES Approach guide to help and lead in this 
direction. 
 
Improving competitiveness of European 
companies that rely on the design and 
integration of embedded systems.  
The project will improve competitiveness of 
European companies that rely on the design and 
integration of embedded systems in their products 
by reducing design costs and time to market 
creating tools and methodologies specifically 
targeted to them. 
 
 
At A Glance: MADNESS 
 
Methods for predictAble Design of 
heterogeneous Embedded Systems with 
adaptivity and reliability Support 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Luigi Raffo 
Institution: University of Cagliari (Italy) 
Email: raffo@unica.it  luigi@ieee.org 
 
Project website: http://www.madnessproject.org 
 
Partners:  
Università degli Studi di Cagliari (Italy) 
Università della Svizzera italiana (Switzerland) 
Silicon Hive BV (The Netherlands) 
Infineon Technologies AG (Germany) 
Universiteit van Amsterdam (The Netherlands) 
Universiteit Leiden (The Netherlands) 
Informatik Centrum Dortmund (Germany) 
Lantiq Deutschland GmbH (Germany) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2010.01.01 
Total Cost: 2.92 M€ 
EC Contribution: 1.95 M€  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-248424 
Main Objectives 
 
The main goal of the project is to define innovative 
methodologies for system-level design, able to 
guide designers and researchers to the optimal 
composition of  embedded MPSoC architecture, 
according to the requirements and the features of a 
given target application field. The proposed 
approach will tackle the new challenges, related to 
both architecture and design methodologies, 
arising with the technology scaling, the system 
reliability and the ever-growing computational 
needs of modern applications.   
The proposed methodologies will extend the classic 
concept of design space exploration to: 
• Improve design predictability, bridging the 
so called “implementation gap”, i.e. the gap 
between the results that can be predicted 
during the system-level design phase and 
those eventually obtained after the on-silicon 
implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Support adaptive runtime management of 
the architecture, considering, while tailoring 
the architecture, new metrics posed by novel 
dynamic strategies and advanced support for 
communication issues that will be defined. 
MADNESS 
Methods for predictAble Design of heterogeNeous Embedded 
Systems with adaptivity and reliability Support 
The MADNESS project aims at the definition of innovative system-level design 
methodologies for MPSoC embedded systems, extending the classic concept of 
design space exploration to cope with high heterogeneity, technology scaling, system 
reliability and multi-application domains. 
KEYWORDS: system-level design, design space exploration, technology awareness, 
heterogeneity, fault tolerance, adaptivity. 
MADNESS will 
focus on 
improving 
Embedded 
Systems design 
predictability, 
considering new 
features, such as 
adaptivity and 
fault tolerance 
• Consider, in addition to 
traditional metrics (such 
as cost, performance 
and power 
consumption), 
continued availability 
of service, taking into 
account fault resilience 
as one of the 
optimization factors to 
be satisfied. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The project proposes an extended system-level 
design space exploration approach. The DSE is 
seen as an iterative process operating on a library 
of heterogeneous IP cores, exposing a large 
number of degrees of freedom, as typical for 
industrial-strength components. 
 
 
 
In order to improve the design predictability, the 
project will introduce a specific layer for rapid and 
accurate emulation, to be exploited for architectural 
evaluation inside the DSE process. In detail, it will 
allow to take into account, during system-level 
decision phase, the impact of the variables related 
with a prospective physical implementation of the 
architecture (e.g. wiring capacitances and delay, 
2D floorplanning). Moreover, this layer will provide 
the capability of performing, when needed during 
the optimization process, a detailed estimation of 
the performance and the power consumption of a 
candidate architecture, relying on an FPGA-based 
environment for on-hardware prototyping. The 
power consumption evaluation will be obtained 
annotating the FPGA emulation results with energy 
values estimated in a “technology-aware” manner. 
Novel design methodologies for fault tolerance 
and for adaptive runtime management will be 
proposed. These methodologies will act at different 
levels of abstraction and on different phases of the 
design flow. Their introduction will influence the 
system-level design algorithm, since it will require 
new metrics to be taken into account by the 
optimization process. Besides that, it will require 
the development of new dedicated hardware 
support and, thus, new IPs are likely to be 
developed. 
Key Issues 
 
Modern embedded systems usually integrate 
components provided by different parties, very 
often yielding a high level of design complexity to 
be handled by the designer. Different 
computational tasks to be executed often offer 
different kinds and degrees of parallelism, thus 
optimally fitting to a specific kind of processing 
elements. 
In order to improve the overall productivity, an 
effective system-level design should be handled in 
a novel manner, taking into account, at its early 
stages, a bigger number of variables as well as 
more complex IP cores inside the design space 
available to the designer. Moreover, the efficient 
“static approach” to the design of embedded 
processors needs to be extended to MPSoC 
design, and in certain cases needs to include 
dynamic behaviour. This is particularly the case 
when multiple applications are executed at the 
same time, unpredictably interfering with each 
other at runtime and posing the need for the 
assurance of a given level of Quality of Service. In 
addition, given the increasing complexity of the 
systems, a certain degree of fault tolerance must 
be guaranteed, but constraints presented by 
embedded systems design make approaches 
involving massive redundancy hardly adoptable. 
Both these issues require the support inside 
modern MPSoCs of a certain degree of adaptivity. 
To take meaningful system-level decisions, 
moreover, the designer must deal with several 
problems related to modern technology nodes and 
rely on accurate estimations of the hardware costs 
of each candidate architectural solution. 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The MADNESS project will deliver advanced 
technology and specific tools for strengthening 
European excellence in the design of multi-
processor heterogeneous embedded systems. 
Here is a brief list of the expected impacts targeted 
by the MADNESS project. 
• Significantly increased productivity of embedded 
system development. 
• Improved competitiveness of European 
companies that rely on the design and 
integration of embedded systems in their 
products by reducing design costs and time to 
market. 
• Emergence and growth of new companies that 
supply design tools and associated software. 
• Stimulated high-tech European companies, in 
particular SMEs, which offer innovative products 
and services for embedded systems design. 
Reinforced European scientific and technological 
leadership in the design of complex embedded 
systems. 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: MEDEIA 
 
Model-Driven Embedded Systems Design 
Environment for the Industrial Automation 
Sector 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator: 
Name: Dr. Thomas Strasser 
Institution: PROFACTOR GmbH 
Email: thomas.strasser@profactor.at 
 
Project website: www.medeia.eu 
 
Partners: 
Vienna University of Technology (Austria) 
Politecnico di Milano (Italy) 
University of Applied Sciences South Switzerland 
(Switzerland) 
logi.cals Austria kirchner SOFT GmbH (Austria) 
Machining Centers Manufacturing S.p.A (Italy) 
SCHUNK GmbH & Co. KG (Germany) 
Electricité de France S.A (France) 
O3NEIDA Europe (Belgium) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: € 2.84M 
EC Contribution: € 2M  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-211448 
Main Objectives 
 
As the level of automation and system complexity in 
factories and plants increases steadily, system 
engineering becomes progressively more difficult and 
less-productive. A new approach to achieving high 
degrees of functionality through improved 
interoperability of subsystems is under way within 
MEDEIA. 
The focus of the MEDEIA project is on “automation 
objects” or “automation components” as the basis for 
developing a model-based embedded systems design 
environment.  The MEDEIA project’s objective is a radical 
improvement in productivity for the development of 
embedded control systems within the industrial 
automation sector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. A formal framework for model-driven component-
based development of embedded control  
2. An easily – understandable modelling method 
designed for use by domain experts  
3. An integrated modelling of diagnostics  
4. The integrated simulation and verification of 
systems design  
5. An automatic, embedded, and platform specific 
code-generation for the deployment of control 
software to heterogeneous automation hardware  
6. A series of proof–of-concept demonstrations on 
real-world applications by project partners in the 
application domain of robotics, manufacturing, 
power generation and automatic packaging 
The development of these elements will produce a 
pioneering methodology and a prototypical design and 
engineering framework for embedded system design, 
which will enable the industrial automation industry to 
reduce system design time and costs for the 
development of complex control systems.   
MEDEIA 
Model-Driven Embedded Systems Design Environment for the 
Industrial Automation Sector 
MEDEIA will methodically target, research and develop a formal framework supporting a 
new multi-domain modelling method to fulfil the increasing engineering needs in the 
industrial automation sector.   
KEYWORDS: Automation components, behaviour and interface description, component 
based embedded systems design, model-driven architecture 
MEDEIA will focus on 
the development of a 
multi-domain model-
driven embedded 
systems design 
approach for in the 
industrial automation 
sector 
The project goal of reducing 
system design time by 25% 
will be achieved through the 
systematic development of 
the following elements: 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The MEDEIA design methodology is based on the so-
called Automation Components (ACs) which are in 
general a combination of embedded hard- & software. An 
AC contains the general model of its functionality and its 
interface for interacting with other components as 
depicted in the figure below.  
The starting point of each engineering flow is the 
definition/specification of the system requirements. The 
MEDEIA design flow accepts the functional and non-
functional specification of a plant (e.g. for manufacturing, 
robotics or power generation systems) as the initial 
starting point. The functional structure is realized through 
systems or components formed, in turn, from a 
combination of sub-systems and sub-sub-systems. This 
orientation to design reflects MEDEIA’s strong 
compositional approach which greatly productivity in de 
signing and building machines and plants from the 
mechanical/electrical point of view significantly.  
In contrast to the functional structure of a plant, the state-
of-the-art design process for the control system is usually 
not compliant with this point of view. Structures defined in 
embedded system disciplines like control hard- & 
software, as well as communication, are based rather on 
technical reasons as opposed to functional assignment.  
The MEDEIA approach will close this gap between the 
mechanical/electrical engineering and the embedded 
control engineering approaches. The first step within the 
design flow is the specification of a rough plant 
architecture and ACs. Additionally, existing ACs or 
already available implementations of ACs can be 
included. By continuous refinement, adaptation to new 
requirements, splitting up to sub-problems/components 
and composition of ACs, the MEDEIA design flow 
becomes highly flexible and integrative at each level of 
the plant architecture. Independently of the current state 
of the specification of an AC, the AC model enables 
execution of the AC within a simulation framework. 
Therefore, simulation of AC models together with 
concrete implementations enables a new kind of 
hardware-in-the-loop execution: at any level of the plant 
architecture as well as for mixed up environments of 
existing and simulated ACs, the execution of parts of the 
system or the overall system will be possible. 
This feature results in much reduced development cycles, 
early testing and improved dependability of single 
components as well as of the overall plant. 
 
Key Issues 
 
The current situation for the design of automation and 
control systems is characterized by a huge variety of 
different approaches in both, the specification and 
implementation of plants. When different end-users, each 
of whom has expressed their requirements in different 
forms, have to interact, there exists currently very little 
support in automated workflows or even in the 
interoperability of different software tools implementing 
the combined set of specifications defined in different 
forms. 
The key issue of the MEDEIA approach for bridging the gap 
between the different users and their special way of 
specifying and implementing is to put a common element, 
the Automation Component, in between of the specification 
and implementation elements of a plant automation system 
implementation. 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The MEDEIA method will support the automation industry 
to become more competitive by fostering new features 
that are seen by industry as vital for realisation and 
exploitation of innovative products within Europe. The 
proposed design method and formal framework allows a 
rapid design and engineering of advanced automation 
application solutions within a reasonable time and thus 
overcomes significant disadvantages of state-of-art 
approaches. This is crucial since pioneering high-tech 
products initially target premium-price sectors before 
reaching mass markets. Thus on a wider scope the 
project contributes strategically to innovations and leads 
to a more competitive industrial portfolio. In the 3-5 year 
range, the first products will appear that have been 
designed using the novel MEDEIA technology. First 
challenging fields of applications are likely to include: 
• Manufacturing and production plants, 
• Complex and advanced robotic systems,  
• Power generation, distribution and supply systems, 
as well as 
• Logistic systems. 
MEDEIA technology from industrial partners will be 
developed for application in the fields above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: MNEMEE 
Memory maNagEMEnt technology for 
adaptive and efficient design of 
Embedded systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Peter Lemmens 
Institution: IMEC 
Email: peter.lemmens@imec.be 
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Dr. Stelianos Mamagkakis 
Institution: IMEC 
Email: stelios.mamagkakis@imec.be 
 
Project website: www.mnemee.org 
 
Partners:  
Thales (France) 
IntraCom Telecom (Greece) 
Informatik Centre Dortmund (Germany) 
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven (NL) 
ICCS (Greece) 
IMEC (Belgium) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: January 1st 2008 
Effort: 424 Person months 
Total Cost: 4.680.784€ 
EC Contribution: 2.950.000 € 
 
Contract Number: IST-216224 
Main Objectives 
 
The “MNEMEE” project will provide a novel solution for 
mapping applications cost-efficiently to the memory hierarchy 
of any MPSoC platform without significant optimization of the 
initial source code. The activity is aiming at the data (statically 
and dynamically allocated) management between the state-
of-the-art optimizations at the application functionality and the 
compiler design layer.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scope 
 
The theme of intelligent ubiquitous devices will dominate 
future embedded system designs and speed up the 
integration of multimedia and communication applications, 
thus creating very complex, dynamic source code. Today it is 
increasingly impossible for designers to map applications 
cost-efficiently to any platform without significant optimization 
of the initial source code.  
The MNEMEE project will address this key challenge by 
introducing an innovative supplementary source-to-source 
optimization design layer for data management between the 
state-of-the-art optimizations at the application functionality 
and the compiler design layer.  
 
 
Innovation 
 
The project proposal consists of multi-objective explorations 
that allow trade-offs which designers highly need to rightly 
position their product in the huge search space. A 
combination of design-time and run-time techniques to boost 
the cost-efficiency and performance. Automated optimizations 
that are applied once to reduce design effort and can handle 
very complex code. No existing integrated framework allows 
this and ongoing projects do not address it sufficiently.  
 
MNEMEE 
Memory maNagEMEnt technology for adaptive and efficient design 
of Embedded systems 
Memory management technology for adaptive and efficient design of embedded systems 
and Variability tolerant System-on-a-chip Design in More-Moore Technologies 
KEYWORDS: Embeded systems design, memory optimization, design automation tool
MNEMEE's Proposed 
Solution 
• Multi-objective exploration 
that enable trade-offs 
• Combination of design-
time and run-time 
optimization methodologies
• Automation tools will 
support the methodologies
 
This FP7 funded project is 
the base for a collaboration 
between major industrial 
players in this field, 
research institutes and 
academic partners: Thales, 
IntraCom Telecom, IMEC, 
ICD, ICCS and Technische 
Universiteit Eindhoven. 
 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
Focus 
 
The key objective of the project lies in the efficient data 
access and memory storage of both dynamically and 
statically allocated data and their assignment on the 
memory hierarchy. The few existing source-to-source 
approaches existing today only deal with the static 
manifest arrays and simple code. In contrast, MNEMEE 
will deliver all the necessary design methodologies, 
heuristics and prototype tools to enable the fast 
exploration of the huge dynamic and static design space.  
 
 
Technological challenges 
 
• Provide a framework for source-to-source 
optimization methodologies, which targets both 
statically and dynamically allocated data.  
• Introduce a novel source-to-source optimization 
design layer.  
• Analyze the embedded software applications and 
highlight the source-to-source optimization 
opportunities.  
• Develop a set of prototype tools.  
• Provide data memory-hierarchy aware assignment 
and scheduling methodologies.   
 
 
Progress beyond state-of-the-art 
 
The below Figure shows the relation between the 
workpackages. The first workpackage delivers data 
analysis, memory hierarchy requirements, scenario 
identification and specifications for the embedded 
software applications. The second, third and fourth 
workpackages provide the source-to-source 
optimizations. The fifth workpackage provides the 
demonstrators for the MNEMEE optimization. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Approach 
 
The above Figure shows the relation between the 
partners and their role in the project. 
Workpackage 1: Data analysis, specifications and 
scenario identification for embedded software 
applications.  
Workpackage 2: Source-to-source optimizations of 
dynamically allocated data mapping on MPSoC 
platforms. 
Workpackage 3: Source-to-source optimizations of 
statically allocated data mapping on MPSoC 
platforms.   
Workpackage 4: Memory hierarchy aware optimization 
techniques 
 
 
 
MOBY-D IC  
Model-based synthesis of digital electronic circuits for 
embedded control 
The MOBY-DIC project will research and develop a unique paradigm and supporting 
tool chain for the design of embedded control systems, based on modelling of the 
physical process and integrated design of both control algorithms and embedded 
circuits. 
 
KEYWORDS: Embedded control systems, circuit design, piecewise affine functions, 
optimal control, virtual sensors. 
 
Main Objectives 
MOBY-DIC has identified the following project 
objectives to face the posed research challenges: 
O.1 Define a novel PWA 
(PieceWise-Affine) canonical 
for-malism that unifies the 
control and circuit views on 
embedded control design, and 
develop analysis, complexity 
reduction and controller and 
circuit design methodologies 
for the embedded electronics, 
starting from mathematical 
models of the embedding 
system. 
 
O.2 Create a complete integrated tool chain of 
software modules to support the new analysis and 
design methodologies. 
 
O.3 Provide a proof-of-concept of the new approach 
by addressing three challenging industrial case 
studies in the automotive domain, which require the 
design of embedded controllers and virtual sensors: 
• monitoring batteries for hybrid vehicles 
• design of a virtual smart full gyro sensor for 
vehicle dynamics applications 
• Stop-&-Go Adaptive Cruise Control, a 
functionality already available in some upper-
class vehicles, which automatically adapts the 
vehicle’s speed depending on a predecessor’s 
behaviour, steering the throttle as well as the 
brake system. 
 
The developed methodologies and tools are generic 
in nature with the consequence that they are usable 
in any application domain such as industrial and 
electronic automation, robotics, transportation, 
aerospace, health care, etc. 
 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
At A Glance: MOBY-DIC 
 
Model-based synthesis of digital electronic 
circuits for embedded control 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Marco Storace 
Institution: Università di Genova 
Email: marco.storace@unige.it 
 
Project website: www.mobydic-project.eu 
 
Partners:  
Università degli Studi di Genova – UNIGE (Italy) 
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven – TU/e 
(Netherlands) 
Universidad de Sevilla – USE-IMSE (Spain) 
Università degli Studi di Trento – UNITN (Italy) 
Ford Forschungszentrum Aachen GmbH – FFA 
(Germany) 
ON Semiconductor Belgium BVBA – ON-SEMI 
(Belgium) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2009.12.01 
Total Cost: € 3,209,203.00 
EC Contribution: € 2,140,000.00 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-248858 
MOBY-DIC will 
develop a unique 
paradigm and 
supporting tool 
chain for the 
design of 
embedded 
control systems
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The MOBY-DIC project targets a step-by-step 
development of the methodology and contains four 
scientific work packages (WP). The WP’s are 
organized in such a way to eliminate bottlenecks and 
difficulties. The main steps are: 
1. Selection of the canonical PWA form suitable for 
both control and circuit implementation purposes. 
This step is at the heart of the project, being the 
trait d'union. It forms the bridge between the control 
world and the circuit world (WP2). 
2. Development of analysis and design methodologies 
and a software toolbox for the synthesis of circuit-
oriented PWA control systems and application of 
them to three challenging automotive case studies 
(WPs 3 and 5).  
3. Creation of the circuit synthesis methodologies in 
two phases: identification of the best circuit 
structures for the implementation of the controllers 
and observers in PWA canonical form obtained 
from step 2 above (phase 1) and definition of an 
automated circuit design procedure (phase 2) (WPs 
3 and 4).  
4. Validation of the proposed approach through the 
design of circuits implementing the control systems 
in three case studies. The results of the 
implemented circuits will be compared with those 
concerning standard solutions of the considered 
control systems (WPs 4 and 5). 
There are two further work packages: WP5 concerns 
the validation of the whole embedded system (sensor, 
control, actuator) in the three case studies; WP6 will 
take care of dissemination and exploitation of the 
project results to the scientific community and 
industries of high importance. 
Key Issues 
 
On the theoretical level, MOBY-DIC aims at developing 
analysis and synthesis methods for PWA controllers 
and estimators that can trade-off performance 
properties of the overall system and the implementation 
complexity of the resulting digital circuits. MOBY-DIC 
proposes a circuit-oriented design flow based on the 
PWA paradigm that, starting from a model description, 
ends with an (even integrated) embedded system. The 
availability of such a design flow will actually spur the 
application of PWA controllers and virtual sensors for 
many applications and will alleviate the obstructions in 
their usage as caused by the decoupled designs of the 
(mathematical) control law and of the circuit. 
In other words, MOBY-DIC will provide circuit-aware 
embedded control design and control-aware embedded 
circuit design, by employing a PWA modelling 
paradigm, which provides a flexible formalism, efficient 
control design tools, and efficient implementation in 
electronic circuits. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
MOBY-DIC is expected to impact all major goals of the 
workprogramme, in particular: 
• Significantly increased productivity of embedded 
system development. 
• Improved competitiveness of European companies 
that rely on the design and integration of embedded 
systems in their products by reducing design costs 
and time to market. 
• Emergence and growth of new companies that supply 
design tools and associated software. 
• Reinforced European scientific and technological 
leadership in the design of complex embedded 
systems. 
 
 
 
 
At a Glance: MOGENTES 
 
MOdel-based GENeration of efficient Tests for 
Embedded Systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Dr. Manfred Gruber 
Institution: Austrian Research Centers - ARC 
Email: manfred.gruber@arcs.ac.at 
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Dr. Wolfgang Herzner 
Institution: Austrian Research Centers - ARC 
Email: wolfgang.herzner@arcs.ac.at 
 
Project website: www.MOGENTES.eu 
 
Partners:  
Austrian Research Centers GmbH - ARC (AT) 
Budapest Univ. of Technology and Economics 
(HU) 
Ford Forschungszentrum Aachen GmbH (DE) 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (CH) 
Graz University of Technology (AT) 
Prolan Irányítástechnikai ZRT (HU) 
Prover Technology AB (SE) 
SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden (SE) 
Thales Rail Signalling Solutions GmbH (AT) 
Re:Lab S.R.L. (IT) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: € 4,4 Mio 
EC Contribution: € 3,1Mio  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-216679 
MOGENTES 
MOdel-based GENeration of efficient Tests for Embedded Systems 
MOGENTES aims at significantly enhancing testing and verification of dependable 
embedded systems by generation of efficient test case  
KEYWORDS: Model-based test case generation (MBTCG), Dependable embedded 
systems (DES), Fault modelling, Test coverage metrics 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The goal of MOGENTES is to significantly enhance 
testing and verification of dependable embedded 
systems by means of automated generation of 
efficient test cases relying on the development of new 
approaches as well as innovative integration of state-
of-the-art techniques. In particular, MOGENTES aims 
at the application of these technologies in large 
industrial systems of automotive, railway control, and 
off-highway vehicles domains to achieve a significant 
cost reduction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While formal verification has been applied success-
fully for systems of limited size, testing is still the 
primary though expensive alternative. Therefore, 
MOGENTES has the objectives: 
• To reduce testing effort by at least 20%. 
• To generate efficient test cases from system and 
fault models, for both functional and non-
functional system properties of new and existing 
embedded systems. 
• To establish a framework for integration of 
involved tools, including model transformations, to 
prepare inputs for model checkers etc., which can 
be easily used by domain experts. 
• To provide traceability of requirements and match 
them to test analysis results. 
• To foster application of automated testing to 
satisfy functional safety standards requirements. 
• In general, to increase the confidence in safety-
relevant embedded systems by improving their 
testing and proving their conformance to safety 
standards.
MOGENTES will 
focus on 
automated 
generation of 
efficient test cases, 
relying on 
development of 
new approaches as 
well as innovative 
integration of state-
of-the-art 
techniques. 
Today, embedded computer 
systems become 
increasingly integrated in 
safety-relevant systems such 
as vehicles, medical 
equipment, or industrial or 
public control systems. 
Evidently, any possible mea-
sure has to be taken to 
ensure the dependability of 
such systems, from early 
planning and design to final 
installation and maintenance. 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
These objectives shall be achieved with the following 
concepts. 
• Define common modelling languages and 
semantics (meta-models), with UML as primary 
candidate, such that the domain specific 
requirements of the demonstrators can be 
reflected, and the (partial) models of the 
demonstrators can be mapped to this language.  
• Develop a test theory that defines the con-
formance relation between the model and the 
implementation, and the notion of success and 
failure of a test case. 
• Define fault models (for software as well as hard-
ware) and extend the modelling languages to 
allow the integration of the representation of faults 
into the (application) models. 
• Define new coverage criteria under consideration 
of minimal cut sets (i.e., combinations of faults 
causing a safety requirement violation), fault injec-
tion, mutation testing, and safety aspects, and use 
existing TCG techniques to generate efficient test 
cases that achieve this coverage. 
• Use model-based fault injection (MBFI) to extend 
models for automatically calculating minimal cut 
sets 
• Validate the defined fault models (and thus the 
generated test cases) with physical fault injection. 
• Use (bounded) model checking techniques to 
generate stress test scenarios. 
• Provide semantics-aware transformations from 
system models to inputs of specific tools, e.g. to 
enable interaction of generated models with 
existing simulation environments for allowing 
evaluation of model coverage. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
Following obstacles are observed which still today 
hamper broad application of model-based test 
generation in industry: 
• For existing systems, domain-specific formal 
notations ("meta-models"), in which their models 
can be defined, are not always available. 
• In general, formal tools are still difficult to use, 
they often need expert knowledge due to their 
own terminology and the specific semantics of the 
applied formalisms. 
• For real embedded systems, applicability is still 
limited due to their complexity and size. 
• Formal models used in the development focus on 
specification of fault-free behaviour, and the 
notion of faults and fault effects are rarely 
included in the models. 
• Accordingly, means for dependability, e.g. fault 
tolerance, are poorly addressed by existing tools. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
MOGENTES will contribute to both maintaining the 
competitiveness of Europe's industry by helping to 
reduce validation and verification costs, and to 
strengthen the increasing test tools and services 
branch. 
In general, MOGENTES will increase knowledge and 
develop new techniques and tools in the area of 
verification and validation of dependable embedded 
systems which can be applied in model-based 
development processes also by non-experts in formal 
methods. 
 
 
 
 
 
MULTICUBE 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator: 
Name: Cristina Silvano 
Institution: Politecnico di Milano 
Email: silvano@elet.polimi.it 
 
Project website: www.multicube.eu 
 
Partners: 
Politecnico di Milano (Italy) 
Design of Systems on Silicon – DS2 
(Spain) 
STMicroelectronics (Italy) 
IMEC (Belgium) 
ESTECO (Italy) 
University of Lugano - ALaRI (Switzerland) 
University of Cantabria (Spain) 
STMicroelectronics Beijing (China) 
Institute of Computing Technology – 
Chinese Academy of Sciences (China) 
 
Duration: 30 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: € 3 081 383 
EC Contribution: € 2 098 338  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-216693 
MULTICUBE 
Multi-Objective Design Space Exploration Of Multi-Processor SoC Architectures For 
Embedded Multimedia Applications 
KEYWORDS: Multi-Objective Design Space Exploration, Multi-processor System-on-Chip, 
Architecture Optimization, Performance and Power Estimation, Platform-based Design, 
Embedded Systems, Multimedia Applications. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
Many point tools exist to optimize particular aspects of 
embedded systems. However, an overall design space 
exploration framework is needed to combine all the 
decisions into a global search space, and a common 
interface to the optimization and evaluation tools. The 
MULTICUBE project focuses on the definition of an 
automatic multi-objective Design Space Exploration (DSE) 
framework to be used to tune the System-on-Chip 
architecture for the target application evaluating a set of 
metrics (e.g. energy, latency, throughput, bandwidth, QoS, 
etc.) for the next generation of embedded multimedia 
platforms. This overall objective is two-fold. 
From one side, the MULTICUBE project will define an 
automatic multi-objective DSE framework to find design 
alternatives that best meet system constraints and cost 
criteria, strongly dependent on the target application, but 
also to restrict the search space to crucial parameters to 
enable an efficient exploration. In the developed DSE 
framework, a set of heuristic optimization algorithms must 
be defined to reduce the overall exploration time by 
computing an approximated Pareto set of configurations 
with respect to the selected figures of merit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From the other side, the MULTICUBE project will define a 
run-time DSE framework based on the applications of the 
results of the static multi-objective design exploration to 
optimize the run-time allocation and scheduling of different 
application tasks. The design exploration flow results in a 
Pareto-optimal set of design alternatives with different 
speed, energy, memory and communication bandwidth 
parameters. This information can be used at run-time by 
the operation system to make an informed decision about 
how the resources should be distributed over different tasks 
running on the multi-processor system on-chip. This 
resource distribution cannot be performed during the 
design exploration itself, since it depends on which tasks 
are active at a particular point in time. 
MULTICUBE will 
focus on multi-
objective design 
space exploration for 
embedded System-
on-Chip 
architectures 
Once the approximated 
Pareto set has been built, 
the designer can quickly 
select the best system 
configuration satisfying the 
constraints.  
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The goal of MULTICUBE is to cover the gap between 
the system-level specification and the definition of the 
optimal application-specific architecture. MULTICUBE 
activities are driven by the idea to cover this gap by 
building a stack of tools and accurate methodologies 
directly targeted to specific multiprocessor SoC based 
on Network on Chip architectures. In the MULTICUBE 
design flow, the specifications of the target architectures 
and applications will be provided as inputs to the design 
flow. A SystemC-based multi-level modeling 
methodology for multiprocessors will be developed. 
Once received the target architecture as input, we will 
provide to the next step the system model to evaluate 
different architectural alternatives in terms of metrics. 
Then, the Design Space Exploration framework will be 
defined to sail over architectural solutions following 
several heuristic optimization algorithms. This step is 
implemented as an optimization loop, where the 
selected architecture instance generated by the DSE 
framework is given back to the estimation framework for 
the metrics evaluation. The tool integration phase in 
MULTICUBE will be performed to implement an 
automatic system optimization engine to generate, for 
the target MPSoC architecture, either the best 
architectural alternative (if the exploration is done 
statically) or the best tasks scheduling and allocation 
solution (if the exploration is done at run-time). 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
• Increased productivity of system development 
through a fast, reliable DSE process allowing finding 
an optimized solution in a short time. DSE will be 
performed at system-level, thus avoiding costly, low-
level analysis steps (i.e. ISS simulations). 
 
 
 
• Improved competitiveness of European 
companies that rely on the design and integration 
of embedded systems in their products by 
reducing costs and time to market. 
• Stimulate high-tech European SMEs (such as 
ESTECO) that offers general-purpose innovative 
design solutions and tools to apply them for 
embedded systems design. 
• Reinforced European scientific and technological 
leadership in the engineering of complex systems 
both at the industry side (STM as a large 
company and DS2 as a SME) and the academic 
and research side (IMEC, Politecnico di Milano, 
ALaRI, University of Cantabria and ICT). 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The design methodology will be implemented at 
system-level in a set of open-source and proprietary 
EDA tools to guarantee a large exploitation of the 
results of the MULTICUBE project in the embedded 
system design community. The overall goal is to 
support the competitiveness of European industries 
by optimizing embedded HW/SW systems while 
reducing the design time and costs. To ensure a wide 
applicability of the proposed DSE framework, the 
MULTICUBE project is strongly industry-driven. Two 
European industrial partners (STMicro-electronics 
Italy and DS2) and STMicroelectronics China will 
define the requirements of the design tools and 
validate step-by-step the results of the exploration 
tools to design a set of target industrial applications. 
The integration of design tools and the commercial 
exploitation of the tools will be done by an European 
SME, ESTECO. ALaRI will be mainly in charge of the 
dissemination and exploitation activities. The 
research and technological development will mainly 
be done by IMEC, Politecnico di Milano, University of 
Cantabria and the Institute of Computing Technology 
– Chinese Academy of Sciences. 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: PREDATOR 
 
DESIGN FOR PREDICTABILITY AND 
EFFICIENCY 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator: 
Name: Prof. Dr. Reinhard Wilhelm 
Institution: Universität des Saarlandes 
Email: wilhelm@cs.uni-sb.de 
 
Project Technical Manager: 
Name: Prof. Dr. Reinhard Wilhelm 
Institution: Universität des Saarlandes 
Email: wilhelm@cs.uni-sb.de  
 
Project website: http://www.predator-project.eu/ 
 
Partners:  
Universität des Saarlandes (Germany) 
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich 
(Schweiz) 
Universität Dortmund (Germany) 
Alma Mater Studiorum – Università di Bologna 
(Italy) 
Scuola Superiore di Studi Universitari è di 
Perfezionamento Sant’ Anna (Italy) 
ABSINT Angewandte Informatik GmbH 
(Germany) 
AIRBUS France SAS (France) 
Robert Bosch GmbH (Germany) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008-02-01 
Total Cost: 3.926.305,20€ 
EC Contribution: 2.799.990,80€ 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-216008 
PREDATOR 
Design for Predictability and Efficiency 
The PREDATOR project is concerned with the (worst-case) predictability and the 
(average-case) performance of embedded systems. The efficiency requirements 
comprise performance, resource utilisation, and power consumption. The considered 
systems typically occur in the aeronautics and automotive industries, in multimedia and 
industrial automation. 
KEYWORDS: Predictability, efficiency, average-case performance, computer system 
design 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
Main Objectives 
 
Coordinated by the Compiler Design Lab of Universität 
des Saarlandes, a leading academic research group in 
timing analysis of hard real-time systems, and steered 
by Airbus France SAS and Robert Bosch GmbH, two 
key industrial players in safety-critical industries, 
PREDATOR aims at: 
• improving the design and development methods for 
safety-critical embedded systems  
• developing tools that support these development 
methods  
• developing architectural concepts that support the 
derivation of timing guarantees for hard real-time 
systems  
• providing architectural platforms that exhibit the 
desired predictability properties  
The involved industrial partners will pose design 
challenges based on experience in the design of time-
critical embedded systems. These challenges will be 
taken up by the academic consortium members. 
Prototype architectures, design methods and analysis 
tools will be developed to solve the challenges. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each technique proposed in the project will be 
evaluated by measuring the reduction in the 
overestimation with respect to the case in which that 
technique is not used. Efficiency of new designs will be 
measured by means of simulation and profiling. 
 
PREDATOR will develop 
a new methodology, 
Design-for-Predictability 
leading to embedded 
systems with good 
combinations of 
predictability and 
performance. 
The ultimate goal of the 
project is the reduction of 
the remaining uncertainty 
of real-time system 
behaviour and the 
reduction of the penalties 
to pay for this uncertainty. 
 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
Synergetic Development of Tools with Design 
Predictability requires offline analysis of whole 
hardware/software systems. Thus, design and 
implementation methods need to be considered in 
terms of analysis complexity and precision. It is 
necessary to regard analyzability and design as a 
single entity. The design methodology envisaged by 
the PREDATOR consortium aims at improving the 
methods for predicting system behaviour. Two 
orthogonal ways to improve the predictability of 
embedded systems are the following: 
1. Reducing uncertainty by improving analysability 
and 
2. Influencing design and implementation concepts 
to reduce penalties.  
Basic questions about the relation between analysis 
and design will be clarified and the appropriate 
combination of design methods and analysis 
methods will be identified aiming at:  
• Identifying and subsequently eliminating 
concepts endangering predictability, which have 
no significant influence on performance.  
• Identifying alternative concepts to currently used 
ones and their implications with regard to 
predictability, performance, complexity and cost.  
 
WCET Estimation and Overrun Handling 
More relaxed guarantees will be considered, which 
increase resource efficiency, and robust scheduling 
algorithms as well as overload management 
techniques to tolerate them. Interrupt handling will be 
integrated into the scheduling decisions to account 
for both I/O and task timing requirements. Feedback-
based resource reservation schemes and adaptive 
scheduling will be investigated to enable the system 
to react to unpredictable changes and cope with 
dynamic environments. An important point will be to 
identify the inter-dependencies between design 
choices on the different layers and in particular 
between the layers.  
 
Resource-Aware Abstraction 
This design concept would bound the access costs 
to resources on the one hand and export 
information about resource usage on the other 
hand. Component models are needed that expose 
resource demand and guarantees instead of 
abstracting them away. As a result, there is no 
distinction between functional and non-functional 
properties anymore as both system aspects need to 
be considered likewise. This new approach can be 
considered as a paradigm shift in component-based 
design. Pivotal questions related to this topic are 
whether 
• the current layering is suited for time-
predictability and efficiency, 
• there are new organisational principles between 
layers that help to find suitable trade-offs at run-
time or compile-time, and 
• resource demand and guarantees can be 
integrated into a new component-based 
approach to embedded system design. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
The consortium will develop methods for 
heterogeneous embedded-system design with 
improved predictability properties. Adaptivity will be 
offered on the basis of reliably determined 
performance bounds. The predictability of extra-
functional properties, such as timing and energy 
performance, plays a key role. Tool chains for 
designing embedded systems as offered by the 
participating partners will be integrated to respond 
to the needs of the industry. 
The PREDATOR methods will enable embedded 
systems to be designed in a resource-aware way. 
This will eliminate unnecessary feedback loops, 
considerably reduce costs, and shorten the time to 
market. 
 
 
 
At A Glance: PROARTIS  
Probabilistically Analyzable Real-Time 
Systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Gina Alioto 
Institution: Barcelona Supercomputing Center - 
Centro Nacional de Supercomputación 
Email: gina.alioto@bsc.es 
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Francisco J. Cazorla 
Institution: Barcelona Supercomputing Center - 
Centro Nacional de Supercomputación 
Email: francisco.cazorla@bsc.es  
 
Project website: www.proartis-project.eu 
 
Partners:  
Barcelona Supercomputing Center - Centro 
Nacional de Supercomputación (Spain) 
Rapita Systems Ltd. (U.K.) 
Università di Padova (Italy) 
Institut National de Recherche en Informatique 
et Automatique (France) 
Airbus Operations SAS (France) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2010.02.01 
Total Cost: € 2,425,654 
EC Contribution: €1,800,000  
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-249100 
PROARTIS 
Probabilistically Analyzable Real-Time Systems 
PROARTIS will define novel hardware and software architectures for critical real-time 
embedded systems that, thanks to randomized timing behaviour, will ensure 
negligible probability of pathologically long execution times. This will enable a truly 
probabilistic worst-case execution time analysis that can be used in certification 
arguments. 
KEYWORDS: real-time systems, embedded systems, probabilistic timing analysis, 
worst-case execution time analysis (WCET)
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The overarching objective of the PROARTIS 
project is to facilitate a probabilistic approach to 
timing analysis. The proposed approach will 
concentrate on proving that pathological timing 
cases can only arise with negligible probability, 
instead of struggling to eradicate them, which is 
arguably not possible and could severely degrade 
performance. This will be a major turn from 
previous approaches that seek analyzability by 
trying to predict with cycle accuracy the state of 
hardware and software through analysis. 
To summarize: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This paradigm shift will permit probabilistic analysis 
techniques to be used effectively in arguments of 
system verification and certification, by 
demonstrating that the probability of pathological 
execution times is negligible.  
The techniques developed in PROARTIS will 
enable probabilistic guarantees of timing 
correctness to be derived. For example, if the 
reliability requirements placed on a sub-system 
indicate that the probability of a timing failure (a 
WCET violation) must be less than 10-9 per hour of 
operation, then the analysis techniques developed 
in PROARTIS shall translate this requirement into a 
probabilistic worst-case execution time guarantee 
for the sub-system. Probabilistic analysis effectively 
provides a continuum of worst-case execution 
times (WCET) for different confidence levels.  
PROARTIS 
focuses on the 
probabilistic 
timing analysis of 
critical real-time 
embedded 
systems 
The central hypothesis of 
PROARTIS is that new 
advanced hardware/software 
features enabling truly 
randomized timing behaviour 
can be defined for use in 
critical real-time embedded 
(CRTE) systems. 
 
 
Thus a sub-system may have a probability of 10-8 
per hour of exceeding an execution time of 1.5 ms, 
and probabilities of 10-9, and 10-10 per hour of 
exceeding 1.55 ms and 1.59 ms, respectively. The 
main idea of PROARTIS is that for future CRTE 
systems, such probabilistic guarantees offer 
significant advantages over deterministic 
approaches which attempt to make absolute 
guarantees, thereby severely limiting the 
opportunity of use of advanced hardware features 
and inevitably attaining lesser performance. 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
The technical approach of the project is to develop 
new hardware and software architectures that are 
amenable to probabilistic analysis, and to propose 
novel and effective probabilistic timing analysis 
methods. The project will work along three main 
axes:  
1. Architectural Design Principles. Definition of 
hardware and software design guidelines that will 
allow CRTE system designers to benefit from 
randomisation properties. These properties permit 
to take benefit from high performance hardware 
features as well as more complex software 
systems. 
2. Probabilistic Timing Analysis. Definition of a 
new analysis paradigm that exploits the 
randomisation properties of the proposed 
architecture. The new probabilistic approach will 
enable the timing analysis of the new high 
performance hardware features as well as more 
complex software systems. As a result of this new 
analysis paradigm, the project will develop a new 
probabilistic WCET analysis method and tool. 
3. Verification and Certification. Based on the 
outcomes of (1) and (2), development of 
probabilistic arguments that can be used effectively 
in  the verification and certification of CRTE 
systems.  
 
 
Key Issues 
 
The main challenge of the PROARTIS project is to 
foster a paradigm shift from deterministic to 
randomised timing behaviour in CRTE systems. In 
the past, strong arguments that could be used in 
certification have been based on understanding the 
behaviour of the whole system at the level of 
processor cycle. This approach is becoming 
increasingly untenable in practicality, error 
proneness and cost against new-generation 
hardware technologies, including of course the 
pervasive multi core systems. 
The PROARTIS project moves away from timing-
deterministic systems towards timing-randomised 
systems that exhibit truly independent timing 
behaviour and therefore enable the application of 
the law of large numbers to (probabilistically) 
predict the behaviour of extreme (i.e., long) 
execution times. The benefits of this novel 
approach are potentially very large. Strong 
emphasis is put in the project on the issues that 
may arise with regard to system validation and on 
the quantification of the benefits that the approach 
developed may bring.  
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The PROARTIS project will facilitate the production 
of analysable CRTE systems on advanced 
hardware platforms with features such as memory 
hierarchies and multi core processors. PROARTIS 
has the following overall strategic industrial goals: 
 
1. Increased performance, reliability and 
reduced costs by enabling CRTE systems to take 
full advantage of advanced hardware like deep 
memory hierarchies and multi core processors. The 
use of these features will allow designers to 
schedule more tasks while reducing the weight, 
power consumption and the size of the whole 
system and maintaining the desired predictability. It 
will also reduce the risk of temporal budget 
overruns. Application-level tasks will have an 
execution behaviour free (with sufficient low 
probability) from pathological temporal overruns. 
 
2. Increased productivity by enabling software 
engineers to develop more complex real-time 
software systems through timing-aware systems 
that reveal crucial timing details while dramatically 
simplifying analysis. For example, memory 
latencies will be predicted with less effort, requiring 
knowledge only of the total number of memory 
accesses, rather than the exact memory addresses 
and memory access patterns. 
 
3. Reduced time-to-market by enabling 
trustworthy WCET and other analyses for large-
scale real-time systems that will dramatically 
reduce testing time. 
 
 
 
 
 
At A Glance: ProSE 
 
Promoting Standardisation for 
Embedded systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator: 
Name:Laila Gide  
Institution: THALES 
Email: laila.gide@thalesgroup.com 
 
Project Technical Manager: 
Name: Erwin Schoitsch  
Institution: Austrian Research Centers 
Email: erwin.schoitsch@arcs.ac.at 
 
Project website: www.prose-project.org 
 
Partners:  
Fraunhofer-IGD  
ESI –Tecnalia (Spain) 
Austrian Research Centers (Austria) 
AVL List (Austria) 
STMicorelectronics (Belgium) 
CEA (France) 
Acciona Infraestructuras (Spain) 
Ericsson AB (Sweden) 
 
Duration: 24 months 
Start:  2008.05.01 
Total Cost:    € 720 000 
EC Contribution: € 720 000 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-224213 
ProSE 
Promoting Standardisation for Embedded systems 
Standards are of strategic importance for market creation and development. ProSE 
envisages providing recommendations for purposeful and efficient standardisation in 
Embedded Systems, facilitating the evolution of synergies across business domains. 
KEYWORDS: Support Action, Embedded Systems, ARTEMIS, Strategic Agenda, 
Standards, Standardisation, Design by composition, cross-domain (holistic) system 
view. 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The ProSE project aims at providing the “Embedded 
Systems” community, particularly ARTEMIS Technology 
Platform and ARTEMISIA with adequate support for the 
implementation of their objectives in the “Standardisation” 
arena by setting-up a methodology for prioritisation and 
building links with the standardisation bodies in order to foster 
the emergence of standards in line with the high level 
objectives of the ARTEMIS ETP. 
The prime objective of ProSE will be approached by actively 
assisting ARTEMISIA in elaborating, maintaining, and 
monitoring a Strategic Agenda in the area of the standards, 
throughout the 24 months duration of the project, by 
supporting the specific ARTEMIS Working Group on 
Standards adopted by ARTEMISIA. 
More specifically, ProSE aims at enabling the emergence of 
high value standards by starting with the dissemination of 
knowledge about relevant deployed and emerging standards 
in the field of embedded systems within the related R&D 
communities in Europe, going over to the identification and 
prioritisation of new areas for standardisation activities and 
coming up with a practised methodology for supporting their 
development and acceptance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ProSE links to European national and international 
standardisation bodies and pre-standardisation organisations 
to collaboratively (e.g. in workshops) classify different 
standardisation needs, and to elaborate common issues 
across research areas and projects.  
This will be complemented by setting up an open forum on 
standardisation issues in Embedded Systems. 
ProSE also contributes to the action plan for ICT, defined by 
the European Commission in March 2006, by providing a 
concrete solution for improvement in the adoption of 
standards in the rapidly growing embedded systems 
domains, and by improving the inclusion of different 
stakeholders in the standardisation process. 
 
ProSE will make a survey of 
the state of the art and 
perform a gap analysis 
through the adoption of a 
methodology for the 
identification of 
appropriate 
standardisation 
candidates.
ProSE will focus on 
providing recommendations 
on Embedded Systems 
Standards to foster cross 
domains synergies and to 
accelerate development and 
evolution of standards in 
order to respond to the 
needs of the fast evolving 
markets. 
COORDINATION AND SUPPORT ACTION
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
 
This is accompanied by awareness building and by 
communication and dissemination to the 
stakeholders and to the public at large. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
There are, at present, many promising R&D activities 
dealing with diverse issues of embedded technology, 
and there are many standardisation bodies that are 
potentially interested in the results of those R&D 
activities. However, due to the fragmentation 
between application domains and between their 
communities, and also due to the lack of a 
systematic and selective promotion of standardisation 
candidates to support the above-mentioned targets in 
the field of embedded systems, the emergence and 
evolution of desired standards does not keep pace 
with the increasingly rapid technology 
development. The key issue for ProSE is to fill this 
gap by: 
- structuring and disseminating knowledge about 
existing standards within the various embedded 
systems domains,   
-   providing a set of criteria for identifying and 
prioritising good candidates for standardisation in a 
very systematic and selective manner,   
-  proposing a practicable methodology for their 
maturation towards their eventual acceptance so as 
to enable or facilitate cross-domain compatibility and 
a higher degree of reusability. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
The ProSE project will directly address the 
complexity challenge by promoting and facilitating 
new approaches to embedded system design. It will 
also contribute to the changeover from “design by 
decomposition” to “design by composition” as a 
major trend for embedded systems, by supporting 
existing and emerging standards that will enable this 
changeover.  
It will help to better meet increasing demand for 
innovation activities in the Embedded Systems 
domains by shortening the process of selection of 
candidate standards, and facilitating the emergence 
of high quality standards and of new services, 
cross-domain products and solutions, thus seizing 
new market opportunities. 
 
 
Technical Approach 
 
ProSE envisages providing recommendations for 
purposeful and efficient standardisation in Embedded 
Systems and facilitating the evolution of synergies 
across business domains: 
• by addressing specific cross domain issues such 
as the reusability, reliability, verification and 
certification of embedded software and systems; 
and  
• addressing adaptation of existing standards, 
influencing evolving or promoting potential new 
standards in areas not properly addressed until 
now; 
• by investigating the existing specific domains 
(Aeronautics, Automotive, Rail, Energy, Telecom, 
Consumer, Medical...) standards in order to 
identify cross-domain potential synergies and 
promoting the ProSE vision towards 
standardisation bodies; 
• by establishing links between the ES industry 
(facilitating the engagement of SMEs), EU 
standardisation bodies (ETSI, CEN, CENELEC, 
AUTOSAR …) and worldwide standardisation 
bodies (ARINC, ITU, IEC, ISO,…), and the 
research community (particularly Networks of 
Excellence, ERCIM, EWICS TC7, ENCRESS, 
“Clubs” and the like; 
• by delivering a Strategic Agenda for 
standardisation. This Strategic Agenda aims at 
serving as an input to the future EU and national 
work programmes. 
The goal of ProSE is the promotion and initiation of 
standards and standards adaptation. For this 
purpose, the project will develop a framework for the 
analysis of the present standardisation position and a 
method to determine standardisation priorities for 
Embedded Systems. 
The project will also identify major relevant 
standardisation organisations and develop criteria for 
evaluating candidate standards, a work model and 
procedures for promoting these candidates to reach 
the status of a standard in the long term. To achieve 
a long-lasting impact, ProSE therefore intends to 
establish a self-sustaining process – an approach 
and a way of working – that will live well beyond the 
end of the proposed project itself, as long as it is 
effective in coping with the challenges of finding 
cross-domain solutions and improving reusability in 
the field of embedded systems.  
 
 
At a Glance: Quasimodo 
 
Quantitative System Properties in Model-
Driven-Design of  Embedded Systems 
 
 
 
Project Coordinator  
Name: Professor Kim Guldstrand Larsen 
Institution: Aalborg University, Denmark 
Email: kgl@cs.aau.dk 
 
Project Co-Coordinator 
Name: Associate Prof. Brian Nielsen 
Institution: Aalborg University, Denmark 
Email: bnielsen@cs.aau.dk 
 
Project website: www.quasimodo.aau.dk 
 
Partners: 
Aalborg University (DK) 
Embedded Systems Institute (NL) 
RWTH Aachen University (D) 
Universität des Saarlandes (D) 
Université Libre de Bruxelles (B) 
ENS-Cachan/CNRS (F) 
Terma A/S (DK) 
Hydac Gmbh (D) 
Chess Beheer B.V (NL) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: 2.696.000 € 
EC Contribution: 1.995.000€ 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-214755 
Quasimodo 
Quantitative System Properties in Model-Driven-Design of 
Embedded Systems 
Quasimodo will develop theory, techniques and tool components for handling 
quantitative (e.g. real-time, hybrid and stochastic) constraints in model-driven 
development of real-time embedded systems. 
KEYWORDS: Quantities, non-func-tional properties, modelling, analysis, testing, code-
generation, algorithms. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
Characteristic for embedded systems is that they have to 
meet a multitude of quantitative constraints. These 
constraints involve the resources that a system may use 
(computation resources, power consumption, memory 
usage, communication bandwidth, costs, etc.), 
assumptions about the environment in which it operates 
(arrival rates, hybrid behaviour), and requirements on the 
services that the system has to provide (timing 
constraints, QoS, availability, fault tolerance, etc.). 
Existing Model-Driven Development (MDD) tools are 
rather limited in their handling of quantitative constraints. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The objective of the Quasimodo project is to develop 
theory, techniques and tool components for handling 
quantitative (e.g. real-time, hybrid and stochastic) 
constraints in model-driven development of real-time 
embedded systems. More specifically, the project aims 
at: 
• Improving the modelling of diverse quantitative 
aspects of embedded systems. 
• Providing a wide range of powerful techniques for 
analysing models with quantitative information and 
for establishing abstraction relations between them. 
• Generating predictable code from quantitative 
models. 
• Improving the overall quality of testing by using 
suitable quantitative models as the basis for 
generating sound and correct test cases. 
• Applying the techniques to real-life case-studies and 
disseminating the results to industry. 
Quasimodo will focus on 
developing new 
techniques and tools for 
model-driven design, 
analysis, testing and 
code-generation for 
advanced embedded 
systems with complex 
quantitative constraints. 
 
Existing Model-Driven 
Development (MDD) tools 
are rather limited in their 
handling of quantitative 
constraints. 
Hence MDD will not realise 
its full potential in the 
embedded systems area 
unless the ability to handle 
quantitative properties is 
drastically improved. 
 
 
Current industrial testing practise is often manual 
without effective automation and is consequently rather 
error prone and costly: it is estimated that 30-70% of 
the total development cost is related to testing. Model-
based testing is a novel approach to testing with 
high potential of improving cost and efficiency. We 
intend to extend the model-based testing technology to 
the setting of quantitative models allowing generation, 
selection, execution and provision of coverage-
measures to be made. 
In order to demonstrate the usefulness of our 
techniques, we will apply them to several complex 
industrial case studies, and provide a collection of 
unique tool components to be use as plug-ins in 
industrial tools or tool chains.  
 
 
Key Issues 
 
One key issue is modelling of quantitative information 
in models with sound semantic basis. Typically these 
models are automata extended with notations for real-
time, continuous, stochastic, and resource 
consumption.  Another central problem is the 
development of efficient symbolic techniques, 
algorithms and data-structures for the (automated) 
analysis of quantitative models, and that can be 
implemented in tools for analysis, test and 
controller/code-generation. 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
By enabling early and automated analysis, design, and 
test of embedded systems with quantitative constraints, 
the results of Quasimodo will increase the 
competitiveness of European embedded systems 
industry and will help establish Europe as a leader 
in design of complex embedded systems.  This 
objective will be reached by both advancing the state-
of-the-art of models, tools and methods for quantitative 
design, together with knowledge transfer to European 
industries. 
 
Technical Approach 
 
To achieve its aims, Quasimodo will - as illustrated in 
the figure below  - cover all of the logical phases of 
a typical development trajectory including 
Modelling and Specification, Analysis, 
Implementation and Testing. The Quasimodo project 
will start on the basis of previous theoretical and 
practical experience of the consortium members, in 
the areas of verification (real-time, cost-decorated, 
stochastic and hybrid systems), scheduling and 
controller synthesis (finite-state, real-time and cost-
decorated systems), implementability (finite-state and 
real-time systems) and testing (finite-state, data-
intense and realtime systems).  
The principle aim of the project is to provide a 
coherent and scalable metho-dology with a 
supporting collec-tions of tool components that can 
be used to design reliable embedded systems that 
meet their requirements in a controlled and resource-
efficient way using a model- driven approach. This 
means that design decision, analysis, code-
generation, testing, etc. are always based upon 
design models that reflect the relevant aspects of the 
systems. To focus on aspects such as performance, 
timeliness, and efficient resource-usage, which are 
central to embedded systems, the models must 
provide quantitative information such as 
information about timing, cost, data, stochastics and 
hybrid phenomena.  
Algorithmic methods will be developed for 
analysis of functional correctness and 
performance issues. The analysis methods include 
data-structures for symbolic exploration of the 
behaviour of models, abstraction and 
compositionality principles for relating design models 
and help to control the size and complexity of the 
models, exploitation of approximate analysis 
techniques for partial analysis of very complex 
models and, orthogonally, optimal utilisation of the 
given computing platform on which the algorithms are 
implemented.  
In the implementation step, executable code 
running on given physical devices has to be 
provided. The theoretical framework of the 
quantitative models assumes infinitely fast hardware, 
infinitely precise clocks, unbounded memory etc. In 
contrast real CPUs are subject to hard limitations in 
terms of frequency and memory-size. Thus, how to 
guarantee that properties established by a given 
model are also valid of its implementation is a major 
challenge.  
 
 
 
At A Glance: SATURN 
 
SysML bAsed modelling, archteTUre 
exploRation, simulation and syNthesis 
for complex systems 
 
 
Project Coordinator / Project Technical 
Manager:  
Name: Paul Whiston 
Institution: Artisan Software Tools Ltd  
Email: 
paul.whiston@artisansoftwaretools.com 
 
Project website: www.saturnsysml.eu 
 
Partners:  
Artisan Software Tools (UK) 
Intracom S.A. Telecom Solutions (GR) 
Thales Security Systems S.A.S. (F) 
Extessy AG (D) 
Paderborn University (D) 
University of Cantabria (E) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2008.01.01 
Total Cost: € 3 747 208 
EC Contribution: € 2 450 000  
 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-216807 
SATURN 
SysML bAsed modelling, archteTUre exploRation, simulation and 
syNthesis for complex systems 
KEYWORDS: SysML, UML, MARTE, SystemC, VHDL 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
SATURN’s goal is to bridge the current gap between 
modelling and verification/synthesis in UML based designs of 
Embedded Systems that are equally composed of HW and 
SW. 
To do this, the UML profile for MARTE is evaluated for its 
complementary application with SysML, and significantly 
improved adding formal semantics of different Models of 
Computation for integrated modelling and verification 
environments. By bridging this gap, SATURN expects to 
demonstrate a significant reduction in time-to-market. 
This will be delivered through: 
• the augmentation of SysML with MARTE, 
• the use of MARTE as a platform to integrate SysML with 
a run-time environment for cross-domain verification, 
• the automatic generation of implementable descriptions 
for both hardware (SystemC/VHDL) and embedded 
software (C/C++) components of the targeted system, 
and 
• the integration of different abstraction layers allowing 
seamless integration at functional and target architecture 
level. 
Results are validated by two complex industrial proof-of-
concept case studies covering a smart camera system and an 
outdoor broadband wireless telecom system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The consortium also includes two major European 
Universities: Paderborn University & University of Cantabria. 
SATURN enables Artisan to build on its leading position in 
engineering based UML tools (extending SysML based on 
Artisan Studio) while Extessy will benefit from the project by 
increasing their respective market in verification 
infrastructures. Taking advantage of the open platform of 
Extessy AG, the SATURN process will be extremely flexible, 
and integrate with different third party verification tools and 
implementations. Through contributions to MARTE 
standardisation, project results will be exploited both during 
the project and will persist long after the project has 
completed. 
SATURN  will focus on 
SysML with MARTE, 
auto-generaration of 
SystemC/VHDL and the 
verification and 
simulation of systems 
SATURN combines two 
SME tool vendors (Artisan 
and Extessy AG) with 
leading system houses 
(Intracom S.A. Telecom 
Solutions & Thales 
Security Systems S.A.S). 
 
 
 
At A Glance: TERESA 
 
Trusted computing Engineering for 
Resource constrained Embedded 
Systems Applications 
 
 
Project Coordinator:  
Name: Antonio Kung 
Institution: TRIALOG 
Email: antonio.kung@trialog.com 
 
Project Technical Manager:  
Name: Cyril Grepet 
Institution: TRIALOG 
Email: cyril.grepet@trialog.com 
 
Project website: www.teresa-project.org 
 
Partners:  
TRIALOG (France) 
IRIT (France) 
Fraunhofer SIT (Germany) 
escrypt (Germany) 
Universität Siegen (Germany) 
Ikerlan-IK4 (Spain) 
 
Duration: 36 months 
Start: 2009.11.01 
Total Cost: € 3.79 million  
EC Contribution: € 2.9 million 
 
Contract Number: INFSO-ICT-248410 
TERESA 
Trusted computing Engineering for Resource constrained 
Embedded Systems Applications 
The goal of TERESA is to define, demonstrate and validate an engineering 
discipline for trust that is adapted to resource constrained embedded systems 
KEYWORDS: Trust, Security, Dependability, Patterns, Resource Constrained 
Embedded Systems, Model Driven Engineering. 
RESEARCH PROJECTS 
Embedded Systems Design 
 
 
Main Objectives 
 
The goal of TERESA is to define, demonstrate and 
validate an engineering discipline for trust that is 
adapted to resource constrained embedded systems. 
We define trust as the degree with which security and 
dependability requirements are met.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
• They are used by different application sectors. 
• Computing resources are mostly statically 
determined and allocated through a process 
consisting of a configuration phase and a building 
phase. 
• They are generally high integrity systems with 
strong assurance requirements. They therefore 
use advanced engineering disciplines. 
 
TERESA has the following objectives: 
• Provide guidelines for the specification of sector 
specific RCES trusted computing engineering. 
Software process engineers in a given sector can 
then use the guidelines to define a trusted 
computing engineering process that is integrated 
with the software engineering process used in 
their RCES sector. 
• Define a trusted computing engineering approach 
that is suited to the following sectors:  
- Automotive 
- Home control 
- Industry control 
- Metering 
TERESA will focus 
on trust, security and 
dependability in 
resource constrained 
embedded systems.
 
Resource Constrained 
Embedded systems 
(RCES) are 
characterised as 
follows:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected Impact 
 
TERESA contributes to the security and reliability of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
through the increased productivity of embedded 
system development. The engineering process 
promotes the separation of engineering concerns. It 
provides application designers with the following 
benefits: 
• The reuse of state-of-the-art S&D solutions.  
• The advantage of MDE and pattern based 
approaches. The MDE approach allows the reuse 
of S&D artefacts at an earlier stage of design. 
• The repository access tool allows application 
designers to have the advantage of MDE even 
though they do not use MDE for application 
design and are not experts in modelling. 
TERESA's engineering process takes into account 
domain specific processes. This allows for the 
support of specific standards, as well as the 
assurance of the approach.  
TERESA's open repository facilitates the emergence 
of new tools for repository access. This will in turn 
encourage the emergence and growth of new 
companies. 
TERESA contributes to European leadership in 
embedded system design and competitiveness in the 
area of trusted computing engineering of resource 
constrained embedded systems. 
In the future, new systems used for the Internet, for 
alternative paths to ICT components and systems, 
and for ICT sustainable development will be resource 
constrained embedded systems. By focusing on the 
trusted computing engineering aspects of such 
systems, TERESA will contribute to the advent of 
such breakthroughs. 
 
Technical Approach 
 
Patterns 
Patterns are widely used today to specify 
architecture and design aspects. They refer to 
templates which describe solutions for commonly 
occurring problems. A key advantage is that 
security and dependability experts can provide 
patterns which might not be available in companies 
involved in the development of RCES. The 
TERESA vision is that Security and Dependability 
(S&D) patterns that are derived from and 
associated with domain specific models will help 
application developers to integrate application 
building blocks with S&D building blocks. 
 
Models 
Model Driven Engineering (MDE) is a technique for 
software development. Models are transformed into 
another one up to the generation of the application. 
MDE engineering is widely used in embedded 
systems where assurance requirements are crucial. 
TERESA advocates the use of a model-based 
approach for defining patterns and developing 
applications. 
 
Repository 
Trust is adapted to resource constrained 
embedded systems and must take into account the 
requirements of all sectors, since not all RCES 
have the same needs. The TERESA approach 
uses a repository of S&D patterns. 
 
Process Validation in Different Sectors 
The engineering process for resource constrained 
embedded systems will be validated in the systems 
of four application sectors: automotive, home 
control, industry control, and metering. 
 
 
Key Issues 
 
TERESA follows a model-based approach which 
uses S&D patterns: 
• Application sector trust models are defined as 
profiles (e.g. UML, SysML profiles), based on a 
common trust meta-model. 
• S&D platform independent patterns are 
identified and defined for each application 
sector, while some patterns can be used by 
several application sectors. 
• The S&D repository saves all patterns. The 
TERESA process will provide guidelines to 
define when and how to apply these patterns 
through the repository. 
• Formal properties of S&D are defined and 
validated for patterns belonging to application 
sectors requiring a certain level of assurance. 
• Platform-dependent implementation of the 
patterns is guided by precise requirements. 
 

