 
Visiting Address: Smedjegatan 37 
Postal Adress: P.O. Box 325, SE-631 05 Eskilstuna, Sweden 
Phone: +46 16 153 600 Fax: +46 16 153 610 
Visiting Address: Högskoleplan 1 
Postal Adress: P.O. Box 883, SE-721 23 Västerås, Sweden 
Phone: +46 21 101 300 Fax: +46 21 101 460 
Web: www.mdh.se/idt 
E-mail: idtexp@mdh.se  
 
 
 
1 (5) 
 
School of Innovation, Design and Engineering  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Study programme: Embedded systems 
 
Objectives 
About 99 percent of all computers today are embedded – they are 
found in cell phones, game consoles, digital cameras, cars, airplanes, 
medical equipment, home appliances, robots, etcetera. The market for 
embedded systems is enormous, and the industry's demand for high-
skilled experts in these areas is constantly increasing.  
We offer a top-quality education in embedded systems, with world-
known expert teachers, industrial student projects, and closely related 
to our world-known research in the area. Embedded Systems is the 
most intensive research area at Mälardalen University and it is among 
top-five research centras in the world in embedded systems. 
Upon successful completion, our students will be highly competitive 
on the national and international job market, both in the industry as 
high-skilled expert and in the academia as a researcher or prospective 
PhD student. After studies, the students will be able to make a career 
as e.g., engineers, project leaders, system architects, programmers or 
researchers in the fields of e.g., automotive industry, robotics, 
telecom, industrial process control, consumer electronic, etc. 
 
Knowledge and Understanding 
After completion of this course block the student will show: 
• knowledge and understanding of fundamental embedded systems 
design paradigms, architectures, possibilities and challenges, both 
with respect to software and hardware,  
 
2 (5) 
 
• a wide competence from different areas of technology, especially 
from computer engineering, robotics, electronics, intelligent systems 
and mechatronics. 
• deep state-of-the-art theoretical knowledge in the areas of real-time 
systems, artificial intelligence, learning systems, sensor and 
measuring systems, and their interdisciplinary nature needed for 
integrated hardware/software development of embedded systems. 
• ability to analyze a system both as whole and in the included parts, 
to understand how these parts interact in the functionality and 
properties of the system, and 
• understanding and experience of state-of-the-practice industrial 
embedded systems and intelligent embedded system development. 
 
Aptitudes and Accomplishments 
After completion of this course block the student will be able to: 
• practically apply gained theoretical knowledge in order to design, 
analyze and implement embedded systems, e.g. integrating 
embedded subsystems and applications in building a fully functional 
autonomous robot. 
• apply formal method, testing, verification, validation and simulation 
techniques and tools in order to engineer reliable and safe embedded 
systems, 
• demonstrate a deeper understanding of the electronics and physical 
principles used for embedded biomedical measuring systems 
• communicate their knowledge to engineers and non-engineers, both 
orally and in writing, and 
• interact effectively in system development teams involving people 
from different cultures and backgrounds. 
 
Ability to Evaluate and Assess 
After completion of this block the student will: 
• be able to locate, read, understand and review research papers, and 
hence be familiar with the state-of-the-art in embedded systems, 
• be able to choose appropriate methodological and analytical tools to 
analyze and interpret research results both quantitatively and 
qualitatively, and 
• have skills such as self-reflection, critical reasoning and the ability to 
manage complex problems. 
Language 
The block is taught solely in English. 
Special Eligibility Requirements 
 
 
3 (5) 
 
Completed Bachelor’s degree (or equivalent) of 3 years (180 ECTS credits) or 
more, in an engineering subject or computer science, of which at least one 
semester (30 ECTS credits) in computer engineering, computer science or 
electronics that include courses in programming corresponding 15 ECTS 
credits. At least 22,5 ECTS credits in Mathematics/Applied Mathematics are 
required. English B is required for Swedish students. Foreign students are 
required to submit a TOEFL test result, minimum score 550 with a TWE 
score of at least 4 (PBT) or 79 with a TWE score of at least 17 (iBT) or an 
IELTS test result with an overall band score of minimum 6,0 and no band 
score below 5,0 or equivalent. 
Selection 
Selection is based on the number of academic credits. 
Contents 
 
The course block consists of a project related part and a theoretical 
coursework part.   Several projects are supplied by our industrial partners, 
and are solved in collaboration with them. The aim with sharp industrial 
projects is to prepare students for work in industry directly after the 
completion of their education, and to make our students are highly 
competitive on the national and international job market. 
 
The course part provides adequate theoretical knowledge to solve the 
problems that the students are faced to. It consists of three areas: 
1) Methodology – provides necessary methods and tools for 
successful project management. 
2) Embedded Systems – provides knowledge about development 
of safety-critical, real-time applications for small and 
distributed embedded devices. It also covers hardware for 
embedded systems, energy efficiency, testing and debugging, 
communication, etc. 
3) Intelligent systems – provides knowledge about learning 
systems, advanced sensor and measurement systems, in the 
context of embedded applications and medical devices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 (5) 
 
The table below gives an overview of the individual course units per study 
semester.  
Semester 1 (Fall) Semester 2 (Spring) 
 
DVA317 – Project methodology, 7.5 
ECTS cred. 
DVA316 – Embedded Systems I, 7.5 
DVA404 – Embedded Systems II, 
7.5  
DVA408 – Project in Embedded 
Systems, 7.5  
 
 
DVA406 – Intelligent systems, 7.5  
ELA402 – Biomedical engineering, 
7.5  
DVA409 – Project in intelligent 
embedded systems, 15  
 
 
The details about the courses can be found in their syllabuses at: 
http://www.mdh.se/studieinformation/kursplaner.jsp  
 
Choices within the block 
The student will be given a possibility to choose between several different 
projects within the project courses.  
Host School 
School of Innovation, Design and Engineering 
 
Quality Assurance 
The program is continuously evaluated by the steering committee that 
consists of the representatives from the academia, students, and industrial 
partners.  The School of Innovation, Design and Engineering (IDT) is 
responsible for the planning of the program, for the dissemination of 
information about the program, for guiding its students, and for an on-going 
evaluation of the program. Evaluation of courses plays an important part in 
periodic revisions of the program  
Research Base 
 
Embedded systems is the most research-intensive research area in 
Mälardalen University and consists of two research profiles: Mälardalen 
Real-Time research Centre (MRTC) and Intelligent Sensor Systems (ISS). 
MRTC is a national leader in Embedded Systems research. Research at 
MRTC has a dominating focus on Embedded Software, with a mission is to 
provide research excellence that enable industry to take advantage of the 
 
5 (5) 
 
opportunity provided by software in products and production systems. 
Within the ISS profile, research is multidisciplinary and spans over areas 
such as Biomedical Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, Computer 
Communication and Electronic Circuit Design. The research is applied, 
focusing towards mobile, intelligent sensor systems leading to increased 
safety and effectiveness within industry, care, healthcare and sports 
medicine. Both MRTC and ISS are involved in delivering of this course block. 
Hence, the courses will be given by active researchers in the field, and they 
will contain state-of-the-art research results. 
Industrial Cooperation 
Our ambition is to be in the middle of reality. Therefore our activities in 
education and research are performed in close cooperation and co-
production with industry, organizations and public communities both 
locally, regionally, nationally and internationally. This course block is 
supported by several industrial partners, most of them actively involved in 
the education through industrial projects for students, mentorship and guest 
lectures. We use our industrial partners to assure the quality and industrial 
relevance of our educational programs. They provide us sharp industrial 
equipment, give guest lectures at our courses, organize industrial visits, 
provide internships and theses for our students, and, whenever possible, give 
employment to our students.  
Equality and equal opportunities 
Mälardalen University has established bodies and procedures that deal with 
equal opportunities, gender balance, and social equity. We have norms and 
routines for ensuring fair selection and provide specific support for different 
groups related to equality or additional support for the needed groups. 
Computer engineering is an area in which traditionally female students are 
less participating than male students. For this reason we will increase efforts 
to attract more female students.  
 
Furthermore, MDH is equipped to accommodate students with various 
disabilities. Disabled students have their own service, which can help in 
arranging any extra equipment necessary to make their stay as convenient as 
possible. For example, there is special equipment for students with reduced 
sight and hearing. The universities has also specialized support for students 
with dyslexia and are equipped to accommodate students with various other 
disabilities. A common factor of most of our buildings is that they are either 
new or have been painstakingly renovated to provide support for disabled 
students. 
 
 

