Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-1 
Wireless Cameras Network for Intelligent 
Traffic Surveillance System   
 
Zainab Nazar Khalil Wafi1, R.B. Ahmad1, Paulraj M P2 
1,School of Computer and Communication Engineering  
2School of Mechatronic Engineering  
E-mail (zainabwafi@yahoo.com) 
 
 
 
Abstract- Wireless Networks (WNs) have attracted wide interests 
in both academic and industrial communities due to their 
diversity of applications. In this paper a Wireless Camera 
Network (WCN) which utilizes advanced embedded system & 
wireless network (WNs) protocol for networks used to improve 
motorways safety from abnormal situations. The system consist 
of numbers of embedded smart cameras connected via wi-fi and 
are deployed along a motorway and connected via wireless 
network (wi-fi) to be an eye for operators. The system will 
capture and interpret images (which may cause danger to 
motorway users) and an alarm system will be triggered to 
inform motorway operators for immediate actions. Various 
algorithms for image processing and object recognition will be 
implemented for image interpretations. At the same time, 
images from network smart cameras will be sent for storage to a 
server for record purposes.  
 
Keywords - wireless camera network (WCN),                        
wireless networks (WNs), embedded system, GNU/Linux, smart 
camera, Image Processing, Object recognition.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
All Wireless communication has benefited our lives in 
computer network which leads to significant changes in our 
working environment and habits due to usage of   mobile 
systems. Wireless and Wireless Networks are now replacing 
the use of cables between computers and electronic devices 
[1]. Wireless network was first used for military missions. 
Now it is being deployed in wide range of civil applications 
due to its size and affordable cost [2]. Now that the wi-fi or 
other wireless technology has become mature, it is also 
possible to design a Wireless Camera Network (a 
combination of image processing embedded system and 
wireless network) for monitoring purposes.  There are various 
embedded system platforms that can be implemented for this 
project such as FPGA, DSP chips other micro controller 
chips. However Single Board Computer based on 
GNU/Linux operating system is chosen due to its flexibility, 
sustainability, and open source.  
 
II. LITRETURE REVIEW 
 
    There are works that try to make use of Wireless 
Network (WN) for various kinds of applications such as 
those reported in [3] and [4]. In [3] it focused on hardware 
design while [4] was on high level algorithms for controlling 
traffic lights. Also in [5] Zang and Forshaw proposed a 
parallel system for extracting information about the speed and 
direction of traffic movement, generating descriptions of 
movement with specified regions (‘cells’) on the road. This 
system did not generate information about vehicle size or 
shape, or about the number of vehicles. Harlow and Peng 
described methods for processing range imagery and 
performing vehicle detection and classification. Kastrinaki et. 
al. presented an overview of image processing and analysis 
tools used for traffic applications on traffic monitoring and 
automatic vehicle guidance[5]. In [6] Georgiana, Kien and 
Rui explored the advantages of employing Internet-connected 
to enhance e-transportation with the ability to respond to 
terrorist threats and other human-caused disasters. The 
surface transportation system is of critical importance in 
responding rapidly and effectively to various human-caused 
disasters. The significance of their work consists of 
enhancing the surface transportation aspects of homeland 
security by leveraging e-technologies in the street network to 
develop a Smart Traffic Evacuation Management System 
(STEMS). As part of intelligent transportation systems, 
Internet-connected sensors and cameras have become 
ubiquitous along roads and motorways, enabling many novel 
e-transportation applications.  Recent advancement in sensor 
technologies has facilitated the development of new e-
transportation applications, by providing traffic data with 
better spatial and temporal resolution, accuracy, precision, 
repeatability and consistency [6]. 
 
Sam Tran Phu Manh and M.S.and T.A.Yang have devised 
a method, Optimized Communication and Organization 
(OCO), for efficient target tracking in wireless sensor 
networks and also they developed Optimized Computation 
and energy dissipation to maximize the lifetime of the sensor 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-2 
network [7]. Unfortunately, none of the work has been 
discussed on how to design and implement practical protocols 
and systems based on WN and it cameras (nodes) in order to 
improve existing traffic systems. The problem of collision 
detection has been discussed in [8] and [9]; however, their 
works are based on the above-mentioned technologies such 
as automatic machine vision so they also have the problems 
in terms of deployment as described earlier [10]. 
 
Interest on image processing and its applications started in 
1921 where the focus was on developing devices which could 
capture high resolution images. Since then various digital 
images processing and techniques were researched for 
various applications. This led to the appearance of the new 
computer systems and the space orbit programs to show the 
capability of processing images. The use of the technique of 
the image processing started in California 1964 by Pasadena 
State to improve the images they got from the Jet Propulsion 
space labs when they tried to process moon images that they 
received from the space ship Ranger7, and then from that 
time field of image processing underwent a wide 
improvement and development [11]. 
 
Computer Graphics (CG) is a vast, important, and popular 
discipline. From its beginning around 1970, CG is now a 
mature discipline built on a strong mathematical basis and 
with applications in an ever increasing number of areas. CG 
is interesting because its results are visual and often 
impressive. It is thus a discipline that attracts many scientists, 
but it is also useful for researchers as it provides them with 
suitable knowledge of the algorithms they will use to create 
graphical applications and representations of all sorts of data 
[12]. 
 
III. OBJECTIVES AND RESULTS 
 
The main objective of this research is to design an applied 
image processing techniques using single board computer 
platform for motorway surveillance system. The system will 
be a replacement of human for triggering alarms which if 
something dangerous has happened or potential horrific 
scenario (potential accidents) is about to happen. In general 
this project consists of a smart camera system interconnected 
with wireless technology for traffic surveillance which shall 
call Wireless Camera Network (WCN). Images might also be 
stored in a server for future usage and at the same time, the 
smart camera will perform image processing for potential 
dangers. 
 
IV. METHODOLOGY  
 
The proposed Wireless Camera Network (WCN) system 
consists of a collection of nodes and a base station. A node is 
a microprocessor which handles and processes data from the 
camera sensors, local memory, radio and battery, and a base 
station which is responsible for receiving and processing data 
collected from various nodes and cameras; and sending 
controlling signals of the situation [13].The main drawback is 
the energy constraint as it seems impractical to change or 
recharge a battery [2]. But a solar cell can be used to offset 
this drawback. 
 
So the Wireless cameras Network (WCN) are embedded 
computers which are formed in a large system that operate 
functionally as in ad hoc mode or in instruction mode(i.e. to 
say they are interconnected with each other to form a large 
computerized system network) they may be part of , or 
installed in , power generation system or in industrial 
production factories or various construction equipment 
schemes or robotic or mechanical equipments or 
communication system or in remotely controlled irrigation 
schemes or airport terminals to monitor, control and 
command the functionality of the system they may be fed by 
power supply operated by solar energy in the isolated or 
remotely placed equipments. It combines the function of 
LLC, MAC, RTS/CTS and other function for the data transfer 
according the OSI standard layer and to implement the 
interconnection that included sensor to provide reliable data 
transfer through specified communication channel which may 
spread spectrum orthognal frequency division multiplexing or 
other types of communication. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-3 
The brain of a smart camera is a special processing module 
that performs application specific information processing. 
The design of a smart camera as an embedded system is 
challenging because video processing has insatiable demand 
for performance and power, but at the same time embedded 
systems place considerable constraints on the design. Today, 
GestureCam, and FPGA-based smart camera can recognize 
simple hand gestures. The first completed version of 
GestureCam has shown promising real-time performance and 
is being tested in several desktop HCI (Human Computer 
Interface) applications. Y. Shi and T. Tsui developed a smart 
camera that can recognize simple hand gestures. The camera 
was built using a single chip of FPGA as processing device. 
The first version prototype of GestureCam has shown very 
promising real-time performance and recognition rate [14]. 
 
V. COMPARISIONS 
 
 Wire and Wireless: 
The use of wireless instead of wires is recommended when 
possible. The wireless network uses different technologies 
from the wired network and therefore has considerably lower 
bandwidth capabilities. Because of this, any high volume 
traffic applications, such as streaming video will not only be 
slow for the clients who use that application, but all other 
clients connecting to the same AP will be similarly affected. 
Servers are not permitted on the WLAN [15].The main 
difference is the type of technology and the type of 
installation used. However there is no difference when it 
comes to the system's capabilities and effectiveness [16]. 
 
The wireless model includes both 802.11g (wireless) and 
10/100 Ethernet (wired) connections. The wired-only model 
has only the Ethernet interface. Aside from that, they are the 
same [17].A wired network and a wireless network function 
similarly. Table (1) shows the main differences in the two 
networks [18]. 
 
From all above recommend the use of Wireless Camera 
Network, because the use of wires will cause mess in 
installation. 
 
 Smart and Normal digital camera: 
The important differences between a smart camera and 
"normal" camera, such as consumer digital camera and 
camcorder, lie in two aspects. The first is in the camera 
system architecture. A smart camera usually has a special 
image processing unit containing one or more high 
performance microprocessors to run intelligent ASIP 
(application specific information processing) algorithms, in 
which the primary objective is not to improve image quality 
but to extract information and knowledge from images. The 
image processing hardware in a normal camera is usually 
simpler and less powerful with the main aim of achieving 
good visual image quality. The other main difference is in the 
primary camera output. A smart camera output is either the 
feature extracted from the captured images or a high level 
description of the scene, which is fed in to an automated  
 
TABLE І 
COMPARING BETWEEN WIRE AND WIRELESS CONNECTIONS 
 
control system, while for normal camera the primary output is 
the processed version of captured image for human 
consumption. For this reason, normal video camera have 
large output bandwidth requirements (indirect proportion to 
resolution of the image sensor used), while smart camera can 
have very low data bandwidth requirements at the output (it 
can be just one bit in the simplest case, with '1' meaning 'there 
is motion' and '0' meaning 'there is no motion).  
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Image 1. Network Camera and Smart Cameras 
 
 
VI. THE MAIN STRUCTURE 
 
Detection and recognition of the level of congestion and 
abnormal situations at highways are very important problem 
and they are valuable source of information in traffic 
management. Although it is just one of the aspects that make 
up a traffic management system, it seems to be a crucial point 
for gathering information which is obtained from video 
system [5].  
 
Today the initial cost of video systems is decreasing and 
its use is increasing. As an example, video cameras were first 
used in traffic management for roadway surveillance based 
on their ability to transmit closed-circuit television (CCTV) 
imagery to a human operator for interpretation. However, 
present day technology uses video image processing 
techniques to automatically analyze the scene of interest and 
extract real-time information for traffic surveillance and 
control; this facilitates the development of Internet-based 
traffic information systems. Currently available traffic-
sensing devices provide a wide range of information, from 
tracking vehicle presence, volume and speed, to detecting 
traffic density or travel time. The ubiquitous deployment of 
sensors in the transportation network, along expressways and 
at intersections of local streets, is complemented by the 
increased accessibility of the collected real-time and 
historical traffic data over the Web. Several approaches for 
sensor data dissemination over the Internet have been 
proposed in the literature, as an example, a browsing 
environment providing access to real-time and historical 
traffic data over the Web is the Freeway Performance 
Measurement System (PeMS), currently that is deployed in 
California. Therefore the environment for finding and sharing 
cameras data and applications over the Internet would 
encourages a more spread out deployment of cameras and  
would facilitates the development of more and more 
transportation applications adaptable to real-time traffic 
conditions. Advances in cameras data dissemination have 
been major factor that has motivated the researchers to 
explore new e-technologies for improving the surface 
transportation aspect of homeland security [6]. 
 
This part discusses the WCN application and the basic 
design of it. By consider that Camera and image wireless 
network could further develop real time large scale system of 
computerized city motorway system and highway road 
monitoring and control system. This could be achieved by 
installing camera sensors on the highway and at certain 
junctions to monitor highway users & pedestrians. It can also 
monitor road illumination and other environmental also 
security problems. The cameras processor units can monitor 
the highway, and the data from the cameras are sent to mobile 
police cars unit subordinated by area section police station 
where the main server which is responsible of monitoring the 
highways of different parts of the city is installed, this station 
is placed as base station where it receives the cameras display 
through necessary switching unit. These units can send an 
over ride control signal to the specified or respective node. 
 
The energy source of a node (cameras) is generally 
considered non-rechargeable. Thus, the most researchers are 
concerned in tradeoffs between energy conserving and 
performance. 
 
A wireless radio is the most energy consuming unit of a 
node. It can operate in three or four different states: 
transmitting, receiving, idle and sleeping [19]. The 
implementing and control these states are done by using some 
of important protocols such as the MAC s protocols and the 
best protocol should be chosen to solve the energy problem. 
There is the possibility of using laser technique to send data 
and video signal in optical fiber cable to avoid external 
electrical interference, and also to have a very large 
bandwidth to accommodate video signal and large amount of 
data from the large number of sensors cameras and other AP. 
Figure 1 shows the process of the system above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure.1. System Process 
 
VII. THE INSTALLATION 
 
Below are the steps that should followed to solve the 
problem found in the system process: 
1. Distribute a group of camera sensors on highway 
and at traffic light and junctions of the main roads. 
2. Check the power and energy of each nodes by 
sending signal to the server that is responsible of 
checking the nodes situation 
3. Use some recognitions protocols and some 
transformation functions such as Fourier 
transformation and Gaussian transformation to 
recognise the edges of the objects. Filtering 
algorithms, wavelet Transform protocols could be 
used too. Then get way classify the objects in the 
road. 
4. Install new programming method which is a large 
library of intelligent algorithms OpenCv (Computer 
Vision) work in GNU-Linux under Ubuntu to 
recognise the abnormal objects situation in the 
image.  
5. Send the image data to the base station by sending 
signals to the nearest node which leads to the base 
station. 
6. Analyse the signal and data received then send that 
particular signal (image of object and it information) 
from the base station to the patrol cars and police 
station. 
 
Some basic theories of processing are needed to    
analyse the image: 
 Processors Image 
 The Digitizers 
 Digital Computers 
 Memory Devices 
 Displays and Recording devices 
Figure (2) shows the operation that takes place among the 
elements of the Digital Image System, note that the line 
between the digitizer and the digital computer refers to the 
perfect situation when one of the connecters has been 
connected [10].  
 
 
 
Figure.2. Processing Digital Images processing System Components 
 
 
VIII. SIMULATION EVALUATION ALGORITHEM  
 
The necessary Image Recognition Application that 
recognizes the objects captured by the camera will be used to 
check the abnormal of situation in the highway points, the 
applications would be done and implement by using  gcc 
under GNU-Linux and Open CV libraries. The Open 
Computer Vision library is a collection of algorithms and 
sample codes for various computer vision problems.  The 
library is compatible with IPL (Intel's Image processing 
library) and if available then using IPP (Intel Integrated 
performance primitives) for better performance. Open CV 
provides low level portable data types and operators, and a 
set of high level functionalities for video acquisitions, image 
processing functions and analysis, structural analysis, motion 
analysis and object tracking, object recognition, camera 
calibration and 3D reconstruction. 
 
  Notice that the system should be built according to time 
delay, priority, distance of cameras, grouping of cameras of a 
number of sections, communications between the cameras, 
data scheduling, and the necessary response of the system. 
Extracting information about the motion of road traffic can be 
done by using image analysis, then the Algorithm in [20] 
which done by Zhang and M. R. B. Forshaw in 1997 could be 
used. 
 
 
 
Control 
Signal 
Control 
Signal 
Video 
Data   
Video Data  
Main 
base 
station 
Camera 
& sensor 
Mobile 
police cars 
Control 
Signal 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-6 
The algorithm contains the following steps:  
1. Cell map generation: Traffic movement on the road 
usually shows some regular patterns at certain 
locations. 
2. Data acquisition: Seven successive digitized TV 
frames are acquired and input to the transputer array, 
which calculates a single estimation of speed and 
direction for each cell at a given instant of time. 
3. Image Pre processing: A median filter is a commonly 
used, powerful noise reduction method in image 
processing. For every pixel in the image, the median 
grey value among itself and its immediate neighbors 
is chosen as the new pixel value. 
4. Corner Detection: The comer detector implements a 
comer response calculation and spatiotemporal 
analysis. 
5. Neural network for finding feature displacements: 
Matching of corners is performed by several 
Hopfield-type neural networks. Although neural 
networks are inherently parallel structures, each 
network is implemented sequentially on a single 
transputer. 
6. Interpretation of road traffic scenes: After matching 
corners in the three successive images, a 
displacement vector can be generated for each cell 
with the same transputer as was used in matching. 
This gives an estimate of the speed and direction of 
motion of objects at the cell location. 
This information, together with knowledge of the expected 
traffic behavior, forms a complementary description of road 
traffic within the scene [20]. 
 
There is  different  problems  in traffic surveillance , in 
this  paper  we  try solve two of  them which is  car  parking 
illegally and  cars  turn from illegally  places. 
The programming is written in OpenCV under GNU 
Linux and it contains the following steps: 
1. Capture Images frames from camera and save them to do 
real time operations. 
2. Specify ROIs (Region Of  Interest) and  classify  the  
ROI places  when there  is  no problem on it ( no 
vehicles on the  road). 
3. Do operations to the next  frames by  comparing  it  with 
the first ROI and  check the  histogram, then the  
problem will be discovered as vehicles stand  in the  road 
illegally  or  cars  move on  the  opposite  of  the road . 
4. Check the  type of  vehicles by  use  object  recognitions  
methods also can do that  by analyze  the  size  of 
vehicles (height  and  width as  x ,y) . 
5. Send an image signal to the patrol car or the nearest 
police station. 
Figure 3 shows how the basic processed in the system. 
 
 
Figure.3. Flowchart of Data Processing in Wireless Smart Camera 
 
 
 
IX. FUTURE PLAN 
 
Another camera can be used in future to recognize the 
template number of the vehicles which will work by sending 
signal from the first camera to inform the second camera to 
start it job recognize the numbers  for cars that break the 
traffic rules . Another suggestion could be proposed by allow 
voice communication in the wireless camera network. This 
can be done by placing microphones at the camera sites. 
When the patrol cars discover some abnormal scenes, he can 
speak to that location via the WCN to warn or make an 
announcement; in this situation SBC board provided with on 
board audio will be need. 
 
X. CONCLUSION 
 
 This paper described the use of embedded smart camera 
as a part of WCN with SBC board system that is used to get 
safe and efficient secure system in highways and motorways. 
Here we depend on some theories, functions and protocols 
that work using OpenCV libraries and GNU under Linux 
Operating system. 
The program could be run in real time by use both HP 
Centrino Duo laptop with built in camera and HP Desktop 
SCSI connected with usb Logitech camera also can run with 
recorded video file. The program tested during day time .But 
not during night time yet, because night situation require a 
type of camera that not affected by the lights of the cars and 
preferred to use infrared camera for ensure getting a good 
results in case of there is  any problem of street lightning  
system and if the cars switch off their lights  
In future the use of WCN can be a very promising 
technology. 
 
 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Man-Machine Systems (ICoMMS) 
11 – 13 October 2009, Batu Ferringhi, Penang, MALAYSIA 
 
2A3-7 
 REFERENCES 
 
[1] http://www.ieeexplore.ieee.org/book/0470848871.01.pdf , 
"Applications and requirements of wireless services", 
[2] I. Khemapech, I. Duncan and A. Miller ,"A Survey of Wireless Sensor 
Networks Technology",School of Computer Science /University of St 
Andrews/North Haugh 
http://pst.cs.standrews.ac.uk/publications/pdfs/khemapach05survey.pdf 
[3] http://www.media.mit.edu/resenv/vehicles.html 
[4] Wenjie, C., Lifeng, C., Zhanglong, C., Shiliang, T.: A realtime dynamic 
traffic control system based on wireless sensor network. International 
Conference Workshops on Parallel Processing, pp. 258-264 (June 2005) 
[5] Ang´elica Lozano, Giuseppe Manfredi , Luciano Nieddu,Laboratorio de 
Transporte y Sistemas Territoriales "An algorithm for the recognition of 
levels of congestion in road traffic problems", Instituto de Ingenier´I 
,Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico (UNAM), 
Mexico,Department of Political Science, Libera Universit´a, Rome, 
Italy, Department of Economics, Libera Universit´a , Rome Italy , June 
2007 
[6] Georgiana L. Hamza-Lup a, Kien A. Hua b, Rui Peng b "Leveraging e-
transportation in real-time traffic evacuation management ",     a 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Florida Atlantic 
University, 500NW California Blvd., Port St. Lucie, FL 34986, USA , b 
School of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, USA , 6 
December 2006 
[7] Sam Tran Phu Manh, M.S., T. A. Yang," Applying Image Processing 
Techniques to Simulate a Self-Organized Sensor Network For tracking 
objecs" The University of Houston Clear Lake,2005 
[8] Atev, S., Arumugam, H., Masoud, O., Janardan, R., Papanikolopoulos, 
N.P.:" A visionbased approach to collision prediction at traffic 
intersections". IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems. vol. 6(4) (2005) 
[9] Trivedi, M.M., Gandhi, T., McCall, J.: Looking-In and Looking-Out of 
a Vehicle: Computer-Vision-Based Enhanced Vehicle Safety. IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 8(1) (2007) 
[10] Yi Lai, Yuan Zheng, and Jiannong Cao," Protocols for Traffic Safety 
Using Wireless Sensor Network", Internet and Mobile Computing Lab, 
Department of Computing, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong  
[11] Gonzalez Rafael C.; Wintz Paul A. "Digital Image Processing: Second 
Edition ", by. 1987 
[12] Eric Paquette_LESIA "Computer Graphics education in different 
curricula: analysis and proposal for courses", Software & IT 
Engineering Dept., E´cole de technologie (2005). 
[13] http://asae.frymulti.com/abstract.asp?aid=21878&t=2, ASABE 
Technical Library,© 2008 American Society of Agricultural and 
Biological Engineers 
[14] Yu Shi and Timothy Tsui " An FPGA- Based Smart Camera For 
Gesture Recognition in HCI Applications" , National ICT Australia,  
ACCV 2007, Part I, LNCS 4843, pp. 718–727, 2007.© Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg 2007.  
[15] http://www.mun.ca/cc/wireless_access/faq.php 
[16] http://www.protectionnetworks.com/faq.asp 
[17] http://www.slimdevices.com/pi_faq.html#about2-wiredwireless 
[18] http://www.banyandata.com/faq.php 
[19] Pawel Piotr Czapski , " A Survey: MAC Protocols For Applications Of 
Wireless Sensor Networks", School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore,  
[20] XU Zhang, M. R. B. FORSHAW " A Parallel Algorithim To Extract 
Information About The Motion Of Road Traffic Using Image Analysis" 
Centre for Transport Studies, University College London,  UK, 1997 
Elsevier Science Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 

