1
RFID Security and Privacy:
A Research Survey
Ari Juels
RSA Laboratories
ajuels@rsasecurity.com
28 September 2005
Abstract— This article surveys recent technical research on the
problems of privacy and security for RFID (Radio Frequency
IDentification).
RFID tags are small, wireless devices that help identify objects
and people. Thanks to dropping cost, they are likely to proliferate
into the billions in the next several years – and eventually into
the trillions. RFID tags track objects in supply chains, and are
working their way into the pockets, belongings and even the
bodies of consumers. This survey examines approaches proposed
by scientists for privacy protection and integrity assurance in
RFID systems, and treats the social and technical context of
their work. While geared toward the non-specialist, the survey
may also serve as a reference for specialist readers.
A condensed version of this survey will appear in the IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communication (J-SAC) in 2006.
Keywords: authentication, cloning, counterfeiting, EPC, privacy,
security, RFID
I. INTRODUCTION
RFID (Radio-Frequency IDentification) is a technology forautomated identification of objects and people. Human
beings are skillful at identifying objects under a variety of
challenge circumstances. A bleary-eyed person can easily pick
out a cup of coffee on a cluttered breakfast table in the
morning, for example. Computer vision, though, performs
such tasks poorly. RFID may be viewed as a means of
explicitly labeling objects to facilitate their “perception” by
computing devices.
An RFID device – frequently just called an RFID tag – is a
small microchip designed for wireless data transmission. It is
generally attached to an antenna in a package that resembles
an ordinary adhesive sticker. The microchip itself can be as
small as a grain of sand, some 0.4mm2 [82]. An RFID tag
transmits data over the air in response to interrogation by an
RFID reader.
In both the popular press and academic circles, RFID has
seen a swirl of attention in the past few years. One important
reason for this is the effort of large organizations, such as Wal-
Mart, Procter and Gamble, and the United States Department
of Defense, to deploy RFID as a tool for automated oversight
of their supply chains. Thanks to a combination of dropping
tag costs and vigorous RFID standardization, we are on the
brink of an explosion in RFID use.
Advocates of RFID see it as a successor to the optical
barcode familiarly printed on consumer products, with two
distinct advantages:
1) Unique identification: A barcode indicates the type of
object on which it is printed, e.g., “This is a 100g bar
of ABC brand 70% chocolate.” An RFID tag goes a step
further. It emits a unique serial number that distinguishes
among many millions of identically manufactured ob-
jects; it might indicate, e.g., that “This is 100g bar of
ABC brand 70% chocolate, serial no. 897348738.”1 The
unique identifiers in RFID tags can act as pointers to a
database entries containing rich transaction histories for
individual items.
2) Automation: Barcodes, being optically scanned, require
line-of-sight contact with readers, and thus careful phys-
ical positioning of scanned objects. Except in the most
rigorously controlled environments, barcode scanning
requires human intervention. In contrast, RFID tags
are readable without line-of-sight contact and without
precise positioning. RFID readers can scan tags at rates
of hundreds per second. For example, an RFID reader by
a warehouse dock door can today scan stacks of passing
crates with high accuracy. In the future, point-of-sale
terminals may be able to scan all of the items in passing
shopping carts [90].
Due to tag cost and a hodgepodge of logistical complica-
tions – like the ubiquity of metal shelving, which interferes
with RFID scanning – RFID tags are unlikely to appear
regularly on consumer items for some years. Retailers have
expressed interest, though, in ultimately tagging individual
items. Such tagging would, for instance, address the perennial
problem of item depletion on retail shelves, which is costly in
terms of lost sales.
Today, RFID is seeing fruition in the tagging of crates and
pallets, that is, discrete bulk quantities of items. RFID tagging
improves the accuracy and timeliness of information about the
movement of goods in supply chains.
The main form of barcode-type RFID device is known as an
EPC (Electronic Product Code) tag. An organization known as
EPCglobal Inc. [25] oversees the development of the standards
for these tags. Not surprisingly, EPCglobal is a joint venture
1In principle, barcodes can uniquely identify objects, of course; two-
dimensional barcodes on shipped packages do so, for instance. In practice –
particularly in retail environments – unique barcoding has proven impractical.
2
of the UCC and EAN, the bodies that regulate barcode use in
the United States and the rest of the world respectively.
EPC tags cost less than thirteen U.S. cents apiece in large
quantities at present [2]. Manufacturers and users hope to see
per-tag costs drop to five cents in the next few years [75]. RFID
readers cost several thousand dollars each, but it is likely that
their cost will soon drop dramatically.
In the quest for low cost, EPC tags adhere to a minimalist
design. They carry little data in on-board memory. The unique
index of an EPC tag, known as an EPC code, includes
information like that in an ordinary barcode, but serves also
as a pointer to database records for the tag. An EPC code
today can be up to 96 bits in length [47].2 Database entries for
tags, of course, can have effectively unlimited size, so that the
recorded history of a tag and its associated object can be quite
rich. EPCglobal has developed a public lookup system for
EPC tags called the ONS (Object Name Service), analogous
in name and operation with the DNS (Domain Name System).
The purpose of the ONS is to route general tag queries to the
databases of tag owners and managers.
In general, small and inexpensive RFID tags are passive.
They have no on-board power source; they derive their trans-
mission power from the signal of an interrogating reader.
Passive tags can operate in any of a number of different
frequency bands. LF (Low-Frequency) tags, which operate in
the 124 kHz – 135 kHz range, have nominal read ranges of
up to half a meter. HF (High-Frequency) tags, operating at
13.56 Mhz, have ranges up to a meter or more (but typically
on the order of tens of centimeters). UHF tags (Ultra High-
Frequency), which operate at frequencies of 860 MHz – 960
MHz (and sometimes 2.45GHz), have the longest range – up to
tens of meters. UHF tags, though, are subject to more ambient
interference than lower-frequency types. Later in this survey,
we enumerate the major standards for passive RFID devices.
Some RFID tags contain batteries. There are two such types:
semi-passive tags, whose batteries power their circuitry when
they are interrogated, and active tags, whose batteries power
their transmissions. Active tags can initiate communication,
and have read ranges of 100m or more. Naturally, they are
expensive, costing some $20 or more.
A. RFID today and tomorrow
Many of us already use RFID tags routinely. Examples
include:
• Proximity cards, that is, the contactless cards used for
building access.
• Automated toll-payment transponders – the small plaques
mounted in automobile windshields. (These are usually
semi-passive.)
• The ignition keys of many millions of automobiles, which
include RFID tags as a theft-deterrent.
• Payment tokens: In the United States, the SpeedPassTM
token for petrol station payments is an example. Contact-
2The expectation at the time of writing is that the EPC codes will soon
expand to a minimum of 128 bits in length – with extensions for 256 bits or
more.
less credit-cards, like American Express ExpressPayTM
and the Mastercard PayPassTM use RFID.
Some fifty million house pets around the world have RFID tags
implanted in their bodies, to facilitate return to their owners
should they become lost.
In a world where everyday objects carried RFID tags –
perhaps the world of the future – remarkable things would
be possible. Here are a few possibilities (among the myriad
that the reader might dream up):
• Smart appliances: By exploiting RFID tags in garments
and packages of food, home appliances could operate
more cleverly. Washing machines might select wash
cycles automatically, for instance, to avoid damage to
delicate fabrics. Your refrigerator might warn you when
the milk has expired or you have only one remaining
carton of yogurt – and could even transmit a shopping
list automatically to a home delivery service.3
• Shopping: In retail shops, consumers could check out
by rolling shopping carts past point-of-sale terminals.
These terminals would automatically tally the items,
compute the total cost, and perhaps even charge the
consumers’ RFID-enabled payment devices and transmit
receipts to their mobile phones. Consumers could return
items without receipts. RFID tags would act as indices
into database payment records, and help retailers track
the pedigrees of defective or contaminated items.
• Interactive objects: Consumers could interact with
RFID-tagged objects through their mobile phones. (Some
mobile phones already have RFID readers.) A consumer
could scan a movie poster to display showtimes on her
phone. She could obtain manufacturer information on a
piece of furniture she likes by waving her phone over it.
• Medication compliance: Research at Intel and the Uni-
versity of Washington [32] exploits RFID to facilitate
medication compliance and home navigation for the
elderly and cognitively impaired. As researchers have
demonstrated, for example, an RFID-enabled medicine
cabinet could help verify that medications are taken in a
timely fashion. More generally, RFID promises to bring
tremendous benefits to hospitals [30].
B. But what, really, is “RFID”?
We have discussed the basics of RFID and laid out some
evocative scenarios. Yet we have not formally defined the term
“RFID.” A wholly satisfying definition is elusive. But it is not
a mere pedantic exercise: The definition of RFID can have an
important impact on technical and policy discussions.4
In this article, we use “RFID” to denote any RF device
whose main function is identification of an object or per-
son. At the rudimentary end of the functional spectrum, this
3The company Merloni has built prototype RFID-enabled appliances [7].
4For example, in March 2005, Wired News published an article [16]
highlighting privacy concerns raised by a Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) project to issue RFID identification cards known as DAC cards (“DHS
access cards”). While vigilant about privacy concerns, DHS responded that
such concerns were largely misplaced, and resulted from a misunderstanding:
DAC cards, the agency said, would not be RFID devices, but ISO 14443
devices. (ISO 14443 is an international standard for proximity cards.)
3
definition excludes simple devices like retail inventory tags,
which merely indicate their presence and on/off status. It also
excludes portable devices like mobile phones, which do more
than merely identify themselves or their bearers. A broad
definition for “RFID” is appropriate because the technical
capabilities and distinctions among RF devices will drift over
time, and the privacy and authentication concerns that we
highlight in this paper apply broadly to RF identification
devices great and small. Most importantly, though, the names
of standards like ‘ISO 14443” or ”EPC Class-1 Gen-2” do
not trip off the tongue or inhere well in the mind. The term
“RFID” will unquestionably remain the popular one, and the
term according to which most people frame debate and policies
– a fact it behooves technologists to remember.
Of course, standards precisely define classes of RF devices.
It is worth briefly mentioning the major ones. ISO 18000 is
a multi-part standard that specifies protocols for a number
of different frequencies, including LF, HF, and UHF bands.
For UHF tags, the dominant standard will very likely be the
recently ratified EPCglobal Class-1 Gen-2 standard. For HF
tags, there are two main standards apart from ISO 18000. ISO
14443 (types A and B) is a standard for “proximity” RFID
devices; it has a nominal 10cm operating range. ISO 15693 is
a more recent HF standard for “vicinity” RFID devices; it can
achieve longer nominal ranges – up to 1m for large antenna
setups. (Mode 1 of ISO 18000 Part 3 is based on ISO 15693.)
Also of note is the NFC (Near-Field Consortium) stan-
dard (NFCIP-1/ECMA340, ISO 18092). Compatible with ISO
14443 and ISO 15693, this HF standard transcends the fixed
tag-reader model, in that an NFC device can operate as either
a reader or a tag, and thus either transmit or receive. Some
mobile phones today support NFC; many portable devices may
well in the future.
C. Security and Privacy Problems
1) Privacy: RFID raises two main privacy concerns for
users: clandestine tracking and inventorying.
RFID tags respond to reader interrogation without alerting
their owners or bearers. Thus, where read range permits,
clandestine scanning of tags is a plausible threat. As dis-
cussed above, most RFID tags emit unique identifiers, even
tags that protect data with cryptographic algorithms (as we
discuss below). In consequence, a person carrying an RFID tag
effectively broadcasts a fixed serial number to nearby readers,
providing a ready vehicle for clandestine physical tracking.
Such tracking is possible even if a fixed tag serial number is
random and carries no intrinsic data.
The threat to privacy grows when a tag serial number is
combined with personal information. For example, when a
consumer makes a purchase with a credit card, a shop can
establish a link between her identity and the serial numbers
of the tags on her person. Marketers can then identify and
profile the consumer using networks of RFID readers – both
inside shops and without. The problem of clandestine tracking
is not unique to RFID, of course. It affects many other wireless
devices, such as Bluetooth-enabled ones [51].
In addition to their unique serial numbers, certain tags –
EPC tags in particular – carry information about the items
to which they are attached. EPC tags include a field for the
“General Manager,” typically the manufacturer of the object,
and an “Object Class,” typically a product code, known for-
mally as a Stock Keeping Unit (SKU).5 (See [47] for details.)
Thus a person carrying EPC tags is subject to clandestine
inventorying. A reader can silently determine what objects she
has on her person, and harvest important personal information:
What types of medications she is carrying, and therefore what
illnesses she may suffer from; the RFID-enabled loyalty cards
she carries, and therefore where she shops; her clothing sizes
and accessory preferences, and so forth. This problem of
inventorying is largely particular to RFID.
Today the problems of clandestine RFID tracking and
inventorying are of limited concern, since RFID infrastructure
is scarce and fragmentary. As explained above, the tagging
of individual retail items is probably some years away. Once
RFID becomes pervasive, however, as is almost inevitable,
the privacy problem will assume more formidable dimen-
sions. One harbinger of the emerging RFID infrastructure is
Verisign’s EPC Discovery Service [48]. It creates a unified
view of sightings of individual EPC tags across organizations.
Figure 1 illustrates the threat of clandestine RFID invento-
rying as it might in principle emerge in the future.
Remark: Some people like to point out that mobile phones
already permit wireless physical tracking, and are practically
ubiquitous. Mobile phones, however, have on/off switches.
More importantly, mobile phones transmit signals receivable
only by specialized telecommunication equipment. The owner
of a mobile phone mainly reposes trust in her service provider.
By contrast, most RFID tags are scannable by commodity
RFID readers, which will soon be everywhere. Of course, mo-
bile handsets increasingly exploit new channels like Bluetooth
and WiFi, so some of the privacy distinctions between RFID
tags and mobile phones will erode. Mobile phones, though,
have fairly considerable computing power, and can support
sophisticated forms of access control.
There is already considerable political and media ferment
around RFID privacy. Several consumer advocacy groups
have mounted campaigns against RFID deployment in retail
settings. In 2003, for example, a boycott [3] caused Benetton
to disavow RFID-tagging plans for its garments (amid mis-
conceptions about the company’s plans [6]). In the same year,
a group of privacy organizations signed a position statement
on the use of RFID in consumer products [27].6
RFID privacy is already of concern in several areas of
everyday life:
• Toll-payment transponders: Automated toll-payment
transponders – small plaques positioned in windshield
5These fields are short numerical codes that are meaningful, like barcodes,
only upon translation. Services like the ONS will publicly translate General-
Manager codes into human-readable form. Manufacturers may or may not
choose to make their Object-Class codes publicly available. These codes will
be easy to determine, however, with or without reference to the manufacturer:
Scanning one instance of a given product type will reveal its Object Class.
6Participation in this movement is varied and colorful. It includes well
established civil liberties groups like the ACLU. It also includes at least one
highly visible RFID opponent motivated by a fear that RFID may fulfill the
prophesy of the Mark of the Beast from the Book of Revelation [15].
4
Fig. 1. An illustration of potential consumer privacy problems of RFID
corners – are commonplace worldwide. In at least one
celebrated instance, a court subpoenaed the data gathered
from such a transponder for use in a divorce case,
undercutting the alibi of the defendant [81].
• Euro banknotes: As early as 2001 [85], the media
reported plans by the European Central Bank to embed
RFID tags in banknotes as an anti-counterfeiting mea-
sure. This project seems increasingly implausible given
the attendant technical difficulties (not to mention the
purported target date of 2005). It has served off and on,
however, as a flashpoint for privacy concerns.7
• Libraries: Some libraries have implemented RFID sys-
tems to facilitate book check-out and inventory control
and to reduce repetitive stress injuries in librarians. Con-
cerns about monitoring of book selections, stimulated in
part by the USA Patriot Act, have fueled privacy concerns
around RFID [69].
• Passports: An international organization known as the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) has
promulgated guidelines for RFID-enabled passports and
other travel documents [46], [57]. The United States has
mandated the adoption of these standards by twenty-seven
“Visa Waiver” countries as a condition of entry for their
citizens. The mandate has seen delays due to its technical
challenges and changes in its technical parameters, partly
in response to lobbying by privacy advocates [91].8
• Human implantation: Few other RFID systems have in-
flamed the passions of privacy advocates like the VeriChip
7Rumors even circulated recently of RFID tags embedded in high-value
U.S. notes, as demonstrated experimentally by the propensity of these notes
to catch fire in microwave ovens.
8The U.S. State Department has recently indicated that: (1) U.S. passport
covers will include metallic material to limit RF penetration, and thus prevent
long-range scanning of closed passports; and (2) The U.S. may adopt a
key ICAO privacy-protecting mechanism called Basic Access Control (BAC).
Under BAC, passport contents are encrypted; optical scanning is required to
obtain the decryption key from a passport.
system [84]. VeriChip is a human-implantable RFID tag,
much like the variety for house pets. One intended appli-
cation is medical-record indexing; by scanning a patient’s
tag, a hospital can locate her medical record. Indeed,
hospitals have begun experimentation with these devices
[41]. Physical access control is another application in
view for the VeriChip.
In the United States, several states have initiated RFID-
privacy legislation, most notably California, where the state
assembly considered (and rejected) bills in 2004 and 2005.
Often overlooked in policy discussion is the REAL ID Act,
recently passed by the U.S. legislature. This bill mandates the
development of federal U.S. standards for drivers’ licenses,
and could stimulate wide deployment of RFID tags.
a) Read ranges: Tag read ranges are an important factor
in discussions about privacy. Different operating frequencies
for tags induce different ranges, thanks to their distinctive
physical properties. Under ideal conditions, for instance, UHF
tags have read ranges of over ten meters; for HF tags, the
maximum effective read distance is just a couple of meters.
Additionally, environmental conditions impact RFID efficacy.
The proximity of radio-reflective materials, e.g., metals, and
radio-absorbing materials, like liquids, as well as ambient
radio noise, affect scanning distances. At least one manufac-
turer, Avery Dennison, has devised RFID tags specially for
application to metal objects. Liquids – like beverages and
liquid detergents – have hampered the scanning of UHF tags
in industry RFID pilots. Protocol and hardware-design choices
also affect read ranges.
The human body, consisting as it does primarily of liquid,
impedes the scanning of UHF tags, a fact consequential to
RFID privacy. If in the future you find yourself worried about
clandestine scanning of the RFID tag in your sweater, the most
effective countermeasure may be to wear it!
Sometimes RFID tags can foul systems by reason of exces-
sively long range. In prototypes of automated supermarket-
5
checkout trials run by NCR Corporation, some (experimental)
patrons found themselves paying for the groceries of the
people behind them in line [90].
Certainly, the RFID industry will overcome many of these
impediments, so it would be a mistake to extrapolate tag
capabilities too far into the future. It is important, however,
to keep the limitations of physics in mind.
For the study of RFID privacy in passive tags, it is more
accurate to speak not of the read range of a tag, but of the
read ranges of a tag. Loosely speaking, there are four different
ranges to consider. In roughly increasing distance, they are:
• Nominal read range: RFID standards and product spec-
ifications generally indicate the read ranges at which they
intend tags to operate. These ranges represent the maxi-
mum distances at which a normally operating reader, with
an ordinary antenna and power output, can reliably scan
tag data. ISO 14443, for example, specifies a nominal
range of 10cm for contactless smartcards.
• Rogue scanning range: The range of a sensitive reader
equipped with a powerful antenna – or antenna array –
can exceed the nominal read range. High power output
further amplifies read ranges. A rogue reader may even
output power exceeding legal limits. For example, Kfir
and Wool [65] suggest that a battery-powered reading
device can potentially scan ISO 14443 tags at a range of
as much as 50cm, i.e., five times the nominal range. The
rogue scanning range is the maximum range at which a
reader can power and read a tag.
• Tag-to-reader eavesdropping range: Read-range limi-
tations for passive RFID result primarily from the re-
quirement that the reader power the tag. Once a reader
has powered a tag, a second reader can monitor resulting
tag emissions without itself outputting a signal, i.e., it
can eavesdrop. The maximum distance of such a second,
eavesdropping reader may be larger than its rogue scan-
ning range.
• Reader-to-tag eavesdropping range: In some RFID
protocols, a reader transmits tag-specific information to
the tag. Because readers transmit at much higher power
than tags, they are subject to eavesdropping at much
greater distances than tag-to-reader communications –
perhaps even kilometers away.9
Also of concern in some special cases are detection ranges,
that is, the distance at which an adversary can detect the
presence of tags or readers. In military scenarios, for example,
tag-detecting munitions or reader-seeking missiles pose a
plausible threat.
Research question: There is scant published research on
the feasible rogue-scanning and eavesdropping ranges for
commercial RFID tags. Such research would benefit both
9The EPC Class-1 Gen-2 standard exploits the gap between tag-to-reader
and reader-to-tag eavesdropping ranges to achieve stronger data secrecy. When
a reader is to transmit a sensitive value like a PIN P to a tag, the tag first
transmits a random bit-string R to the reader. The reader transmits P XORR,
rather than P directly. Eavesdropping on the more vulnerable reader-to-tag
channel alone, therefore, does not reveal P . A version of this idea first
appeared in Weis et al. [87].
RFID security analyses and public policy formulation. For
example, rumors have circulated of RFID-enabled passports
being vulnerable to eavesdropping at a distance of 30 feet [92]
– perhaps a motivation for the recent U.S. State Department
decision to consider encryption in such passports.
b) Privacy from cradle to grave: The importance of
RFID privacy in military operations reinforces an oft-neglected
point: Privacy is not just a consumer concern. The enhanced
supply-chain visibility that makes RFID so attractive to indus-
try can also, in another guise, betray competitive intelligence.
Enemy forces monitoring or harvesting RFID communications
in a military supply chain could learn about troop movements.
In civilian applications, similar risks apply. For example, many
retailers see item-level RFID tagging as a means to monitor
stock levels on retail shelves, and avoid out-of-stock products.
Individually tagged objects could also make it easier for
competitors to learn about stock turnover rates; corporate spies
could walk through shops surreptitiously scanning items [80].
Many of the privacy-enhancing techniques we discuss in this
survey aim to protect consumers, or at least human bearers of
RFID tags. It is useful to bear in mind the full scope of the
privacy problem, though. In a recent survey article, Garkfinkel
et al. [56] offer a taxonomy of threats across the different
stages of a typical industrial supply chain.
2) Authentication: Privacy is a hobby-horse in media cover-
age of RFID. To some extent, it has overshadowed the equally
significant problem of authentication.10 Loosely speaking,
RFID privacy concerns the problem of misbehaving readers
harvesting information from well-behaving tags. RFID authen-
tication, on the other hand, concerns the problem of well-
behaving readers harvesting information from misbehaving
tags, particularly counterfeit ones.
Asked what uses they foresee for RFID, ordinary U.S. con-
sumers most frequently mention recovery of stolen goods [72].
In the popular imagination, RFID tags serve as a trustworthy
label for the objects to which they are attached. Belief in
tag authenticity will inevitably come to underpin many RFID
applications. But it is in some measure an illusion.
Basic RFID tags are vulnerable to simple counterfeiting at-
tacks. Scanning and replicating such tags requires little money
or expertise. In [89], Jonathan Westhues, an undergraduate
student, describes how he constructed what is effectively an
RF tape-recorder. This device can read commercial proximity
cards – even through walls – and simulate their signals to
compromise building entry systems.
EPC tags will be vulnerable to similar attacks. An EPC,
after all, is just a bitstring, copyable like any other. EPC tags
offer no real access-control mechanisms. It is possible that
“blank,” i.e., fully field-programmable EPC tags, will be read-
ily available on the market.11 More importantly, elementary
RFID simulation devices will be easy to come by or create.
Such devices need not even resemble RFID tags in order to
10In fact, RFID was first invented as a “friend-or-foe” authenticator for
fighter planes during WWII.
11Field-programmable Class-1 Gen-2 EPC tags are available today [5];
they contain factory-programmed identifiers, however, in addition to user-
programmable bits.
6
deceive RFID readers. As a result, EPC tags may carry no real
guarantee of authenticity.
Yet plans are afoot for use of such tags as anti-counterfeiting
devices. In the United States, the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) has called for the pharmaceutical industry to
apply RFID tags to pallets and cases by 2007, with the aim of
combatting counterfeit pharmaceuticals [35]. Two companies,
Texas Instruments and VeriSign Inc., have proposed a “chain-
of-custody” approach in support of this effort [50]. Their
model involves digital signing of tag data to provide integrity
assurance. Digital signatures do not confer cloning resistance
to tags, however. They prevent forging of data, but not copying
of data.
To be fair, even in the absence of resistance to tag
cloning, unique numbering of objects can be a powerful
anti-counterfeiting tool. As a simple illustration, consider the
forgery of paintings, an epidemic in the art world. The Vic-
torian painter Alma-Tadema presciently evaded this problem
with a simple expedient. To avoid new “discoveries,” he not
only signed his paintings, but wrote unique, sequential serial
numbers on them and cataloged them. For this reason (among
others), spurious Alda-Tademas do not turn up on the art
market as do, say, spurious Van Goghs. RFID tags can help
combat counterfeiting on the same principle. If two RFID-
tagged crates turn up in a warehouse with identical serial
numbers, a problem has clearly arisen. Such detection does
not require tag authentication. The FDA has noted that simply
by furnishing better data on item pedigrees in supply chains,
RFID tags can help identify sources of counterfeit goods.
Nonetheless, scenarios abound in which counterfeiters can
exploit the vulnerability of RFID tags to cloning. Detection of
duplicates ultimately requires consistent and centralized data
collection; where this is lacking, physical and digital anti-
counterfeiting mechanisms become more important. Here are
a couple of examples (from [54]):
Example: EXCON Corp., a shipping company, is plotting to
steal prescription medications that it has been entrusted with
transporting. These medications sit in tamper-proof cases with
attached RFID tags. Rather than trying to defeat the tamper-
proofing of the cases, EXCON creates bogus medications and
cases, and clones the associated EPC tags. It swaps in the
bogus cases while it has custody of the real ones.12
Example: Dupyu Stores, an unscrupulous retailer, wishes to
introduce bogus pharmaceuticals into its stock. After skim-
ming the tags on legitimate pharmaceutical packages, Dupyu
staff attach cloned tags to counterfeit, look-alike packages.
Even in a system in which tag pedigrees are publicly accessi-
ble, this activity can still deceive consumers. Cloned tags will
appear to have the same pedigree as legitimate tags, namely
a history of legitimate manufacture and ultimate delivery to
Dupyu. See [78] for elaboration on this scenario.
12This modus operandi is not an uncommon one. Shamos [76] reports that
corrupt officials have altered vote tallies in elections in this manner. Rather
than tampering with ballot-boxes, they created fake ballot-boxes and ballots
offsite, applied counterfeited seals, and substituted these for legitimate ballot
boxes in transit from polling stations.
Some RFID devices, such as the American Express
ExpressPayTM and the Mastercard PayPassTM credit cards,
and the active RFID tags that will secure shipping containers,
can perform cryptographic operations. Bar reverse-engineering
(and side-channel attacks), these devices offer very good
resistance to cloning. As we explain below, however, some
popular RFID devices perform cryptographic operations that
are too weak to afford protection against determined attackers.
What about RFID as an anti-theft mechanism? Certainly,
RFID tags can help prevent theft in retail shops. They will
serve as an alternative to the Electronic Article Surveillance
(EAS) tags that today detect stolen articles of clothing and
other, relatively high-value items. RFID tags will not, how-
ever, prove very effective against determined thieves. A thief
wishing to steal and repurpose an RFID-tagged object can
disable its existing tag and even, with enough sophistication,
even replace it with a tag carrying data of her choice.13
There is another aspect of authentication that is specific
to RFID, namely authentication of distance. Thanks to the
relatively short range of some RFID devices, users can au-
thorize commercial transactions with RFID devices by placing
them explicitly in proximity to readers. RFID-enabled payment
tokens like credit cards work this way. As we shall see,
however, tag distance is difficult to authenticate. Researchers
have already demonstrated spoofing attacks.
Remarks: (1) The problems of RFID security and privacy
are to some extent interdependent. Generally, cloning a tag
requires scanning that violates the privacy of its holder.
(2) Denial of service is an important security issue in RFID
systems, but not an issue specific to RFID. All wireless de-
vices are subject to radio jamming. Similarly electromagnetic
impulses can permanently damage radio devices (and in fact,
any type of electronic hardware).
D. Attack models
In order to define the notions of “secure” and “private” for
RFID tags in a rigorous way, we must first ask: “Secure” and
“private” against what? The best answer is a formal model
that characterizes the capabilities of potential adversaries. In
cryptography, such a model usually takes the form of an
“experiment,” a program that intermediates communications
between a model adversary, characterized as a probabilistic
algorithm (or Turing machine), and a model runtime environ-
ment containing system components (often called oracles). In
the model for an RFID system, for example, the adversary
would have access to system components representing tags
and readers.
In most cryptographic models, the adversary is assumed to
have more-or-less unfettered access to system components in
the runtime environment. In security models for the Internet,
this makes sense: An adversary can more or less access
any networked computing device at any time. A server, for
instance, is always on-line, and responds freely to queries
13Thieves today commonly bypass EAS systems by hiding items in foil-
lined bags that prevent the penetration of radio waves needed to read inventory
tags.
7
from around the world. For RFID systems, however, around-
the-clock access by adversaries to tags is usally too strong
an assumption. In order to scan a tag, an adversary must
have physical proximity to it – a sporadic event in most
environments. It is important to adapt RFID security models
to such realities. Because low-cost RFID tags cannot execute
standard cryptographic functions, they cannot provide mean-
ingful security in models that are too strong.
An important research challenge, therefore, is the formula-
tion of weakened security models that accurately reflect real-
world threats and real-world tag capabilities. Juels [52], for
example, proposes a so-called “minimalist” security model
and accompanying protocols for low-cost tags. This model
supposes that an adversary only comes into scanning range
of a tag on a periodic basis (and also that tags release their
data at a limited rate). More precisely, the minimalist model
assumes a cap on the number of times that an adversary can
scan a given tag or try to spoof a valid reader; once this cap is
reached, it is assumed that the tag interacts in private with a
valid reader. The minimalist model might assume, for example,
that an adversary can scan a target proximity card or try to
gain unauthorized entrance to a building only ten times before
the legitimate owner of the card achieves valid building entry
outside the eavesdropping range of the adversary.
Juels and Weis [61] consider a formal security model that
they call a “detection” model. The underlying assumption
is that the adversary’s goal is to clone a tag without being
detected in the attempt. This is weaker than a “prevention”
model, which assumes that an adversary cannot clone a tag at
all, irrespective of whether its attempts are detected.
In the vein of more standard cryptographic modeling, Mol-
nar, Soppera, and Wagner [68] propose a formal model for
privacy in tags with full cryptographic capabilities – pseudo-
random functions, in particular. Of special interest is the fact
that their definitions include extensions for delegation of tag
secrets. They propose a scheme in which a tag owner can
disclose just a selected portion of the tag’s identifiers. Avoine
likewise proposes some strong cryptographic models for tag
privacy. He analyzes several schemes with respect to these
models [11], and identifies a number of formal weaknesses.14
Many cryptographic models of security fail to express
important features of RFID systems. A simple cryptographic
model, for example, captures the top-layer communication
protocol between a tag and reader. At the lower layers are anti-
collision protocols and other basic RF protocols. Avoine and
Oechslin (AO) [13] importantly enumerate the security issues
present at multiple communication layers in RFID systems.
Among other issues, they highlight the risks of inadequate
random-number generation in RFID tags. (As remarked in a
footnote above, for example, the EPC Class-1 Gen-2 standard
relies on randomness to protect sensitive data transmitted from
the reader to the tag.) They observe the tracking threats that
can arise from many competing RFID standards: A tag’s
underlying standard could serve as a short, identifying piece
of information. AO also note potential risks at the physical
14Avoine identifies the scheme of Ohkubo, Suzuki, and Kinoshita (OSK)
alone as possessing the formal properties he defines. As we note below,
however, OSK is in fact vulnerable to privacy compromise.
level in RFID systems. For example, due to manufacturing
variations, it is conceivable that an adversary could identify
tags based on physical quirks in the signals they emit. Even
the best cryptographic privacy-preserving protocol may be of
little avail if an RFID tag has a distinct “radio fingerprint”!
There is, however, a flip side to the presence of multiple
communication layers in tags. If tags have distinct radio finger-
prints that are sufficiently difficult to reproduce in convincing
form factors, then these fingerprints could help strengthen
device authentication [22]. Moreover, as we shall discuss,
some proposed RFID protocols actually exploit the presence
of multiple protocol layers to improve tag privacy.
E. Nomenclature and organization
For the remainder of this survey, we classify RFID tags
according to their computational resources. In section II, we
consider basic tags, meaning those that cannot execute stan-
dard cryptographic operations like encryption, strong pseudo-
random number generation, and hashing. We turn our attention
in section III to what we call symmetric-key tags. This category
includes tags that cost more than basic RFID tags, and can
perform symmetric-key cryptographic operations.
Our categorization is a rough one, of course, as it neglects
many other tag features and resources, like memory, com-
munication speed, random-number generation, power, and so
forth. It serves our purposes, however, in demarcating available
security tools. We separately consider the problems of privacy
and authentication protocols within each of the two categories.
Devices like RFID tags for shipping-container security,
high-security contactless smartcards, and RFID-enabled pass-
ports15 can often perform public-key operations. While our
general points in this survey apply to such tags, we do not
treat them explicitly. The majority of RFID tags – certainly
passive ones – do not have public-key functionality. Moreover,
existing cryptographic literature already offers much more
abundant treatment of the problems of privacy and security for
computationally powerful devices than for the weak devices
that typify RFID.
II. BASIC RFID TAGS
Basic RFID tags, as we have defined them, lack the re-
sources to perform true cryptographic operations. Low-cost
tags, such as EPC tags, possess at most a couple of thousand
gates, devoted mainly to basic operations [88]. Few gates – on
the order of hundreds – remain for security functionality. It is
tempting to dismiss this computational poverty as a temporary
state of affairs, in the hope that Moore’s Law will soon render
inexpensive tags more computationally powerful. But pricing
pressure is a strong countervailing force. RFID tags will come
to be used in vast numbers; if and when they replace barcodes
on individual items, they will contribute substantially to the
cost of those items. Thus, given the choice between, say,
a ten-cent RFID tag that can do cryptography, and a five-
cent tag that cannot, it seems inevitable that most retailers
15Most such passports will probably not perform public-key cryptography
in their first generation. But the ICAO guidelines provide for public-key
challenge-response protocols.
8
and manufacturers will plump for the five-cent tag. They will
address security and privacy concerns using other, cheaper
measures. (The barebones security features of the EPC Class-1
Gen-2 standard reinforce this point.)
The lack of cryptography in basic RFID is a big im-
pediment to security design; cryptography, after all, is one
of the lynchpins of data security. On the other hand, the
lack of cryptography in basic tags poses intriguing research
challenges. As we shall see, researchers have devised a farrago
of lightweight technical approaches to the problems of privacy
and authentication.
A. Privacy
Most privacy-protecting schemes for basic tags have fo-
cused on the consumer privacy problems discussed above.
(Industrial privacy, i.e., data secrecy, is important too, but
less frequently considered.) We now enumerate the various
proposed approaches to the consumer privacy problem.
1) “Killing” and “Sleeping”: EPC tags address consumer
privacy with a simple and draconian provision: Tag “killing.”
When an EPC tag receives a “kill” command from a reader,
it renders itself permanently inoperative. To prevent wanton
deactivation of tags, this kill command is PIN protected. To
kill a tag, a reader must also transmit a tag-specific PIN (32
bits long in the EPC Class-1 Gen-2 standard). As “dead tags
tell no tales,” killing is a highly effective privacy measure.
It is envisioned that once RFID tags become prevalent on
retail items, point-of-sale devices will kill the RFID tags on
purchased items to protect consumer privacy. For example,
after you roll your supermarket cart through an automated
checkout kiosk and pay the resulting total, all of the associated
RFID tags will be killed on the spot.
Removable RFID tags support a similar approach. Marks
and Spencer, for example, include RFID tags on garments in
their shops [20]. These RFID tags, however, reside in price
tags, and are therefore easily removed and discarded.
Killing or discarding tags enforces consumer privacy effec-
tively, but it eliminates all of the post-purchase benefits of
RFID for the consumer. The receiptless item returns, smart
appliances, aids for the elderly, and other beneficial systems
described earlier in this article will not work with deactivated
tags. And in some cases, such as libraries and rental shops,
RFID tags cannot be killed because they must survive over
the lifetime of the objects they track. For these reasons,
it is imperative to look beyond killing for more balanced
approaches to consumer privacy.16
Rather than killing tags at the point of sale, then, why
not put them to “sleep,” i.e., render them only temporarily
inactive? This concept is simple, but would be difficult to
manage in practice. Clearly, sleeping tags would confer no
real privacy protection if any reader at all could “wake” them.
Therefore, some form of access control would be needed for
the waking of tags. This access control might take the form
16There are some technical obstacles to effective killing of tags. For
example, while a large retailer might have the infrastructure to accomplish
it, what about mom-and-pop shops that do not have any RFID readers?
of tag specific PINs, much like those used for tag killing. To
wake a sleeping tag, a reader could transmit this PIN.
The sticking point in such a system is that the consumer
would have to manage the PINs for her tags. Tags could bear
their PINs in printed form, but then the consumer would need
to key in or optically scan PINs in order to use them. PINs
could be transmitted to the mobile phones or smartcards of
consumers – or even over the Internet to their home PCs.
Consumers have enough difficulty just managing passwords
today, however. The nitty-gritty management of PINs for RFID
tags could prove much more difficult, as could the burden of
managing sleep/wake patterns for individual tags.
A physical trigger, like the direct touch of a reader probe,
might serve as an alternative means of waking tags [79]. Such
approaches, however, would negate the very benefit of RFID,
namely convenient wireless management.
2) The renaming approach: Even if the identifier emitted
by an RFID tag has no intrinsic meaning, it can still enable
tracking. For this reason, merely encrypting a tag identifier
does not solve the problem of privacy. An encrypted identifier
is itself just a meta-identifier. It is static, and therefore subject
to tracking like any other serial number. To prevent RFID-tag
tracking, it is necessary that tag identifiers be suppressed, or
that they change over time.
a) Relabeling: Sarma, Weis, and Engels (SWE) propose
the idea of effacing unique identifiers in tags at the point
of sale [75] to address the tracking problem, but retaining
product-type identifiers (traditional barcode data) for later
use. Inoue and Yasuura (IY) [49] suggest that consumers be
equipped to relabel tags with new identifiers, but that old tag
identifiers remain subject to re-activation for later public uses,
like recycling. As a physical mechanism for realizing the idea
of SWE, IY also explore the idea of splitting product-type
identifiers and unique identifiers across two RFID tags. By
peeling off one of these two tags, a consumer can reduce the
granularity of tag data. Karjoth and Moskowitz extend this
idea [64], proposing ways that users can physically alter tags
to limit their data emission and obtain physical confirmation of
their changed state. As a remedy for clandestine scanning of
library books, Good et al. [40] propose the idea of relabeling
RFID tags with random identifiers on checkout.
The limitations of these approaches are clear. Effacement of
unique identifiers does not eliminate the threat of clandestine
inventorying. Nor does it quite eliminate the threat of tracking.
Even if tags emit only product-type information, they may still
be uniquely identifiable in constellations, i.e., fixed groups.
Use of random identifiers in place of product codes addresses
the problem of inventorying, but does not address the problem
of tracking. To prevent tracking, identifiers must be refreshed
on a frequent basis. This is precisely the idea in the approaches
we now describe.
b) “Minimalist” cryptography: While high-powered de-
vices like readers can relabel tags for privacy, tags can alterna-
tively relabel themselves. Juels [52] proposes a “minimalist”
system in which every tag contains a small collection of
pseudonyms; it rotates these pseudonyms, releasing a different
one on each reader query. An authorized reader can store the
full pseudonym set for a tag in advance, and therefore identify
9
the tag consistently. An unauthorized reader, however, that
is, one without knowledge of the full pseudonym set for a
tag, is unable to correlate different appearances of the same
tag. To protect against an adversarial reader harvesting all
pseudonyms through rapid-fire interrogation, Juels proposes
that tags “throttle” their data emissions, i.e., slow their re-
sponses when queried too quickly. As an enhancement to the
basic system, valid readers can refresh tag pseudonyms.
The minimalist scheme can offer some resistance to corpo-
rate espionage, like clandestine scanning of product stocks in
retail environments.
c) Re-encryption: Juels and Pappu (JP) [58] consider
the special problem of consumer privacy-protection for RFID-
enabled banknotes. Their scheme employs a public-key cryp-
tosystem with a single key pair: A public key PK, and
a private key SK held by an appropriate law enforcement
agency. An RFID tag in the JP system carries a unique
identifier S, the banknote serial number. S is encrypted under
PK as a ciphertext C; the RFID tag emits C. Only the law
enforcement agency, as possessor of the private key SK, can
decrypt C and thus learn the serial number S.
To address the threat of tracking, JP propose that the
ciphertext C be periodically re-encrypted. They envisage a
system in which shops and banks possess re-encrypting readers
programmed with PK. The algebraic properties of the El
Gamal cryptosystem permit a ciphertext C to be transformed
into a new, unlinkable ciphertext C′ using the public key PK
alone – and with no change to the underlying plaintext S.
In order to prevent wanton re-encryption by, e.g., malicious
passersby, JP propose that banknotes carry optical write-access
keys; to re-encrypt a ciphertext, a reader must scan this key.
(As we shall discuss, RFID-enabled passports may employ a
similar mechanism.)
From several perspectives, like the need for re-encrypting
readers, the JP system is very cumbersome. But it helpfully
introduces the principle that cryptography can enhance RFID-
tag privacy even when tags themselves cannot perform cryp-
tographic operations.
In a critique in [10], Avoine explores limitations in the
formal security model of JP. He observes, for instance, that
eavesdropping on re-encrypting readers in the JP system can
undermine privacy.
d) Universal re-encryption: The JP system relies on
a single, universal key pair (SK, PK). While a single
key pair might suffice for a unified monetary system, a
general RFID system would certainly require multiple key
pairs. Straightforward extension of JP to multiple key pairs
(SK1, PK1), (SK2, PK2), . . . (SKn, PKn), however, would
undermine system privacy. To re-encrypt a ciphertext C, it
would be necessary to know under which public key PKi it
is encrypted, information that is potentially privacy-sensitive.
Golle et al. [39] address this limitation in JP by proposing a
simple cryptosystem that permits re-encryption of a ciphertext
without knowledge of the corresponding public key .17 Their
17Golle et al. designed universal re-encryption for use in mix networks
[19], a cryptographic, privacy-preserving tool for anonymous Web browsing,
anonymous e-mail, elections, and so forth. They observe that a privacy-
preserving RFID system involving relabeling is somewhat like a mix network.
system, called universal re-encryption, involves an extension
to the El Gamal cryptosystem that doubles ciphertext sizes.
The Golle et al. system has a serious security limitation: It
does not preserve integrity. Instead of re-encrypting a cipher-
text, an adversary can substitute an entirely new ciphertext, i.e.,
alter the underlying plaintext. Ateniese, Camenisch, and de
Medeiros [9] furnish a solution to this problem predicated on
bilinear pairings in elliptic curve cryptosystems. They propose
a universal re-encryption scheme in which a ciphertext can
be digitally signed by a central authority, thereby permitting
anyone to verify the authenticity of the associated plaintext,
namely the tag identifier. The Ateniese et al. scheme retains
the full privacy-preserving features of ordinary universal re-
encryption. It does not, however, defend against swapping, an
attack in which an adversary exchanges two valid ciphertexts
across RFID tags. Effective defense against swapping attacks
remains an open research problem.
3) The proxying approach: Rather than relying on public
RFID readers to enforce privacy protection, consumers might
instead carry their own privacy-enforcing devices for RFID.
As already noted, some mobile phones include RFID func-
tionality. They might ultimately support privacy protection.
Researchers have proposed several systems along these lines:
• Floerkemeier, Schneider, and Langheinrich [34] propose
and briefly describe a prototype “Watchdog Tag,” essen-
tially an audit system for RFID privacy. The Watchdog
Tag monitors ambient scanning of RFID tags, and collects
information from readers, like their privacy policies.
• Rieback, Crispo, and Tanenbaum [73] and Juels, Syver-
son, and Bailey [60] propose very similar devices, respec-
tively called an “RFID Guardian” and “RFID Enhancer
Proxy” (REP). A Guardian (to use the first term) acts
as a find of personal RFID firewall. It intermediates
reader requests to tags; viewed another way, the Guardian
selectively simulates tags under its control. As a high-
powered device with substantive computing power, a
Guardian can implement sophisticated privacy policies,
and can use channels other than RFID (e.g., GPS or
Internet connections) to supplement ambient data. For
example, a Guardian might implement a policy like:
“My tags should only be subject to scanning within
30m of my home (as determined by GPS), or in shops
that compensate consumer tag-scanning with coupons
for a 10% discount.” The logistical questions of how a
Guardian should acquire and release control of tags and
their associated PINs or keys are tricky ones that merit
further research.
4) Distance measurement: The barebones resources of
basic RFID tags urge exploration of privacy schemes that
shy away from expensive, high-level protocols and instead
exploit lower protocol layers. Fishkin, Roy, and Jiang (FRJ)
[31] demonstrate that the signal-to-noise ratio of the reader
signal in an RFID system provides a rough metric of the
distance between a reader and a tag. They postulate that
with some additional, low-cost circuitry a tag might achieve
rough measurement of the distance of an interrogating reader.
FRJ propose that this distance serve as a metric for trust. A
tag might, for example, release general information (“I am
10
attached to a bottle of water”) when scanned at a distance, but
release more specific information, like its unique identifier,
only at close range.
5) Blocking: Juels, Rivest, and Szydlo (JRS) [59] propose
a privacy-protecting scheme that they call blocking. Their
scheme depends on the incorporation into tags of a modifiable
bit called a privacy bit. A ‘0’ privacy bit marks a tag as
subject to unrestricted public scanning; a ‘1’ bit marks a tag
as “private.” JRS refer to the space of identifiers with leading
‘1’ bits as a privacy zone. A blocker tag is a special RFID
tag that prevents unwanted scanning of tags mapped into the
privacy zone.
Example: To illustrate how blocking might work in practice,
consider a supermarket scenario. When first created, and at
all times prior to purchase – in warehouses, on trucks, and
on store shelves – tags have their privacy bits set to ‘0’. In
other words, any reader may scan them. When a consumer
purchases an RFID-tagged item, a point-of-sale device flips
the privacy bit to a ‘1’: It transfers the tag into the privacy
zone. (This operation is much like the “kill” function in EPC
tags, and may be similarly PIN-protected.) Once in the privacy
zone, the tag enjoys the protection of the blocker. Supermarket
bags might carry embedded blocker tags, to protect items
from invasive scanning when shoppers leave the supermarket.
When a shopper arrives home, she removes items from her
shopping bags and puts them in the refrigerator. With no
blocker tag inside, an RFID-enabled “smart” refrigerator can
freely scan RFID-tagged items. The consumer gets privacy
protection from the blocker when it is needed, but can still
use RFID tags when desired!
How does a blocker actually prevent undesired scanning?
It exploits the anti-collision protocol that RFID readers use to
communicate with tags. This protocol is known as singulation .
Singulation enables RFID readers to scan multiple tags simul-
taneously. To ensure that tag signals do not interfere with one
another during the scanning process, the reader first ascertains
what tags are present, and then addresses tags individually.
Blocking is of particular interest because, in exploiting
singulation, it draws on the special operating characteristics
of RFID. It is therefore worth giving a little detail.
One type of RFID singulation protocol is known as tree-
walking. In this protocol, l-bit tag identifiers are treated as the
leaves of a binary tree of depth l, labeled as follows. The root
has a null label. For a node with binary label s, the left child
has label s ‖ ‘0’; the right child has has label s ‖ ‘1’.
The reader effectively performs a depth first search of this
tree to identify individual tags. Starting with the root of the
tree, the reader interrogates all tags. Each tag responds with
the first bit of its identifier. If the only response received by
the reader is a ‘0’ bit, then it concludes that all tag identifiers
lie in the left half of the tree; in this case the reader recurses
on the left half of the tree. Conversely, a concordant response
of ‘1’ causes the reader to recurse on the right half of the tree.
If the tag signals collide, that is, some tags emit ‘0’ bits and
others emit ‘1’ bits, then the reader recurses on both halves
of the tree. The reader continues recursing in this manner on
sub-trees; it restricts its interrogation to tags in the current sub-
tree. This procedure eventually yields the leaves – and thus the
l-bit identifiers – of responding tags.
A blocker impedes RFID scanning by simulating collisions
in the singulation tree. For example, a naı̈vely designed blocker
could block scanning of all tags simply by emitting both a
‘0’ bit and ‘1’ bit in response to every reader interrogation,
and forcing the reader to traverse the whole tree. Given that
a typical tag identifier is, say, 96 bits in length, such a tree
has many, many billions of leaves. So such a blocker would
always cause a reader to stall!
As we have explained, the aim of the blocker is not wanton
disruption of tag scanning. Rather, the scheme is selective.
Blocking here relies on designation of the leading bit of a
tag identifier as the privacy bit. The blocker only disrupts the
scanning process when a reader attempts to scan tags in the
privacy zone, i.e., in the right half of the singulation tree.
The blocker does not interfere with the normal scanning of
tags with ‘0’ privacy bits, i.e., those outside the privacy zone.
Figure 2 shows how blocking might work in conjunction with
tree-walking in the supermarket scenario we have sketched.
A blocker tag can be manufactured almost as cheaply as
an ordinary tag. Blocking, moreover, may be adapted for
use with ALOHA singulation protocols (the more common
type). To prevent undesired reader stalling, JRS also propose
mechanisms whereby a blocker tag can be “polite,” that is, it
can inform readers of its presence so that they do not attempt
to scan the privacy zone.
Of course, the blocker concept has limitations. Given the
unreliable transmission of RFID tags, even well-positioned
blocker tags might fail. Readers might evolve, moreover, that
can exploit characteristics like signal strength to filter blocker
signals [74]. On the other hand, improvements and variations
are possible: A blocker might be implemented as an active
device in a mobile phone, for example. Given the notoriously
unpredictable behavior of RFID devices in the real world, both
attacks and defenses merit careful empirical evaluation.
a) Soft blocking: Juels and Brainard (JB) [55] propose
a blocking variant that they call soft blocking. Rather than
interfering with singulation, a soft blocker tag merely emits
a compact policy statement, e.g., “Do not scan tags whose
privacy bit is on.” (Viewed another way, a soft blocker tag is
always “polite.”) JB propose that readers interpret such poli-
cies in software.18 Soft blocking relies on auditing of reader
configurations to enforce compliance. As reader emissions are
subject to ambient monitoring, it is possible to construct an
audit device that detects readers that violate tag policies. While
lacking some of the technical assurances of JRS blocking,
soft blocking has certain advantages. For example, while JRS
blocking is “opt-out,”, soft blocking supports “opt-in” policies.
One scheme proposed by JB involves no explicit blocker
tag at all, but relies on audit alone. This very simple approach
18RSA Laboratories demonstrated a conceptual soft blocking system at the
RSA Conference in February 2004. They set up a mock pharmacy (called the
RXA Pharmacy), in which the bottles containing medications (jellybeans)
bore RFID tags, and pharmacy bags carried soft blocker tags. This system
was very simple. Both inventory tags and blockers were ordinary RFID tags.
The system stored tags’ privacy bits in software.
11
Fig. 2. Illustration of how a blocker tag might work
has obvious technical deficiencies, but is perhaps the most
practical form of blocking!
b) Trusted computing: Molnar, Soppera, and Wagner
(MSW) [67] briefly describe an alternative approach to en-
forcement of privacy policies, such as those that rely on
“privacy bits.” They describe how readers equipped with
trusted platform modules (TPMs) can enforce tag privacy
policies internally. Such readers can generate externally veri-
fiable attestations as to their configuration in accordance with
these policies. MSW note that the commercially available
ThingMagic Mercury 4 reader includes an XScale 2 processor
with a TPM. While the MSW approach does not of course
address the problem of rogue readers, it can facilitate or
complement other forms of privacy protection.
6) Legislation: Even at this early stage, RFID privacy has
attracted the keen attention of policymakers and legislators. As
noted above, RFID-privacy bills have arisen in several states
in the U.S., although none has seen enactment at the time
of writing. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission has issued a
report that addresses the impact of RFID on consumers, with
an emphasis on privacy [21], but has not yet expressed an
intention to issue regulations. EPCglobal Inc. has published
guidelines for its members on EPC privacy for consumer
products [26]. These guidelines emphasize consumer educa-
tion about the presence and functioning of EPC tags, and the
provision of means of disablement or removal.
Good public policies for RFID are likely to prove hard to
craft, because RFID tags, having essentially no form of access
control, offer no obvious points of liability for information
leakage. A healthcare provider, for instance, can issue a
privacy policy describing the ways in which it grants or
denies access to its customer databases; when a database is
compromised, the target of liability is (more or less) clear.
In contrast, a retailer cannot offer any guarantees about the
tracking of RFID tags on items that leave its premises. RFID
privacy is only fully meaningful if all entities with RFID
readers subscribe to it – or if consumers do not carry live
RFID tags. (It is of note that the EPCglobal guidelines do not
really treat the problem of privacy in live RFID tags.)
Given the inevitable deficiencies of technology or policy
acting in isolation, the cooperation of technologists and leg-
islators seems essential to good RFID privacy enforcement.
Some technologists have already turned their attention to
RFID policy and legislation issues. Garfinkel published a five-
point “RFID Bill of Rights” [36] with broad, pithy provisions
for consumer notice and choice. Floerkemeier et al. [34]
have considered ways of enforcing RFID compliance with
the Fair Information Practices (FIP) of the Organization of
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD); their work
aims particularly at informing consumers about the existence
and purposes of RFID data collection.
B. Authentication
We have discussed the ways in which basic RFID tags
can combat counterfeiting by offering enhanced supply-chain
visibility. As we have noted, however, outside an environment
of truly seamless information, counterfeiting of RFID tags
can facilitate counterfeiting of consumer goods. Yet effective
authentication of basic RFID tags – the type we consider here
– is very difficult.
EPC tags of the Class-1 Gen-2 type have no explicit anti-
counterfeiting features whatsoever. In principle, an attacker
can simply skim the EPC from a target tag and program it
into another, counterfeit tag – or simulate the target tag in
another type of wireless device.
Juels [54] shows a simple way to repurpose the kill func-
tion in EPC tags to achieve limited counterfeiting resistance.
Normally, the kill PIN authenticates a reader to a tag in
order to authorize the deactivation of the tag. Instead, this
authentication can be reversed, and the kill PIN can instead
serve to authenticate the tag to the reader. The basic protocol
proposed in [54] co-opts the ability of tags to distinguish
between valid and spurious kill PINs.
In [53], Juels proposes an RFID protocol called yoking. It
provides cryptographic proof that two tags have been scanned
simultaneously – and evidence (although not proof) that the
tags were scanned in physical proximity to one another. A
yoking protocol might, for example, allow a pharmacy to
demonstrate to a government agency that it scanned an RFID-
tagged medication bottle at the same time that it scanned
an RFID-tagged booklet of contraindications – and thus that
it furnished legally required information to consumers. One
variant of this protocol is suitable for basic tags in that it
12
requires virtually no computation, but it does require several
hundred bits of storage per invocation.
Even if tags themselves do not have on-board anti-
counterfeiting features, they can support physical anti-
counterfeiting mechanisms. For example, physical one-way
functions (POWFs) [71] are small plastic objects with re-
flective inclusions such as tiny glass beads. Laser scanning
of POWFs reveals unique, random speckle-patterns that may
be translated into bit-strings; a POWF as small as 1cm2
can contain as many as 1012 static, random bits (effectively
ROM). A POWF has two important anti-cloning properties:
(1) Physical tampering destroys the information contained in
a POWF, and (2) It is difficult to manufacture a POWF that
emits a predetermined set of bits when scanned. Thus a POWF
can help enforce unique identification of an object or container
to which it is attached. While POWF data can be stored any-
where, an RFID tag may serve as a particularly useful carrier
for POWF data. POWFs are just an attractive research concept
at present. Many forms of packaging today contain special,
proprietary (and secret) dyes and other physical markers of
uniqueness. Basic RFID tags can equally well serve as carriers
for their anti-counterfeiting data.
C. The problem of PIN distribution
As we have explained, both privacy and authentication
features in basic tags can depend on tag-specific PINs. The kill
function for Class-1 Gen-2 EPC-standard tags requires a PIN.
There is also an option in the EPC standard for PIN-controlled
write-access in tags. PIN distribution will almost certainly
pose a major problem in the field, from the standpoints
of both security and pure logistics. Once item-level tagging
becomes prevalent, it will be necessary to provision point-
of-sale terminals securely with the PINs for the RFID tags
they are to kill. This problem, the perennial cryptographic
one of key management in another guise, has seen only brief
treatment in the RFID literature. Molnar, Wagner, and Soppera
propose tree-based PIN distributions schemes akin to their
ideas for privacy enforcement and delegation of secrets, which
we summarize below; Juels [54] proposes an extended tag-
authentication scheme in which readers prove their legitimacy
through interaction with valid tags. The problem of secure PIN
distribution merits much more investigation.
III. SYMMETRIC-KEY TAGS
Let us now turn our attention to the class of RFID tags
with richer security capabilities, those capable of computing
symmetric-key (cryptographic one-way) functions.
For brevity, we use loose notation in this section, and
assume very basic familiarity with cryptographic primitives.
Recall that a cryptographic hash function h has the special
property that for a random bitstring M of sufficient length,
it is infeasible to compute M from knowledge of the hashed
value h(M ) alone. Hashing involves no secret key (and is
therefore only loosely called a symmetric-key function). In
contrast, symmetric-key encryption, sometimes called secret-
key encryption, relies upon a secret key k. With this key,
a message or plaintext M can be encrypted as a ciphertext
C = ek[M ]. Only with knowledge of k is it feasible to decrypt
C and recover M .
In our discussions here we assume a centralized system,
i.e., one in which readers are continuously on-line. We denote
the number of tags in a system by n, and let Ti for 1 ≤
i ≤ n denote the identifier for the ith tag in the system. We
informally refer to this tag as Ti. We suppose that tag Ti
contains in memory a distinct, random, and secret key ki.
A. Cloning
In principle, symmetric-key cryptography can go far to-
ward eliminating the problem of tag cloning. With a simple
challenge-response protocol like the following, a tag Ti can
authenticate itself to a reader with which it shares the key ki:
1) The tag identifies itself by transmitting the value Ti.
2) The reader generates a random bitstring R (often called
a nonce) and transmits it to the tag.
3) The tag computes H = h(ki, R), and transmits H.
4) The reader verifies that H = h(ki, R).
Alternatively, and more or less equivalently, the tag can return
eki [R]. (Note that for the moment here, we set aside privacy
considerations, and suppose that tags identify themselves.)
Provided that the hash function h (or encryption function e)
is well constructed and appropriately deployed, it is infeasible
for an attacker to simulate Ti successfully without physically
attacking the tag.
In practice, however, resource constraints in commercial
RFID tags sometimes lead to the deployment of weak crypto-
graphic primitives, and thus vulnerable authentication proto-
cols, as our discussion now illustrates.
1) The Digital Signature Transponder (DST): Texas Instru-
ments (TI) manufactures a low-frequency, cryptographically-
enabled RFID device called a Digital Signature Transponder
(DST). The DST serves as a theft-deterrent in millions of
automobiles – many late-model Ford and Toyota vehicles, for
example. Present as a tiny, concealed chip in the ignition key
of the driver, the DST authenticates the key to a reader near
the key slot as a precondition for starting the engine. (The
metal portion of the ignition key in isolation will not start the
vehicle.) The DST is also present in SpeedPassTM wireless
payment devices, used by millions of customers primarily at
ExxonMobil petrol stations in North America.
The DST executes a simple challenge-response protocol
essentially like that described above. It contains a secret key ki.
In response to a random challenge R from a reader, the DST
executes an encryption function e and outputs C = eki [R].
The challenge R is 40 bits in length, the response C is 24 bits
in length. Of particular note is the length of the secret key
ki. It is only 40 bits. As cryptographers know, this is quite
short by today’s standards: A key of this length is vulnerable
to brute-force computational attack. Perhaps recognizing the
inadequate key-length of the DST, Texas Instruments has
not published details of the encryption algorithm e, instead
preferring the approach of “security through obscurity.”
In late 2004, a team of researchers at Johns Hopkins
University and RSA Laboratories set out to demonstrate the
security vulnerability of the DST [17]. They succeeded in fully
13
cloning DST tokens, by which we mean cracking their keys
and exactly simulating them in separate devices. Their effort
involved three stages:
1) Reverse-engineering: The researchers determined the
unpublished encryption algorithm e in the DST. They
relied on three things: (1) A TI DST reader, available
in an evaluation kit; (2) Some blank DSTs, meaning
tokens with programmable secret keys; and (3) A loose
schematic of the encryption algorithm e published on the
Internet by a scientist at TI [63]. With the reader and
blank tags, the researchers were able to determine the
output value ek[R] for any key k and challenge R. Based
on the published schematic, they carefully formulated
and tested sequences of key/challenge pairs to derive
operational details of the encryption algorithm e. They
did not physically probe the DST in any way.
2) Key cracking: Having determined e, the researchers
implemented a hardware “cracker” costing several thou-
sand dollars. This cracker consisted of an array of 16
FPGA boards. Given two input-output pairs (R1, C1)
and (R2, C2) skimmed from a target DST, it proved
capable of recovering a secret key in about thirty min-
utes on average. The cracker operated by brute force,
meaning that it searched the full space of 240 possible
DST keys.19
3) Simulation: The researchers constructed a pro-
grammable radio device that exactly simulates the output
of any target DST.20
The JHU-RSA team demonstrated their attack in the field.
Simulating the DST present in an ignition key (and using a
copy of the metal portion), they “stole” their own car. They
also purchased gasoline at a service station using a clone of
their own SpeedPassTM token!
As this work demonstrates, all that an attacker requires to
clone a DST is a pair of challenge/response values. An attacker
could, for example, set up a reader in a crowded area, such as
a subway station, and harvest challenge/response pairs from
DST in the pockets of passersby. Alternatively, the attacker
could eavesdrop (at longer range) on the communications
between a DST and valid reader.
2) Reverse-engineering and side channels: Most RFID tags
are and may continue to be too inexpensive to include tamper-
resistance mechanisms. Physically invasive attacks are mainly
of concern for RFID tags that serve as authenticators, and of
greatest concern when such attacks leave no physical traces
or permit the construction of perfect physical replicas of
target devices. For example, a reverse-engineered RFID-based
payment device might be cloned to effect fraudulent payments
(on-line controls serving as an important but limited counter-
measure). Reverse-engineering of smartcards is an increasingly
well studied area; even hardened devices have yielded to
successful probing using modest resources [8].
19An attacker scanning DSTs with a rogue reader could instead perform
this key search using a Hellman table, as described below. This would reduce
the key search effort to about two minutes on an ordinary PC.
20A DST cannot simply be programmed with a recovered key, as it outputs
a static device identifier along with its cryptographic output.
Most interesting and potentially serious in the case of RFID
are attacks involving side channels, meaning sources of infor-
mation beyond the mere bit-values of protocol flows. RFID
tags, far more than contact devices, leak information over
the air, opening the prospect of wireless, non-invasive side-
channel attacks. The two predominant forms of side-channel
analysis studied by the security community are timing attacks,
which extract information based on variations in the rate of
computation of a target device, and power analysis attacks,
which exploit measurable variations in power consumption.
Power interruption and fault induction are related, more active
forms of attack. Over-the-air timing attacks against RFID tags
would appear to be eminently viable; their efficacy is an open
research question. Similarly, measurements of electromagnetic
emanations could pave the way for over-the-air power-analysis
attacks. Carluccio, Lemke, and Paar have initiated early work
in this area [18].
3) Relay attacks: No matter how well designed the cryp-
tographic protocols in an RFID device, and no matter how
strong the cryptographic primitives, one threat is ineluctable:
relay or man-in-the-middle attacks.21 These attacks can bypass
any cryptographic protocol, even public-key ones. Given the
limited read range of tags, many security applications of RFID
involve a presumption of physical proximity between tags
and readers. Basic security premises fail, for instance, if a
proximity card can be caused to open a door or an RFID-
based credit card can effect payment from a kilometer away.
A relay attack undermines proximity assumptions in an
RFID system. To use the colorful nomenclature of Kfir and
Wool [65], this type of attack involves two communicating
devices, a leech and a ghost. The attacker situates the leech
physically close to the target RFID device and the ghost close
to a target reader. Intercommunication between the leech and
ghost creates the appearance of physical proximity between
the target RFID device and a target reader when they may in
fact lie very far apart.
Kfir and Wool (KW) modeled the operational distance of a
leech and ghost pair in an ISO 14443 system, for which the
nominal read range is 10cm. They considered simple leech and
ghost designs based on NFC devices. As noted above, some
mobile phones are now NFC-enabled.
KW concluded that a leech can operate at a distance of
at least 50cm from a target RFID device, while the ghost
can operate at a distance of up to 50m from a target reader!
The distance between the leech and ghost can in principle
be almost unlimited – certainly on the order of kilometers.
Recently, Hancke [43] actually implemented a relay attack
against an ISO 14443A contactless smartcard, and achieved
a 50m distance between the leech and ghost.
Simple countermeasures to RFID relay attacks exist, like
pushbuttons or removable Faraday cages that confirm user in-
tentionality, or user input of PINs into RFID readers. But these
are inconvenient. RF shielding on readers can in principle limit
the directionality of radio signals, and therefore the potential
position of a ghost.
21Wormhole attacks, as explored in the ad hoc networking community,
similarly involve deception around physical distance, often with the aim of
tampering with routing tables.
14
Timing measurements are an oft contemplated but little
studied countermeasure in the research community. A relay
system induces a read time than simple device interrogation;
Hancke has observed this in practice [43]. Hancke and Kuhn
[42] have designed a protocol that bounds the distance between
a reader and RF device, but requires special protocol design
and use of ultra-wide-band communication. As mentioned
above, Fishkin et al. have described a scheme in which a tag
can estimate its distance from a reader [31]. This approach
could limit the margin of maneuver for a leech. Another
possible countermeasure to relay attacks is tag localization,
i.e., loose determination of the position of the tag. Localization
is technically challenging, however [33].
Ultimately, sensitive RF transactions may benefit from the
aid of portable devices like mobile phones, which are capable
of more sophisticated countermeasures than tags. A phone
equipped with a GPS receiver, for example, can digitally sign
its most recently observed location. In the meantime, relay
attacks constitute a very important research area.
Research question: The RFID industry continues to man-
ufacture cryptographically weak devices. Some tags employ
strong cryptography, like the Philips MifareTM DESfire,
which uses 3DES; there are weaker variants of this very
popular product line, however. Many proximity cards and toll
payment transponders use mere static identifiers, as does the
VeriChip. Exploration of the vulnerabilities of these devices is
an important research direction. The resulting lessons should
benefit both the industry and consumers.
B. Privacy
At the heart of the privacy problem for symmetric-key-
enabled RFID tags lies the challenge of key management.
As we have seen, cryptographically secure authentication
(or even mere identification) of an RFID tag Ti relies on a
symmetric key ki shared between a tag and reader. The fact
that this key is tag-specific leads to a paradox. Suppose that
a tag identifies itself prior to authenticating an interrogating
reader or without authenticating an interrogating reader at all,
i.e., the tag emits its identifier Ti more or less promiscuously.
Privacy, then, is unachievable, since any reader can learn the
identity of the tag. On the other hand, a tag cannot easily
identify itself after the reader authenticates to the tag. If the
reader does not know which tag it is interrogating, it cannot
determine which key ki to use in protocol interactions with
the tag!
There is a straightforward but heavyweight solution to this
privacy conundrum. A reader can identify tags by means of key
search. In loose schematic terms, the procedure is as follows.
Let fki [M ] denote a keyed one-way function – either
h(ki, M ) or eki [M ], for example. Let P be an input value, a
random session-specific value, that is, a nonce, or a static bit-
string. (Different proposed schemes involve different choices
for P .) Reader identification of a tag encompasses the follow-
ing two steps, often at the heart of a larger protocol:
1) Tag Ti emits E = fkTi [P ]. (For example, Ti might
encrypt a nonce P under the key kTi .)
2) On receiving E from a tag, the reader searches the
space of all tag keys K = {kTj}j for a key such that
fkTj [P ] = E. (For example, the reader might try to
decrypt E under every key in K until it obtains P .)
If the scheme is correctly parameterized, the reader will find
only one key kTj that successfully yields E. This key uniquely
identifies the tag as Tj . To ensure the privacy of the tag, clearly
the value E emitted by the tag must vary from session to
session, otherwise E is a static identifier. Thus, either kTi or
P (or both) must vary over time; different schemes involve
different ways of varying these values, as we shall see.
In our discussion of the literature, we focus on techniques
for tag identification, rather than authentication. Of course,
the two processes are interrelated. In a general symmetric-key
system, however, tag identification is a pre-condition for tag
authentication. As we have explained, a reader must determine
which key ki it shares with a tag in order to perform any
mutually intelligible cryptographic operation.
C. The literature
Weis, Sarma, Rivest, and Engels [87] (WSRE) first ad-
vanced the general approach of key search for RFID-tag
identification. Among other variants, they propose a basic
scheme in which a tag emits E = (h(ki, R), R), where R
is a random nonce generated by the tag. To identify a tag, a
reader computes h(kj, R) for all keys in K until it finds ki.
(WSRE also describe how a reader, having identified a tag, can
cryptographically “unlock” it so that it releases private data.)
WSRE noted the major sticking point with the key-search
approach: The computational cost for the reader is linear in n.
In practice, if the set of tags {Ti}ni=1 is large, then key search
can be prohibitively costly. Subsequent literature in this area
has largely aimed to reduce the cost of key search. Every such
proposal, however, involves some kind of tradeoff, either the
addition of a new architectural requirement or the suppression
of a security or privacy property.
a) Tree approach: Molnar and Wagner (MW) [69] pro-
pose a scheme in which a tag contains not one symmetric key,
but multiple keys. These keys are arranged in a hierarchical
structure defined by a tree S. Every node in the tree, except
the root, has a unique associated key. Each tag is assigned to
a unique leaf; it contains the keys defined by the path from
the root of S to this leaf. If the tree has depth d and branching
degree b, then each tag contains d keys, and the scheme can
accommodate up to db tags in total.
A tag in the MW scheme authenticates to a reader using
each of its d secret keys – either in serial or in parallel –
in order of their depth in the tree. The tag effectively runs
several rounds of the two-step identification protocol sketched
above, increasing the granularity of the key in each round,
i.e., narrowing the set of tags to be searched. The result is
a striking improvement in efficiency. A reader can identify a
tag by means of a depth-first search of S, and therefore needs
to search through at most db keys. In contrast, a brute-force
key search, as we have explained above, would require that a
reader search the space of all n = db tag keys.
There is a price to be paid for this efficiency gain. The
tree structure creates an overlap among the sets of keys in
15
tags. Compromise of the secrets in one tag, therefore, results
in compromise of secrets in other tags. Compromise of a
fraction of the tags in the system can lead to substantive
privacy infringements, as analyzed in [12].
Molnar, Soppera, and Wagner (MSW) [68] explore ways in
which the sub-trees in the MW scheme may be associated with
individual tags. They introduce a new idea, that of delegation
of the ability to identify tags. By transferring sub-tree data
in the MSW system, the owner of a tag can enable another
party to identify the tag over a limited window of time (i.e.,
number of read operations). Such tag delegation can be useful
in a couple of ways:
1) A tag holder can transfer ownership of an RFID tag
to another party while ensuring that past tag history
remains private.
2) A centralized authority with full tag information can
provision readers to scan particular tags over limited
windows of time. Readers can thus download temporary
scanning privileges, a useful feature in systems with
intermittent connectivity.
b) Synchronization approach: Another approach to
avoiding brute-force key search is for a reader to maintain
synchronized state with tags.
Suppose that every tag Ti maintains a counter P = ci that
is incremented with each reader query. On interrogation, the
tag outputs E = fki [ci]. Provided that a valid reader knows
the approximate current value of the counters of tags in the
system, it can store a searchable table of tag output values.
Suppose that for every tag Ti the reader maintains a counter
value c′i that does not lag behind ci by more than d timesteps.
Then if the reader maintains the output values fki [c′i], fki [c
′
i +
1], . . . , fki [c′i + d] in a table, it can at any time look up the
output E of tag Ti. With a table of size dn, the reader can
look up the output of any tag in the system.
The literature explores several variants of this principle:
• Ohkubo, Suzuki, and Kinoshita (OSK) [70] propose the
conceptually simplest approach: They simply assume that
a tag never emits more than m values over its lifetime.
Therefore, a reader can construct a one-time lookup table
on the first m outputs for all tags, i.e., on the values
{fki [j]}i∈{1...n},j∈{1...m}. (OSK do not investigate the
issue of tag authentication, although a challenge-response
protocol could be layered straightforwardly onto their
basic system.)
• Henrici and Müller [45] propose to resolve the synchro-
nization problem by having a tag emit the number of
timesteps ∆c since the last successful authentication with
the reader. This approach, however, exposes a tag to
adversarial tracking. By querying a tag repeatedly, for ex-
ample, an attacker can inflate ∆c artificially, to the point
where ∆c is distinctly large and therefore recognizable
to the adversary. Avoine identifies this problem in [11].
• Juels [52] proposes a scheme that effectively caps the
degree of desynchronization with a reader; it is a cryp-
tographic variant on the “minimalist” approach described
above. Rather than incrementing its counter indefinitely,
a tag loops through a bounded sequence of d output
values, fki [z], fki[z + 1], . . . , fki[z + d − 1]. Only upon
successful mutual authentication with the reader does the
tag advance to the next sequence of d output values. The
reader maintains a dynamic lookup table of size O(dn)
for all tags. (Like the basic minimalist scheme, this one
assumes “throttling” of tag data.)
• Dimitriou [24] proposes a scheme that eliminates the
issue of desynchronization entirely. Here a tag alters
its counter value, and thus its output value, only upon
successful mutual authentication with a reader. This ap-
proach renders key search highly practical, and also helps
defend against denial-of-service attacks. The drawback,
of course, is that between identification sessions with a
legitimate reader, the output value of a tag is static. Tags
are therefore subject to tracking during such intervals of
time. As Dimitriou notes, however, the resulting privacy
properties may be sufficient from a practical standpoint.
c) Time-space tradeoff approach: In early work, Hellman
[44] studied the problem of breaking symmetric keys. He
considered the resource requirements of an attacker seeking
to recover secret key k from a ciphertext C = ek[M ] on a pre-
determined message M . The attacker might simply perform a
brute-force key search, and invest computational effort O(n),
where n is the size of the total key space. Or she might
pre-compute and store a table of size O(n) consisting of
C = {Ci = eki [M ]}ki∈K , and simply look up C in the table.
Hellman demonstrated an intermediate choice. An attacker can
pre-compute a table of size O(N2/3) – commonly referred
to as a Hellman table – that permits successful key search
with computational effort only O(N2/3). Loosely speaking,
the idea is to group sequences of ciphertexts in C into
deterministically traversable chains of size O(N2/3). Within
the Hellman table are stored only the first and last elements
of these chains. Starting with a ciphertext C, the attacker can
traverse the induced chain until she locates the last element.
By consulting the Hellman table, she can then determine the
first element in the chain; on traversing the chain from this
point, she can determine ki.
Avoine, Dysli, and Oechslin (ADO) [12], [14] observe that
the problem of symmetric-key search for readers in privacy-
preserving RFID systems is nearly identical with that of
breaking keys. For a reader to determine which tag it is
communicating with, the reader can “crack” the ciphertext
Ci to determine ki and thus Ti. ADO apply a variant of the
Hellman technique to the OSK system, yielding a scheme with
considerably more practical lookup costs. Because of the need
to pre-compute the Hellman table, the ADO variant, like the
original OSK scheme, searches for keys over a pre-determined
window of timesteps.
Remarks:
1) Vulnerability in OSK and ADO: A simple, practical
attack against the privacy of the OSK and ADO schemes
has been recently noted in [62]. Both schemes involve
key search across a window of timesteps of predeter-
mined size m. By probing the window boundary, i.e.,
exploiting the fact that the reader cannot identify tags
with counter values greater than m, an attacker can
16
learn a tag’s exact current counter value. Consider a tag
Ti with current counter value ci. The attacker queries
the tag m times, obtaining outputs E1 = Eci , E2 =
Eci+1, . . .Em = Eci+m. Then the attacker submits
Em, Em−1, . . . , E1 to the reader in that order, until
the reader accepts a value Ej. The attacker concludes
that ci = j at the time of attack. For practical system
parameterizations, e.g., m = 128 as proposed by ADO,
this attack is problematic. (Other systems, e.g., MSW,
are similarly vulnerable in theory [68], but practical
parameterizations render such attacks infeasible.)
2) Forward secrecy: A main contribution of OSK is a
technique for achieving forward secrecy in tags. This
property means that if an attacker compromises a tag,
i.e., learns its current state and its key, she is nonetheless
unable to identify the previous outputs of the tag. The
technique is simple: The tag and reader refresh ki
in every timestep by hashing it. Thus, in OSK, it is
infeasible to compute previous keys and outputs from
the current key. Dimitriou uses the same approach in
his later scheme [24].
D. Implementing symmetric-key primitives
Just as important as the effective use of symmetric-key
cryptographic primitives for privacy or authentication is the
efficient design and implementation of these primitives. A few
papers explore primitives geared specifically toward the very
tightly constrained environments of RFID tags:
• Vajda and Buttyán [83] propose a medley of lightweight
cryptographic primitives for RFID-tag authentication.
(They do not provide formal analysis, however.)
• Feldhofer, Dominikus, and Wolkerstorfer [28] propose a
lightweight hardware implementation of a symmetric-key
cipher, namely a 128-bit version of the AES (Advanced
Encryption Standard). Their design requires just over
3500 gate equivalents – considerably more than appro-
priate for basic RFID tags, but suitable for higher-cost
RFID tags.
• Juels and Weis [61], [86] propose a lightweight authen-
tication protocol called HB+ that has security reducible
to a problem called Learning Parity with Noise. To im-
plement HB+, tags need only generate random bits and
compute binary dot products. The key lengths required
for good security are as yet unknown, however, and the
security model is limited [38].
ECRYPT (the European Network for Excellence in Cryptol-
ogy) is currently evaluating 21 candidate stream ciphers [4],
some of them geared toward resource-constrained hardware
platforms. Successful candidates could prove suitable for
RFID tags.
Research questions: The problems of key management and
implementation of primitives are extremely important ones in
this area. Other valuable research problems remain, however,
of which we mention just a couple:
• Is it possible to construct a fully privacy-preserving,
symmetric-key RFID identification scheme in which the
reader performs computation o(n), i.e., sub-linear in the
number of tags? (Recall that use of Hellman tables
undermines privacy.) Alternatively, is it possible to prove
that such a scheme is impossible without the use of
public-key cryptography?
• Nearly all of the schemes we have described presume a
centralized model, namely that readers have continuous
access to a centralized database. This feature provides
resistance to replay and desynchronization attacks. What
is the best way to engineer a system in which readers
have only intermittent connectivity? Indeed, what is the
best way to model such a system?
IV. CONCLUSION
It is astonishing how a modest device like an RFID tag,
essentially just a wireless license plate, can give rise to the
complex melange of security and privacy problems that we ex-
plore here. RFID privacy and security are stimulating research
areas that involve rich interplay among many disciplines, like
signal processing, hardware design, supply-chain logistics,
privacy rights, and cryptography. There remain connections to
be explored between the work surveyed here and other areas
of study. We conclude by highlighting a few of these.
The majority of the articles treated in this survey explore
security and privacy as a matter between RFID tags and
readers. Of course, tags and readers lie at the fringes of a
full-blown RFID system. At the heart will reside a massive
infrastructure of servers and software. Many of the attendant
data-security problems – like that of authenticating readers
to servers – involve already familiar data-security protocols.
But the very massive scaleof RFID-related data flows and
cross-organizational information sharing will introduce new
data-security problems. We have mentioned key-management
and PIN distribution for tags as one such potential problem.
Other challenges will arise from the fluidity of changes in
tag ownership. Today, domain names, for example, do not
change hands very frequently; the DNS can involve human-
intermediated access-control. The ONS – should it indeed see
fruition – will need to accommodate many, many more objects
that change hands with great frequency.
Sensors are small hardware devices similar in flavor to
RFID tags. While RFID tags emit identifiers, sensors emit in-
formation about their environments, like ambient temperature
or humidity. Sensors typically contain batteries, and are thus
larger and more expensive than passive RFID tags. Between
active RFID tags and sensors, however, there is little difference
but nomenclature. For example, some commercially available
active RFID devices are designed to secure port containers.
They emit identifiers, but also sense whether or not a container
has been opened. Given such examples, there is surprisingly
little overlap between the literature on sensor security and that
on RFID security. The boundaries between wireless-device
types will inevitably blur, as evidenced by the dual role of
reader and tag played by NFC devices.
Another important aspect of RFID security that of user
perception of security and privacy in RFID systems. As users
cannot see RF emissions, they form their impressions based
17
on physical cues and industry explanations. RFID will come to
secure ever more varied forms of physical access and logical
access. To engineer usable RFID systems and permit informed
policy decisions, it is important to understand how RFID and
people mix. This area sees some preliminary examiniation in
[66], [77], [23].
Further reading: Finkenzeller [29] is the standard reference
for general technical background on RFID. Shorter and more
accessible are the on-line primer materials published by the
RFID Journal [1], which is also a helpful source of current
industry news.
The master’s thesis of Steven Weis [88] describes early
work in the area of RFID privacy, and provides good technical
background. The recent U.S. Federal Trade Commission report
in [21] provides a helpful regulatory perspective on RFID as
it relates to consumers. An advisory committee known the
Article 29 Working Party is in the process of developing
European Commission privacy guidelines for RFID, which
should be available soon. In 2003, a workshop on RFID
Privacy took place at the MIT Media Lab. The workshop gave
rise to a recently published book entitled RFID: Applications,
Security, and Privacy [37]; the contributing authors offer a
rainbow of backgrounds and perspectives.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank Farooq Anjum, Dan Bailey,
David Molnar, Radha Poovendran, and Steve Weis for their
comments on and suggestions for this work.
REFERENCES
[1] RFID Journal. Online publication. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.rfidjournal.com.
[2] Alien Technology Corporation achieves another step toward pervasive,
economic RFID with announcement of 12.9 cent RFID labels, 13
September 2005. Alien Technology Press Release. Referenced 2005
at http://www.alientechnology.com.
[3] Boycott Benetton web site, 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.boycottbenetton.com.
[4] ECRYPT (European network for excellence in cryptology),
stream cipher project Web page, 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.ecrypt.eu.org/stream/.
[5] Texas Instruments gen 2 inlay data sheet, 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.ti.com/rfid/docs/manuals/pdfSpecs/epc inlay.pdf.
[6] Benetton explains RFID privacy flap. RFID Journal, 23 June 2004. Ref-
erenced 2005 at http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/articleview/471/1/1/.
[7] Merloni unveils RFID appliances. RFID Journal, 4 April 2003. Refer-
enced 2005 at http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/articleview/369/1/1/.
[8] R. J. Anderson and M. G. Kuhn. Low cost attacks on tamper resistant
devices. In B. Christianson, B. Crispo, T. M. A. Lomas, and M. Roe,
editors, Security Protocols Workshop , volume 1361 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 125–136. Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[9] G. Ateniese, J. Camenisch, and B. de Madeiros. Untraceable RFID tags
via insubvertible encryption. In 12th ACM Conference on Computer and
Communication Security , 2005. To appear.
[10] G. Avoine. Privacy issues in RFID banknote protection schemes. In
J.-J. Quisquater, P. Paradinas, Y. Deswarte, and A. Abou El Kadam,
editors, The Sixth International Conference on Smart Card Research
and Advanced Applications – CARDIS, pages 33–48. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 2004.
[11] G. Avoine. Adversarial model for radio frequency identification,
2005. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2005/049. Referenced 2005
at http://eprint.iacr.org.
[12] G. Avoine, E. Dysli, and P. Oechslin. Reducing time complexity in
RFID systems. In B. Preneel and S. Tavares, editors, Selected Areas
in Cryptography – SAC 2005 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer-Verlag, 2005. To appear.
[13] G. Avoine and P. Oechslin. RFID traceability: A multilayer problem.
In A. Patrick and M. Yung, editors, Financial Cryptography – FC ’05 ,
volume 3570 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 125–140.
Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[14] G. Avoine and P. Oechslin. A scalable and provably secure hash based
RFID protocol. In F. Stajano and R. Thomas, editors, The 2nd IEEE
International Workshop on Pervasive Computing and Communication
Security – PerSec 2005, pages 110–114. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society
Press, 2005.
[15] M. Baard. RFID foes find righteous ally. Wired News, 14 July 2005.
Referenced 2005 at http://wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,68133,00.
[16] M. Baard. RFID invades the capital. Wired
News, 7 March 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,66801,00.html.
[17] S. Bono, M. Green, A. Stubblefield, A. Juels, A. Rubin, and M. Szydlo.
Security analysis of a cryptographically-enabled RFID device. In
P. McDaniel, editor, 14th USENIX Security Symposium , pages 1–16.
USENIX, 2005. Dedicated Web site at www.rfidanalysis.org.
[18] D. Carluccio, K. Lemke, and C. Paar. Electromagnetic side
channel analysis of a contactless smart card: first results. In
ECrypt Workshop on RFID and Lightweight Crypto , Graz, Austria,
2005. Slide presentation. Referenced 2005 at http://www.iaik.tu-
graz.ac.at/research/krypto/events/index.php.
[19] D. Chaum. Untraceable electronic mail, return addresses, and digital
pseudonyms. Communications of the ACM , 24(2):84–88, 1981.
[20] J. Collins. Marks & Spencer expands RFID retail trial.
RFID Journal, 10 February 2004. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/articleview/791/1/1/.
[21] United States Federal Trade Commission. Radio frequency iden-
tification: Applications and implications for consumers, March
2005. Workshop report from FTC staff. Referenced 2005 at
www.ftc.gov/os/2005/03/050308rfidrpt.pdf.
[22] T. Daniels, M. Mina, and S.Russell. A signal fingerprinting paradigm
for physical layer security in conventional and sensor networks. In
IEEE/CreateNet SecureComm. IEEE, 2005. To appear.
[23] P. de Jager. Experimenting on humans using Alien technology. In
S. Garfinkel and B. Rosenberg, editors, RFID: Applications, Security,
and Privacy, pages 439–448. Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[24] T. Dimitriou. A lightweight RFID protocol to protect
against traceability and cloning attacks. In IEEE/CreateNet
SecureComm. IEEE, 2005. To appear. Referenced 2005
at http://www.ait.edu.gr/faculty/T Dimitriou files/RFID-
securecomm05.pdf.
[25] EPCglobal Web site, 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.EPCglobalinc.org.
[26] Guidelines on EPC for consumer products, 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.epcglobalinc.org/public policy/public policy guidelines.html.
[27] American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) et al. RFID position statement
of consumer privacy and civil liberties organizations, 20 November 2003.
Referenced 2005 at http://www.privacyrights.org/ar/RFIDposition.htm.
[28] M. Feldhofer, S. Dominikus, and J. Wolkerstorfer. Strong authentication
for RFID systems using the AES algorithm. In M. Joye and J.-J.
Quisquater, editors, Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embed-
ded Systems CHES 04, volume 3156 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 357–370. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[29] K. Finkenzeller. RFID Handbook. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
[30] K. Fishkin and J. Lundell. RFID in healthcare. In S. Garfinkel and
B. Rosenberg, editors, RFID: Applications, Security, and Privacy, pages
211–228. Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[31] K. P. Fishkin, S. Roy, and B. Jiang. Some methods for privacy in RFID
communication. In 1st European Workshop on Security in Ad-Hoc and
Sensor Networks (ESAS 2004), 2004.
[32] K. P. Fishkin, M. Wang, and G. Borriello. A ubiquitous system for
medication monitoring. In Pervasive 2004, 2004. Available as ‘A Flexi-
ble, Low-Overhead Ubiquitous System for Medication Monitoring,Intel
Research Seattle Technical Memo IRS-TR-03-011,25 October 2003.
[33] K.P. Fishkin, B. Jiang, M. Philipose, and S. Roy. I sense a disturbance
in the force: Unobtrusive detection of interactions with RFID-tagged
objects. In Sixth International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ,
pages 268–282, 2004.
[34] C. Floerkemeier, R. Schneider, and M. Langheinrich. Scan-
ning with a purpose - supporting the fair information prin-
ciples in RFID protocols, 2004. Referenced 2005 at cite-
seer.ist.psu.edu/floerkemeier04scanning.html.
[35] United States Food and Drug Administration. Combat-
ting counterfeit drugs: A report of the Food and Drug
18
Administration, 18 February 2004. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.fda.gov/oc/initiatives/counterfeit/report02 04.html.
[36] S. Garfinkel. An RFID Bill of Rights. Technology Review, page 35,
October 2002.
[37] S. Garfinkel and B. Rosenberg, editors. RFID Applications, Security,
and Privacy. Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[38] H. Gilbert, M. Robshaw, and H. Sibert. An active attack against HB+ –
a provably secure lightweight authentication protocol. Manuscript, July
2005.
[39] P. Golle, M. Jakobsson, A. Juels, and P. Syverson. Universal re-
encryption for mixnets. In T. Okamoto, editor, RSA Conference -
Cryptographers’ Track (CT-RSA), volume 2964 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 163–178, 2004.
[40] N. Good, J. Han, E. Miles, D. Molnar, D. Mulligan, L. Quilter, J. Urban,
and D. Wagner. Radio frequency identification and privacy with
information goods. In S. De Capitani di Vimercati and P. Syverson,
editors, Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society – WPES, pages
41–42. ACM, ACM Press, 2004.
[41] J. Halamka. Straight from the shoulder. The New England Journal of
Medicine, 353:331–333, 28 July 2005.
[42] G. P. Hancke and M. G. Kuhn. An RFID distance bounding protocol.
In IEEE/CreateNet SecureComm. IEEE, 2005. To appear. Referenced
2005 at http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/ gh275/distance.pdf.
[43] G.P. Hancke. A practical relay attack on ISO 14443
proximity cards. Manuscript. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/ gh275/relay.pdf.
[44] M. Hellman. A cryptanalytic time-memory tradeoff. IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory , IT-26:401–406, 1980.
[45] D. Henrici and P. Müller. Hash-based enhancement of location privacy
for radio-frequency identification devices using varying identifiers. In
R. Sandhu and R. Thomas, editors, Workshop on Pervasive Computing
and Communications Security – PerSec 2004 , pages 149–153. IEEE,
IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
[46] International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO. Document 9303,
machine readable travel documents (MRTD), part I: Machine readable
passports, 2005.
[47] EPCglobal Inc. EPCTM generation 1 tag data standards version 1.1 rev.
1.27, 10 May 2005. Referenced 2005 at http://www.epcglobalinc.org.
[48] VeriSign Inc. VeriSign EPC starter serviceTM data sheet, 2005.
Referenced 2005 at http://www.verisign.com/static/015884.pdf.
[49] S. Inoue and H. Yasuura. RFID privacy using user-controllable unique-
ness. In RFID Privacy Workshop, MIT, Massachusetts, USA, November
2003.
[50] Texas Instruments and VeriSign, Inc. Securing the pharmaceutical supply
chain with RFID and public-key infrastructure technologies. Whitepa-
per. Referenced 2005 at http://www.ti.com/rfid/docs/customer/eped-
form.shtml.
[51] M. Jakobsson and S. Wetzel. Security weaknesses in Bluetooth. In
D. Naccache, editor, The Cryptographers Track at RSA, volume 2020
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 176–191. Springer-Verlag,
2001.
[52] A. Juels. Minimalist cryptography for low-cost RFID tags. In C. Blundo
and S. Cimato, editors, The Fourth International Conference on Security
in Communication Networks – SCN 2004 , volume 3352 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science , pages 149–164. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[53] A. Juels. ‘Yoking-proofs’ for RFID tags. In R. Sandhu and R. Thomas,
editors, Workshop on Pervasive Computing and Communications Secu-
rity – PerSec 2004, pages 138–143. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
[54] A. Juels. Strengthing EPC tags against cloning. In ACM Workshop on
Wireless Security (WiSe). ACM Press, 2005. To appear.
[55] A. Juels and J. Brainard. Soft blocking: Flexible blocker tags on the
cheap. In S. De Capitani di Vimercati and P. Syverson, editors, Workshop
on Privacy in the Electronic Society – WPES, pages 1–7. ACM, ACM
Press, 2004.
[56] A. Juels, S. Garfinkel, and R. Pappu. RFID privacy: An overview of
problems and proposed solutions. IEEE Security and Privacy, 3(3):34–
43, May/June 2005.
[57] A. Juels, D. Molnar, and D. Wagner. Security and privacy issues
in e-passports. In D. Gollman, G. Li, and G. Tsudik, editors,
IEEE/CreateNet SecureComm. IEEE, 2005. To appear. Referenced 2005
at http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/ dmolnar/papers/papers.html.
[58] A. Juels and R. Pappu. Squealing Euros: Privacy protection in RFID-
enabled banknotes. In R. Wright, editor, Financial Cryptography ’03 ,
volume 2742 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 103–121.
Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[59] A. Juels, R.L. Rivest, and M. Szydlo. The blocker tag: Selective blocking
of RFID tags for consumer privacy. In V. Atluri, editor, 8th ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 103–111.
ACM Press, 2003.
[60] A. Juels, P. Syverson, and D. Bailey. High-power proxies for enhancing
RFID privacy and utility. In G. Danezis and D. Martin, editors, Privacy
Enhancing Technologies (PET), 2005. To appear.
[61] A. Juels and S. Weis. Authenticating pervasive devices with human
protocols. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2005, pages 293–308.
Springer-Verlag, 2005. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume
3621.
[62] A. Juels and S. Weis. Defining strong privacy for RFID, 2005.
Manuscript.
[63] U. Kaiser. Universal immobilizer crypto engine. In Fourth Confer-
ence on the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), 2004. Slide pre-
sentation. Referenced 2004 at http://www.aes4.org/english/events/aes4/.
Subsequently removed.
[64] G. Karjoth and P. Moskowitz. Disabling RFID tags with visible
confirmation: Clipped tags are silenced (short paper). In S. De Capitani
di Vimercati and R. Dingledine, editors, Workshop on Privacy in the
Electronic Society (WPES), 2005. To appear.
[65] Z. Kfir and A. Wool. Picking virtual pockets using relay attacks on
contactless smartcard systems. In IEEE/CreateNet SecureComm. IEEE,
2005. To appear. Referenced 2005 at http://eprint.iacr.org/2005/052.
[66] T. Kindberg, A. Sellen, and E. Geelhoed. Security and trust in
mobile interactions: A study of users’ perceptions and reasoning. In
N. Davies, E. D. Mynatt, and I. Siio, editors, Ubiquitous Computing:
6th International Conference (Ubicomp) , volume 3205 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science , pages 196–213. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
[67] D. Molnar, A. Soppera, and D. Wagner. Privacy for RFID through
trusted computing (short paper). In S. De Capitani di Vimercati and
R. Dingledine, editors, Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society
(WPES), 2005. To appear.
[68] D. Molnar, A. Soppera, and D. Wagner. A scalable, delegatable
pseudonym protocol enabling ownership transfer of RFID tags. In
B. Preneel and S. Tavares, editors, Selected Areas in Cryptography –
SAC 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, 2005.
To appear.
[69] D. Molnar and D. Wagner. Privacy and security in library RFID : Issues,
practices, and architectures. In B. Pfitzmann and P. McDaniel, editors,
ACM Conference on Communications and Computer Security , pages 210
– 219. ACM Press, 2004.
[70] M. Ohkubo, K. Suzuki, and S. Kinoshita. Efficient hash-chain based
RFID privacy protection scheme. In International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing – Ubicomp, Workshop Privacy: Current Status
and Future Directions, 2004.
[71] R. Pappu, B. Recht, J. Taylor, and N. Gershenfeld. Physical one-way
functions. Science, 297:2026–2030, 20 Sept. 2002.
[72] J. Parkinson. RFID: U.S. consumer research findings, 21 June
2004. Presentation from National Retail Federation at U.S. Fed-
eral Trade Commission RFID Workshop. Referenced 2005 at http://
www.ftc.gov/bcp/workshops/rfid/parkinson.pdf.
[73] M. Rieback, B. Crispo, and A. Tanenbaum. RFID Guardian: A battery-
powered mobile device for RFID privacy management. In Colin Boyd
and Juan Manuel González Nieto, editors, Australasian Conference
on Information Security and Privacy – ACISP 2005 , volume 3574 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 184–194. Springer-Verlag,
2005.
[74] M. R. Rieback, B. Crispo, and A. S. Tanenbaum. Keep on blockin’
in the free world: Personal access control for low-cost RFID tags. In
Proc. 13th International Workshop on Security Protocols , Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, 2005. To appear.
[75] S. E. Sarma, S. A. Weis, and D.W. Engels. RFID systems, security and
privacy implications. Technical Report MIT-AUTOID-WH-014, AutoID
Center, MIT, 2002.
[76] M.I. Shamos. Paper v. electronic voting records - an assessment,
2004. Paper written to accompany panel presentation at Com-
puters, Freedom, and Privacy Conference ’04. Referenced 2005 at
http://euro.ecom.cmu.edu/people/faculty/mshamos/paper.htm.
[77] S. Spiekermann. Perceived control: Scales for privacy in ubiquitous
computing environments. In L. Ardissono and T. Mitrovic, editors,
Conference on User Modeling – UM’05 , 2005. To appear.
[78] T. Staake, F. Thiesse, and E. Fleisch. Extending the EPC network – the
potential of RFID in anti-counterfeiting. In ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, pages 1607–1612. ACM Press, 2005.
[79] F. Stajano and R. Anderson. The resurrecting duckling: Security issues
for ad-hoc wireless networks. In 7th International Workshop on Security
19
Protocols, volume 1796 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
172–194. Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[80] R. Stapleton-Gray. Would Macys scan Gimbels? competitive intelli-
gence and RFID. In S. Garfinkel and B. Rosenberg, editors, RFID:
Applications, Security, and Privacy, pages 283–290. Addison-Wesley,
2005.
[81] S. Stern. Security trumps privacy. Christian Science Monitor, 20
December 2001.
[82] K. Takaragi, M. Usami, R. Imura, R. Itsuki, and T. Satoh. An ultra small
individual recognition security chip. IEEE Micro, 21(6):43–49, 2001.
[83] I. Vajda and L. Buttyán. Lightweight authentication protocols for
low-cost RFID tags. In Second Workshop on Security in Ubiquitous
Computing – Ubicomp 2003 , 2003.
[84] VeriChip corporation web site, 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.4verichip.com/.
[85] C.P. Wallace. The color of money. Time Europe, 158(11). 10 September
2001.
[86] S. Weis. Security parallels between people and pervasive devices.
In F. Stajano and R. Thomas, editors, The 2nd IEEE International
Workshop on Pervasive Computing and Communication Security –
PerSec 2005, pages 105–109. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society Press,
2005.
[87] S. Weis, S. Sarma, R. Rivest, and D. Engels. Security and privacy
aspects of low-cost radio frequency identification systems. In D. Hutter,
G. Müller, W. Stephan, and M. Ullmann, editors, International Confer-
ence on Security in Pervasive Computing – SPC 2003 , volume 2802
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 454–469. Springer-Verlag,
2003.
[88] S.A. Weis. Radio-frequency identification security and privacy. Master’s
thesis, M.I.T., June 2003.
[89] J. Westhues. Hacking the prox card. In S. Garfinkel and B. Rosenberg,
editors, RFID: Applications, Security, and Privacy, pages 291–300.
Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[90] D. White. NCR: RFID in retail. In S. Garfinkel and B. Rosenberg,
editors, RFID: Applications, Security, and Privacy, pages 381–395.
Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[91] R. Yu. Electronic passports set to thwart forgers. USA Today, 8 August
2005. Referenced 2005 at http://www.usatoday.com/travel/news/2005-
08-08-electronic-passports x.htm.
[92] K. Zetter. Feds rethinking RFID passport. Wired
News, 26 Apr. 2005. Referenced 2005 at
http://www.wired.com/news/privacy/0,1848,67333,00.html.

