ar
X
iv
:1
11
2.
15
97
v1
  [
cs
.N
I]
  7
 D
ec
 2
01
1
1
Enhanced Inter-Cell Interference Coordination
Challenges in Heterogeneous Networks
David López-Pérez1, İsmail Güvenç2, Guillaume de la Roche3, Marios Kountouris4, Tony Q.S. Quek5, Jie Zhang6
1 King’s College London, London, UK, Email: david.lopez@kcl.ac.uk
2 DOCOMO Communications Laboratories USA, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, Email: iguvenc@docomolabs-usa.com
3 University of Bedfordshire, Luton, UK, Email: guillaume.delaroche@beds.ac.uk
4 SUPELEC, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, Email: marios.kountouris@supelec.fr
5 Institute for Infocomm Research, A∗STAR, Connexis, Singapore, Email: qsquek@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
6 University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, Email: jie.zhang@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract—3GPP LTE-Advanced has started a new study item
to investigate Heterogeneous Network (HetNet) deployments as
a cost effective way to deal with the unrelenting traffic demand.
HetNets consist of a mix of macrocells, remote radio heads,
and low-power nodes such as picocells, femtocells, and relays.
Leveraging network topology, increasing the proximity between
the access network and the end-users, has the potential to provide
the next significant performance leap in wireless networks,
improving spatial spectrum reuse and enhancing indoor coverage.
Nevertheless, deployment of a large number of small cells
overlaying the macrocells is not without new technical challenges.
In this article, we present the concept of heterogeneous networks
and also describe the major technical challenges associated
with such network architecture. We focus in particular on the
standardization activities within the 3GPP related to enhanced
inter-cell interference coordination.
Index Terms— Femtocell, heterogeneous networks, inter-cell
interference coordination, picocell, relay.
I. INTRODUCTION
With more than one billion wireless subscribers today and
predictions for this number being tripled over the next five
years, the wireless industry is confronted with an increasing
demand for ubiquitous wireless coverage and larger data rates.
The exponential traffic growth in broadband wireless networks
is a well established fact and this unprecedented trend is
accelerated by the proliferation of advanced user terminals and
bandwidth-greedy applications, e.g., mobile TV, file transfer.
In order to support this galloping demand for data traffic, 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Long Term Evolution
(LTE) Release 8 is under field trial by most cellular operators.
This standard offers significant advantages with respect to its
predecessor High Speed Packet Access (HSPA), for instance,
higher spectral efficiency, lower latency due to its flat all-
Internet Protocol (IP) architecture, and larger throughputs [1].
However, the performance of Release 8 does not meet the
International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT)-Advanced
requirements for the fourth generation of mobile networks
defined by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
Thus, in order to meet such requirements (e.g., downlink data
rates of up to 100 Mbps and 1 Gbps for mobile and nomadic
users, respectively), LTE-Advanced, i.e., LTE Release 10, is
currently under standardization.
In order to enhance the performance of the overall network,
LTE-Advanced proposes the use of advanced technologies [2].
For instance, Carrier Aggregation (CA) allows the concurrent
utilization of different frequency carriers, hence efficiently
increasing the bandwidth that can be allocated to end-users.
Another trend is the enhancement of multi-antenna techniques,
where using Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems
with up to 8×8 antenna arrays has gained significant attention.
Coordinated Multi-Point (CoMP) transmission and reception,
where multiple cells are able to coordinate their scheduling or
transmission to serve users with adverse channel conditions,
is also envisioned to notably mitigate outages at the cell-edge.
However, all these advanced technologies do not allow sig-
nificant enhancements as they are reaching theoretical limits.
Such techniques may not always work well either, especially
under low Signal-to-Interference Plus Noise Ratio (SINR)
conditions, where received powers are low due to attenuation,
e.g., residential/office scenarios.
In order to overcome these issues and provide a significant
network performance leap, heterogeneous networks (HetNets)
have been introduced in the LTE-Advanced standarization.
A HetNet uses a mix of macrocells, Remote Radio Heads
(RRHs) and low power nodes such as picocells, femtocells,
and relays in order to bring the network closer to end-users.
In that way, radio link quality can be enhanced due to the
reduced distance between transmitter and receiver, and the
larger number of cells allows for more efficient spectrum
reuse and therefore larger data rates. As a result, HetNets are
expected to be one of the major performance enhancement
enablers of LTE-Advanced.
II. HETNETS
A HetNet is a network consisting of infrastructure points
with various wireless access technologies, each of them having
different capabilities, constraints, and operating functionalities.
Specifically, in LTE-Advanced, multi-tier network roll-outs,
involving RRHs, picocells, femtocells, as well as relay stations
underlaying the existing macrocellular layout are envisaged.
These low-power overlaid Base Stations (BSs) can be either
operator deployed or user deployed, and may coexist in the
2
same geographical area, potentially sharing the same spectrum.
Deploying such small cells aims at offloading the macrocells,
improving indoor coverage and cell-edge user performance,
and boosting spectral efficiency per area unit via spatial reuse.
They can be deployed with relatively low network overhead,
and have high potential for reducing the energy consumption
of future wireless networks. Also, this new palette of low-
power ‘miniature’ BSs requires little or no upfront planning
and lease costs, therefore drastically reducing the Operational
(OPEX) and Capital (CAPEX) Expenditures of networks [3].
According to Table I, we provide details of the different
elements of HetNets as follows:
• Macrocellular networks consist of conventional operator-
installed BSs, providing open public access and a wide
area coverage typically on the order of few kilometers.
In LTE, they are also called enhanced NodeBs (eNBs).
Usually destined to provide guaranteed minimum data
rate under maximum tolerable delay and outage con-
straints, macrocells typically emit up to 46 dBm, serving
thousands of customers and using a dedicated backhaul.
• Picocells are low-power, operator-installed cell towers
with the same backhaul and access features as macrocells.
They are usually deployed in a centralized way, serving
few tens of users within a radio range of 300m or less,
and have a typical transmit power range from 23 dBm to
30 dBm. Picocells are mainly utilized for capacity and
outdoor or indoor coverage infill, i.e., in environments
with insufficient macro penetration (e.g., office buildings).
• Femtocells, also known as home BSs or home eNBs,
are low-cost, low-power, user-deployed access points, off-
loading data traffic using consumers’ broadband connec-
tion (Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), cable, or fiber), and
serving a dozen of active users in homes or enterprises.
Typically, the femtocell range is less than 50m and its
transmit power less than 23 dBm. They operate in open
or restricted (Closed Subscriber Group (CSG)) access.
• Relays are usually operator-deployed access points that
route data from the macro BS to end-users and vice versa.
They are positioned so as to increase signal strength and
to improve reception in poor coverage areas and dead-
spots in the existing networks (e.g., cell edges, tunnels).
They can operate in transparent or non-transparent modes
(e.g., IEEE 802.16m), with little to no incremental back-
haul expense and with similar transmit power as picocells.
• RRH are compact-size, high-power and low-weight units,
which are mounted outside the conventional macro BS,
and connected to it generally through a fiber optic cable,
thus creating a distributed BS. The central macro BS
is in charge of control and baseband signal processing,
Moving some radio circuitry into the remote antenna,
RRHs eliminate power losses in the antenna cable and
reduce power consumption. They also enhance flexibil-
ity to network deployments for operators that face site
acquisition challenges and/or physical limitations them.
HetNets entail a significant paradigm shift transitioning
from ‘traditional’, centralized macrocell/microcell approaches
to more autonomous, uncoordinated, and intelligent roll-outs.
TABLE I
SPECIFICATION OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN HETNET
Types of nodes Transmit
Power
Coverage Backhaul
Macrocell 46 dBm Few km S1 interface
Picocell 23-30 dBm <300 m X2 interface
Femtocell <23 dBm <50 m Internet IP
Relay 30 dBm 300 m Wireless
RRH 46 dBm Few km Fiber
However, this paradigm shift, which can be seen as an excel-
lent opportunity for enhancements, also introduces challenges.
For instance, although the advantage of deploying femtocells is
supported by recent studies suggesting that 50% of all voice
calls and more than 70% of data traffic originate indoors,
cross-tier interference and traffic load variability may become
a barrier to a successful deployment of this type of network.
Hence, HetNets bring into play significant technical issues
and raise substantial challenges that are presented in the next
section.
III. TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
Self-organization, backhauling, handover, and interference
are identified here as the key technical challenges facing
HetNets.
A. Self-organization
Since some cells such as picocells and femtocells will
be user-deployed without operator supervision, their proper
operation highly depends on their self-organizing features [4].
The self-organizing capability of HetNets can be generally
classified into three processes:
• Self-configuration, where newly deployed cells are au-
tomatically configured by downloaded software before
entering into the operational state.
• Self-healing, where cells can automatically perform fail-
ure recovery or execute compensation mechanisms when-
ever failures occur.
• Self-optimization, where cells constantly monitor the
network status and optimize their settings to improve
coverage and reduce interference.
The deployment of self-organizing HetNets is an intricate task
due to the various type of coexisting cells and the increasing
number of network parameters that need to be considered.
The random, uneven and time-varying nature of user arrivals
and their resulting traffic load also exacerbate the difficulties
associated with deploying a completely self-organized HetNet.
B. Backhauling
Backhaul network design will be a major issue because of
the complex topology of the various type of coexisting cells.
For instance, the deployment of picocells will require access
to utility infrastructure with power supply and wired network
backhauling, which may be potentially expensive. Femtocells,
which in contrast have relatively lower backhauling costs,
may face difficulties in maintaining Quality of Service (QoS)
3
since backhauls rely on consumers’ broadband connections.
Hence, operators need to plan HetNet backhaul carefully to
identify the most cost effective and QoS guaranteed solution.
Such a solution is likely to be a mixture of both wireless and
wired backhaul technologies, in which some cells may have
dedicated interfaces to the core network, some other cells may
form a cluster to aggregate and forward the traffic to the core,
and other cells may rely on relays as an alternative interface.
C. Handover
Handovers are essential in order to provide a seamless uni-
form service when users move in or out of the cell coverage.
Furthermore, handovers are efficient for traffic load balancing,
by shifting users at the border of adjacent/overlapping cells
from the more congested cells to the less congested ones.
Nevertheless, this comes at the expense of system overhead,
which is likely to be significant in HetNets due to the large
number of small cells and the different types of backhaul links
available for each type of cell. In addition, the probability of
handover failure increases the probability of user outage [4].
D. Interference
Unlike traditional single-tier cellular networks, in HetNets,
the cross-tier and intra-tier interference problems are signifi-
cantly challenging due to the following reasons:
1) The backhaul network supporting different types of cells
may have different bandwidth and delay constraints.
For instance, femtocells are unlikely to be connected
directly to the core network and thus only limited back-
haul signaling for interference coordination is possible.
2) The restricted access control associated with picocells
and femtocells may lead to strong interference scenar-
ios in both uplink and downlink since users may not
handover to the nearest cells.
3) The self-organizing capability of cells also requires con-
tinuous sensing and monitoring of the radio environment
around them in order to dynamically and adaptively
mitigate or avoid interference.
With interference remaining undebatedly the major challenge,
in the sequel we focus on this topic.
IV. INTERFERENCE RELATED ISSUES IN HETNETS
Within operator-deployed cells like macrocells and relays,
interference may be mitigated via frequency reuse schemes
e.g., important is the planning of both relay and direct links.
However, since these reuse schemes may reduce spatial reuse,
subchannels used in a cell are banned in neighboring ones,
the tendency is to drop their use and target to universal reuse,
where all cells have the potential to use all available resources,
taking varying traffic load and channel conditions into account.
Also, roll-outs of user-deployed cells overlying macrocells
will create new cell boundaries, in which end-users will suffer
from strong inter-cell interference, degrading the performance
of the overall cellular network. In this section, the principal
interference scenarios in HetNets will be reviewed, followed
by a discussion on Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (ICIC)
techniques specified in LTE standardization to address them.
Note that due to space limitations, and the fact that fem-
tocells pose a significant challenge to the proper operation of
a HetNet due to their unplanned deployment and inter-cell
interference characteristics, the rest of this paper is focused
on the macrocell interactions with femtocells and picocells.
A. Sources of Interference
In addition to the large number of created cell boundaries,
the interference problem in HetNets is especially challenging
due to following reasons:
1) Unplanned deployment: Low-power nodes such as fem-
tocells are typically deployed in an ad hoc manner by users.
They can even be moved or switched on/off at any time.
Hence, traditional network planning and optimization becomes
inefficient because operators do not control neither the number
nor the location of these cells. This motivates the need for
new decentralized interference avoidance schemes that operate
independently in each cell, utilizing only local information,
whereas achieving an efficient solution for the entire network.
2) CSG access: The fact that some cells may operate in
CSG mode, in which cell access is restricted and nonsub-
scribers are thus not always connected to the nearest BS,
originates significant cross-tier interference components [5].
Fig. 1 depicts a challenging scenario for ICIC, in which
different nonsubscribers walk nearby houses hosting a CSG
femtocell. In the Uplink (UL), nonsubscriber (a) transmit at
high power to compensate for the path losses to its far serving
macrocell, jamming the UL of the nearby CSG femtocell(s).
In the Downlink (DL), a CSG femtocell interferes the DL
reception of non-subscriber (b) connected to the far macrocell.
Hence, this DL Macrocell User (MUE) becomes a victim user.
3) Power difference between nodes: Picocells and relays
usually operate in open access mode, meaning that all users
of a given operator can access to them. Open access helps
to minimize DL interference as end-users always connect to
the strongest cell, thus avoiding the CSG interference issue.
However, in HetNets, being attached to the cell that provides
the strongest DL Received Signal Strength (RSS)may not be
the best strategy since users will tend to connect to macrocells,
and not to those cells being at the shortest path loss distance.
This is due to the large difference in transmission power
between macrocells and low-power nodes. In that way, traffic
load will be unevenly distributed, thus overloading macrocells.
Moreover, due to this server selection procedure in the
DL, users connected to macrocells will severely interfere
all low-power nodes located in their vicinity in the UL.
Fig. 1 (c) illustrates how a user connected to a macrocell,
which provides the best DL RSS, jams a nearby picocell UL.
Note that due to lower path loss, this MUE would transmit with
a much less UL power if it was associated with the picocell.
This will allow load balancing and UL interference mitigation,
improving network performance.
4) Range expanded users: To address the problems arising
due to the power difference between the nodes in HetNets, new
cell selection methods that allow user association with cells
4
that provide a weaker DL pilot signal quality are necessary.
An approach under investigation is that of range expansion [6],
in which an offset is added to the picocell’s (or relay’s) RSS
in order to increase its DL coverage footprint (see Fig. 1 (d)).
Even though range expansion significantly mitigates cross-tier
interference in the UL, this comes at the expense of reducing
the DL signal quality of those users in the expanded region.
Such users may suffer from DL SINRs below 0 dB since they
are connected to cells that do not provide the best DL RSS
(see Fig. 1(d)).
B. Inter-Cell Interference Coordination
The interference problems summarized above may signifi-
cantly degrade the overall HetNet performance, which requires
the use of ICIC schemes to guarantee its proper operation.
In such schemes, special attention should be given to the
mitigation of inter-cell interference in the control channels.
User Equipments (UEs) may declare radio link failure under
severe interference, and experience service outage due to the
unreliable DL control channels.
Moreover, it is essential that UEs are able to sense, detect,
and report information to their servers concerning potential
interfering cells being present in their vicinity. Then, the
UE serving cell in collaboration with the potential interferers
will coordinate their resource allocation in terms of power,
frequency, and time to enhance network capacity and mitigate
user outages.
In order to facilitate this coordination between HetNet cells,
information messages need to be exchanged among them.
Macrocells are connected to picocells and relays through the
X2 interface. The ICIC messages defined in Release 8 that can
be exchanged via the X2 interface can be listed as follows [7]:
• Relative Narrowband Transmit Power (RNTP) Indicator:
For DL transmissions, RNTP indicator transmitted by a
certain cell is used to inform the neighboring cells on
whether the transmit power for specified Resource Blocks
(RBs) will be set below a certain threshold value.
• Overload Indicator (OI): For uplink transmissions, aver-
age interference plus thermal noise power measurements
for each RB is exchanged between different cells.
• High Interference Indicator (HII): A certain cell informs
neighboring cells that uplink transmission of one of its
cell-edge users will be scheduled in the near future, and
neighboring cells may abstain from scheduling their own
cell-edge users or high powers in the specified RBs.
While such messages exchanged over the X2 interface can help
alleviating the dominant interference scenarios for macrocells,
picocells, and relays, they are not available for femtocells,
hence necessitating new interference coordination approaches.
One possible solution enabling macro/femto coordination is
the exchange of such information messages via the backhaul.
However, because the wireline backhaul of femtocells may not
be owned by the network operator, delay issues may appear.
To overcome this issue, the exchange of messages between
macros and femtos through the wireless broadcast channels or
the use of UEs for relaying data between neighboring cells
are being investigated [8]. For instance, victim MUEs can
be determined by the macrocell by utilizing the measurement
reports of the MUEs, and their identity may be signaled by the
macrocell to the femtocell through the backhaul connection.
Similarly, another approach in which low-power nodes are
able to detect macrocell users and take actions to prevent
outages is under investigation [9]. This option will minimize
the exchange of data between cells at the expense of having
more sophisticated and expensive hardware at the small cells.
V. STANDARDIZATION FOR HETNET EICIC
The ICIC methods specified in Release 8 and Release 9
do not specifically consider HetNet settings and may not be
effective for dominant HetNet interference scenarios (Fig. 1).
In order to address such dominant interference scenarios,
enhanced Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (eICIC) tech-
niques are recently being developed for Release 10, which
can be grouped under three major categories according to [9]:
• Time-domain techniques.
• Frequency-domain techniques.
• Power control techniques.
These approaches will be reviewed in more detail below.
Unless otherwise stated, femtocell eICIC is considered because
of its priority in 3GPP.
A. Time-Domain Techniques
In time-domain eICIC methods, transmissions of the victim
users are scheduled in time-domain resources (e.g., subframe,
or OFDM symbol), where the interference from other nodes
is mitigated. They can be classified into two categories as
follows [10]:
1) Subframe Alignment: When the subframes of macro
eNB and home eNB are aligned as in Fig. 2(a), their control
and data channels overlap with each other. Therefore, in order
not to interfere to the control channel of MUEs, control
channel eICIC needs to be implemented at the femtocells. One
possible way to achieve this is to use so-called Almost Blank
Subframes (ABSFs) at femtocells, as shown in Fig. 2(c). In the
ABSFs, no control or data signals, but only reference signals
are transmitted1. When there are MUEs in the vicinity of a
femtocell, they can be scheduled within the subframes over-
lapping with the ABSFs2 of the femtocell, which significantly
mitigates cross-tier interference.
Similar eICIC approach using ABSFs can also be used to
mitigate interference problems in picocells (and relays) that
implement range-expansion. When no interference coordina-
tion is used for range-expanded picocell users (Fig. 2(b)),
they observe large DL interference from the macrocell. The
interference problem can be mitigated through using ABSFs at
the macrocell, and scheduling range-expanded picocell users
within the subframes that are overlapping with the ABSFs of
the macrocell.
1Note that femtocells still need to transmit reference signals in the coor-
dinated subframes, which occupy a limited portion of the whole subframe.
These reference signals may still cause some severe interference problems in
dominant interference settings [10].
2Note that while only the even subframes are configured as ABSFs in this
paper, different ABSF patterns are also possible. For example, current patterns
considered in 3GPP have ABS duty cycles of 1/8, 2/8, 3/8, and 3/20 [11].
5
2) OFDM Symbol Shift: In the second category of time-
domain eICIC methods, subframe boundary of home eNB
is shifted by a number of OFDM symbols with respect to
the subframe boundary of macro eNB in order to prevent
the overlap between the control channels of femtocell and
macrocell signals [10]. However, there still exists interference
from the data channels of femtocell users to the control
channels of macrocell users. Two possible solutions to address
this problem are 1) shared-channel symbol muting, and 2) con-
secutive subframe blanking at femtocells. In the first approach,
the OFDM symbols that overlap with the control channel of
the victim MUEs are muted. In the second approach, the
subframes of femtocell that overlap with the control channel
of MUEs are configured as ABSF.
B. Frequency-Domain Techniques
In frequency-domain eICIC solutions, control channels and
physical signals (i.e., synchronization signals and reference
signals) of different cells are scheduled in reduced bandwidths
in order to have totally orthogonal transmission of these signals
at different cells. While frequency-domain orthogonalization
may be achieved in a static manner, it may also be imple-
mented dynamically through victim UE detection.
For instance, victim MUEs can be determined by the macro
eNBs by utilizing the measurement reports of the MUEs, and
their identity may be signaled by the macro eNB to the home
eNB(s) through the backhaul. Alternatively, victim MUEs may
also be sensed by the home eNBs.
C. Power-Control Techniques
One last approach that has been heavily discussed in 3GPP
for handling dominant interference scenarios is to apply dif-
ferent power control techniques at femtocells. While reducing
the radiated power at a femtocell also reduces the total
throughput of femtocell users, it may significantly improve
the performance of victim MUEs.
Let Pmax and Pmin denote the maximum and minimum
home eNB transmit powers, respectively, PM denote the
received power from the strongest co-channel macro eNB at a
home eNB, α and β denote two scalar power control variables.
Then, different DL power control approaches at femtocells can
be listed as follows (all values are in dBm) [9]:
1) Strongest macro eNB received power at a home eNB:
The femtocell transmission power can be written as
Ptx = max
(
min(αPM + β, Pmax), Pmin
)
.
2) Path loss between a home eNB and MUE: The home
eNB transmission power can be set as Ptx = med
(
PM+
Pofst, Pmax, Pmin
)
, where the power offset is defined
by Pofst = med
(
Pipl, Pofst−max, Pofst−min
)
, with Pipl
denoting a power offset value that captures the indoor
path loss and the penetration loss between home eNB
and the nearest MUE, and Pofst−max and Pofst−min
denote the minimum and maximum values of Pofst,
respectively.
3) Objective SINR of HUE: In this approach, the received
SINRs of home eNB users (HUEs) are restricted to
a target value and transmit power at a femtocell is
reduced appropriately to achieve this target SINR using
the following expression: Ptx = max
(
Pmin,min(P̂L+
Prec,HUE, Pmax)
)
, where Prec,HUE = 10 log10
(
10I/10+
10N0/10
)
+ SINRtar, with I being the interference
detected by the served UE, N0 is the background noise
power, SINRtar is the target SINR for the HUE, and P̂L
is the path loss estimate between the home eNB and the
HUE.
4) Objective SINR of MUE: The goal of this approach
is to guarantee a minimum SINR at the MUEs, and
the home eNB transmit power is given by Ptx =
max
(
min(αPSINR + β, Pmax), Pmin
)
, where PSINR is
the SINR of the MUE considering only the nearest
femtocell interference.
VI. EICIC PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, the DL of an LTE-Advanced HetNet is
simulated to test the different eICIC schemes presented above.
The scenario (Fig. 3) under scrutiny is a residential area of
size 300m× 300m in Luton (UK), containing 400 dwelling
houses of which 63 were selected to host a CSG femtocell
(if we assume 3 network operators with equal customer share,
this corresponds to an approximate 50 % femto penetration).
The scenario is also covered by one macrocell located 200 m
south and 200 m east from the scenario’s center (i.e., outside
of Fig. 3), and one picocell deployed at the macrocell edge.
Both macrocell and picocell operate in open access.
Eight mobile users, utilizing a Voice over IP (VoIP) service,
move along predefined paths according to a pedestrian model
of mean speed 1.1m/s. Meanwhile, the picocell and the
femtocells are fully loaded and therefore utilize all subcarriers.
The cell power is uniformly distributed between subcarriers,
and a pedestrian user carrying a VoIP service is considered to
fall in outage if it cannot receive control data (i.e., user SINR
is smaller than −4 dB for a time interval of 200ms).
A. Macrocell - Femtocell Interaction
Fig. 4 illustrates the SINR of a pedestrian user when passing
by the front door of two different houses hosting a femtocell.
It can be seen that when no action is taken at the femtocells
(no eICIC), the SINR of the pedestrian user significantly falls
due to the cross-tier interference, thus resulting in user outage.
On the other hand, when eICIC is applied, the MUE SINR
recovers and outages vanish. In this case, an eICIC action
is triggered by the macrocell in the femtocells when MUEs
report low signal quality using channel quality indicators, i.e.,
user SINR smaller than -3 dB.
The ABSF eICIC time method provides the best MUE
protection since those subframes overlapping with the ABSFs
of femtocells are not interfered. The different eICIC power
methods presented in Sec. V-C result on the other hand in
distinct levels of signal quality protection for the victim MUE.
The behavior of these eICIC techniques depends on their
nature and tuning, but there is always a tradeoff between the
performance of both victim MUE and aggressing femtocell.
Table II, where the simulation results are given, shows this.
The larger the average sum throughput of the eight MUEs,
6
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON (600 SEC SIMULATION)
eICIC Number Number Number Average eICIC Average sum TP Average sum TP
methods of macro-pico of PUE of MUE TP gain at a of pedestrian of femtocell eICIC actionsfemto·10 min
HOs outages outages femto [Mbps] users [kbps] tier [Mbps]
no eICIC 5 5 267 73.32(100 %) 156.03 3974.25 -
eICIC time 5 0 0 0 (0 %) 2158.82 2990.50 14.81
eICIC power 1 5 0 0 11.02
(15.03 %)
1937.26 3153.88 14.81
α = 1, β = 60dB
eICIC power 1∗ 5 0 25 46.49(63.41 %) 1139.20 3725.88 56.23α = 1, β = 75dB
eICIC power 2 5 0 0 34.49 (47.03 %) 1499.30 3558.75 20.80
eICIC power 3
5 0 0
22.55
(30.75 %) 1626.61 3333.75 17.47SINRFUE
tar
= 0dB
eICIC power 3∗
5 0 19
33.74
(46.02 %) 1281.21 3520.75 47.52SINRFUE
tar
= 5dB
eICIC power 4
5 0 0
33.74
(66.05 %) 1183.35 3751.13 39.78SINRMUE
tar
= 5dB
∗ This eICIC method has not been properly tuned to avoid the number of user outages. They are given for comparison purposes.
the smaller the average sum throughput of the femtocell tier.
In addition, in the fifth column: ‘eICIC TP gain at a femto’,
the average throughput of a femtocell is given when an eICIC
is triggered on it. The ABSF eICIC time scheme provides
the best MUE performance at the expense of ‘switching off’
the femtocell (no data is carried in ABSFs). On the contrary,
taking no action at the femtocells results in the worst MUE
protection but in the best femtocell throughput performance.
Furthermore, in Table II, it can also be observed how the
performance of power methods (1) and (3) highly depends
on the tuning of their parameters, i.e., α, β, and SINRtar.
If they are not fine tuned a large number of outages occurs.
On the contrary, power methods (2) and (4) do not depend
on this fine tuning, since they are able to adapt to each
victim MUE situation considering either its path loss or its
SINR. Because of this, power methods (2) and (4) can offer
a ‘tailored’ protection for the victim MUE, avoiding outages
while recovering the maximum throughput at each femtocell.
The last column of Table II indicates the average number of
eICIC actions triggered in each femtocell every 10 minutes.
When the eICIC power methods are not fine tuned, more than
one eICIC action are triggered per femtocell to avoid an MUE
call drop. This is because the eICIC actions cannot recover the
MUE SINR to an adequate value. Hence, when a new channel
quality indicator is fed back from the MUE to its macrocell,
new eICIC actions are executed. When this case takes place,
the MUE normally incurs outage. In addition, it must be noted
that power methods (2) and (4) also cast more eICIC actions.
This is because the path losses and SINRs of victim MUEs
continuously change when they move closer to the femtocells,
and thus femtocells need to update their transmission power
in order to prevent MUE outage. Therefore, it can be stated
that this tailored protection comes at the expense of larger
backhaul signaling between cells.
B. Macrocell - Picocell Interaction
When pedestrian users are connected to the picocell in its
range-expanded region, the macrocell uses ABSFs in order to
mitigate macrocell to picocell user DL inter-cell interference.
A 10 dB offset was added to the picocell’s RSS in the DL to
further increase its footprint and create the expanded region.
Table II indicates that macro/pico handovers accorded 5 times.
Results also show that due to the utilization of ABSFs at the
macrocell, picocell user outages were avoided. When no eICIC
is carried out at the macrocell, handovers resulted in outage.
VII. CONCLUSION
HetNets have the potential to significantly boost network
performance, benefiting from transmitter-to-receiver distance
reduction and enabling better spatial reuse of the spectrum.
This article has identified the major advantages of HetNets,
as well as their technical challenges and research problems.
Particular attention has been given to the avoidance of cross-
tier interference due to its crucial role in proper operation of
multi-tier networks. Furthermore, the main eICIC techniques
currently under discussion in 3GPP have been evaluated
through realistic system-level simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ghosh, J. Zhang, J. G. Andrews, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of
LTE. Prentice Hall, Aug. 2010.
[2] M. Dottling, W. Mohr, and A. Osseiran, Radio Technologies and
Concepts for IMT-Advanced. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Oct.,.
[3] V. Chandrasekhar, J. G. Andrews, and A. Gatherer, “Femtocell Net-
works: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 59–67,
Sept. 2008.
[4] H. Claussen, L. T. W. Ho, and L. G. Samuel, “An Overview of the
Femtocell Concept,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, vol. 13, no. 1, pp.
221–245, May 2008.
[5] D. López-Pérez, A. Valcarce, G. de la Roche, and J. Zhang, “OFDMA
Femtocells: A Roadmap on Interference Avoidance,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 41–48, Sept. 2009.
[6] NTT DOCOMO, R1-103264, Performance of eICIC with Control Chan-
nel Coverage Limitation, 3GPP Std., Montreal, Canada, May 2010.
[7] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, LTE: The UMTS Long Term Evolution,
From Theory to Practice. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Feb. 2009.
[8] R1-101369, Considerations on interference coordination in heteroge-
neous networks, 3GPP Std., San Francisco, CA, Feb. 2010.
[9] R1-104968, Summary of the description of candidate eICIC solutions,
3GPP Std., Madrid, Spain, Aug. 2010.
[10] R1-104661, Comparison of Time-Domain eICIC Solutions, 3GPP Std.,
Madrid, Spain, Aug. 2010.
[11] CATT, “Evaluations of RSRP/RSRQ measurement (R4-110284),”
Austin, TX, Jan. 2011.
7
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
David López-Pérez received his Bachelor and Mas-
ter degrees in Telecommunication from Miguel Her-
nandez University, Elche (Spain) in 2003 and 2006,
respectively. He joined VODAFONE SPAIN in
2005, working at the Radio Frequency Department
in the area of network planning and optimization. He
took up a research scholarship at the Cork Institute
of Technology in Ireland in 2006, where he was
researching indoor positioning systems and sensor
networks. In 2007, he joined the Centre for Wire-
less Network Design (CWiND) at the University of
Bedfordshire as PhD Marie-Curie Fellow, where he was involved in different
FP6 and FP7 European projects, as well as EPSRC. Since August 2010, he
is a postdoctoral research associate at King’s College London at the Centre
for Telecommunication Research (CTR) working on heteregeneous networks.
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
İsmail Güvenç received his Ph.D. degree in Elec-
trical Engineering from University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL, in 2006. He was with Mitsubishi Electric
Research Labs in Cambridge, MA, in 2005, and
since 2006, he has been with DOCOMO USA Labs,
Palo Alto, CA, working as a research engineer. Dr.
Guvenc is an associate editor for IEEE Commu-
nications Letters since 2010, and he has recently
served as a guest editor for EURASIP Journal on
Advances in Signal Processing and IEEE Journal
on Selected Topics in Signal Processing. He co-
authored/co-edited two books on short-range wireless communications and
positioning. Dr. Guvenc holds 4 U.S. patents, and has another 20 pending
U.S. patent applications.
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Guillaume de la Roche is a senior research fellow at
the Centre for Wireless Network Design (CWiND),
United Kingdom, since 2007. Before he was with In-
fineon (2001-2002, Germany), Sygmum (2003-2004,
France) and CITI Laboratory (2004-2007, France).
He was also a visiting researcher at DOCOMO-Labs
(2010, USA) and AxisTeknologies (2011, USA). He
holds a Dipl-Ing from CPE Lyon, and a M.Sc and
Ph.D. from INSA Lyon. He is the PI of European
FP7 project CWNetPlan.
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Marios Kountouris (S’04-M’08) received the Dipl.-
Ing. in ECE from the National Technical University
of Athens, Greece, in 2002 and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in Electrical Engineering from the
Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications
(Telecom ParisTech), France, in 2004 and 2008,
respectively. His doctoral research was carried out at
Eurecom Institute, France, funded by FT - Orange
Labs, France. From February 2008 to May 2009, he
has been with the Department of ECE at the Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin, USA, as a postdoctoral
research associate, working on wireless ad hoc networks under DARPA’s
ITMANET program. Since June 2009 he has been with the Department
of Telecommunications at SUPELEC (Ecole Suprieure d’Electricité), France
where he is currently an assistant professor. He also received the Best Paper
Award in IEEE Globecom 2009. He is a member of IEEE and a professional
Engineer of the Technical Chamber of Greece.
8
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Tony Q.S. Quek received the B.E. and M.E. de-
grees from Tokyo Institute of Technology. At Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, he earned the
Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and Computer Sci-
ence. Since 2008, he has been with the Institute
for Infocomm Research, where he is currently a
Principal Investigator. He received the Singapore
Government Scholarship in 1993, Tokyu Foundation
Fellowship in 1998, the A*STAR National Science
Scholarship in 2002, and the JSPS Invited Fellow
for Research in Japan, 2011. He was honored with
the 2008 Philip Yeo Prize for Outstanding Achievement in Research, and the
IEEE Globecom 2010 Best Paper Award.
PLACE
PHOTO
HERE
Jie Zhang is a Professor at the Communica-
tions Group, the Department of Electronic and
Electrical Engineering, University of Sheffield
(www.sheffield.ac.uk). Before taking the Chair in
Wireless Systems at Sheffield in Jan. 2011, from
1997 to 2010, he had been with University of
Bedfordshire, Oxford University, Imperial College
London and University College London etc. His
research interests are focused on radio network plan-
ning and optimisation. Since 2003, as the Principal
Investigator, he has been awarded 17 projects worth
over 4.0 million pounds (his share) by the EPSRC, the European Commission
(FP6/FP7) and the industry etc. He was/is a Co-Investigator of two EPSRC-
funded projects on femtocell (B)4G mobile communications. Since 2006, he
has published over 100 papers in referred journals and conferences, over 10
of which have been widely cited. He is an author of the book - “Femtocells:
Technologies and Deployment” (Wiley, Jan. 2010).
9
b) Femtocell jamming the 
DL of a macro user
a)Macrocell user jamming 
the UL of a femtocell
Macrocell
User connected to the 
macrocell due 
to the larger DL RSS
c) Macrocell user jamming 
the UL of a nearby picocell
Strong carrier
Weak carrier
Strong interference
Successful user
User in outage
Fig. 1. Dominant DL and UL cross-tier interference scenarios in HetNets.
10
Fig. 2. Illustration of ABSFs for time-domain eICIC for 3GPP heterogeneous networks: (a) Macrocell and femtocell subframes without any eICIC. (b)
Macrocell and picocell subframes without any eICIC. (c) Macrocell and femtocell subframes with eICIC. This can address the interference problem in Fig. 1(b),
where the MUEs close to the femtocell can be scheduled in the even subframes of macrocell. (d) Macrocell and picocell subframes with eICIC. This can
address the interference problem in Fig. 1(d), where the range-expanded PUEs can be scheduled in the even subframes of picocells.
11
Fig. 3. HetNet simulated scenario based on an LTE-A network of 20 MHz with 1 macrocell transmitting at 46 dBm, 1 picocell transmitting at 30 dBm and
63 femtocells using up to 20 dBm. The dashed lines represent the routes followed by the eight macrocell users.
12
00:00 00:20 00:40 01:00 01:20 01:40 02:00 02:20 02:40
time (mm:ss)
 10
 5
0
5
10
15
20
25
S
IN
R
 (
d
B
)
targeted MCS
minimum MCS SINR
>200 ms >200 ms
outage in
no eICIC
2 eICIC
 actions launched
eICIC power 4
eICIC power 3
eICIC power 2
eICIC power 1
eICIC time
no eICIC
Fig. 4. SINR versus time of a victim MUE when passing close to two houses hosting a CSG femtocell.

