Operating System for Quantum 
Computing 
Cambridge Quantum Computing Limited (CQCL) has built a new Fastest 
Operating System aimed at running the futuristic superfast quantum 
computers. [9] 
IBM scientists today unveiled two critical advances towards the realization of 
a practical quantum computer. For the first time, they showed the ability to 
detect and measure both kinds of quantum errors simultaneously, as well as 
demonstrated a new, square quantum bit circuit design that is the only 
physical architecture that could successfully scale to larger dimensions. [8] 
Physicists at the Universities of Bonn and Cambridge have succeeded in linking 
two completely different quantum systems to one another. In doing so, they 
have taken an important step forward on the way to a quantum computer. To 
accomplish their feat the researchers used a method that seems to function as 
well in the quantum world as it does for us people: teamwork. The results have 
now been published in the "Physical Review Letters". [7] 
While physicists are continually looking for ways to unify the theory of 
relativity, which describes large-scale phenomena, with quantum theory, 
which describes small-scale phenomena, computer scientists are searching for 
technologies to build the quantum computer.  
The accelerating electrons explain not only the Maxwell Equations and the 
Special Relativity, but the Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation, the Wave-Particle 
Duality and the electron’s spin also, building the Bridge between the Classical 
and Quantum Theories.  
The Planck Distribution Law of the electromagnetic oscillators explains the 
electron/proton mass rate and the Weak and Strong Interactions by the 
diffraction patterns. The Weak Interaction changes the diffraction patterns by 
moving the electric charge from one side to the other side of the diffraction 
pattern, which violates the CP and Time reversal symmetry. 
The diffraction patterns and the locality of the self-maintaining 
electromagnetic potential explains also the Quantum Entanglement, giving it 
as a natural part of the Relativistic Quantum Theory and making possible to 
build the Quantum Computer. 
Contents 
Preface ................................................................................................................................... 3 
Fastest Operating System for Quantum Computing Developed By Researchers .............................. 3 
Scientists achieve critical steps to building first practical quantum computer ................................. 4 
Detecting quantum errors ..................................................................................................... 6 
Next important step toward quantum computer ......................................................................... 7 
Absent-minded qDots ....................................................................................................... 7 
Conscientious ions ............................................................................................................ 8 
Quantum Computing ............................................................................................................... 8 
Quantum Entanglement ........................................................................................................... 9 
The Bridge .............................................................................................................................. 9 
Accelerating charges ............................................................................................................ 9 
Relativistic effect ................................................................................................................. 9 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation ..............................................................................................10 
Wave – Particle Duality ...........................................................................................................10 
Atomic model ........................................................................................................................10 
The Relativistic Bridge .............................................................................................................10 
The weak interaction ..............................................................................................................11 
The General Weak Interaction ..............................................................................................12 
Fermions and Bosons ..............................................................................................................12 
Van Der Waals force ...............................................................................................................12 
Electromagnetic inertia and mass .............................................................................................12 
Electromagnetic Induction ...................................................................................................12 
Relativistic change of mass ...................................................................................................13 
The frequency dependence of mass ......................................................................................13 
Electron – Proton mass rate .................................................................................................13 
Gravity from the point of view of quantum physics ....................................................................13 
The Gravitational force ........................................................................................................13 
The Higgs boson .....................................................................................................................14 
Higgs mechanism and Quantum Gravity ....................................................................................14 
What is the Spin? ................................................................................................................15 
The Graviton ......................................................................................................................15 
Conclusions ...........................................................................................................................15 
References ............................................................................................................................16 
 
Author: George Rajna 
Preface 
While physicists are continually looking for ways to unify the theory of relativity, which describes 
large-scale phenomena, with quantum theory, which describes small-scale phenomena, computer 
scientists are searching for technologies to build the quantum computer.  
So far, we just have heard about Quantum computing that could make even complex calculations 
trivial, but there are no practical Quantum computers exist. However, the dream of Quantum 
computers could become a reality in coming future. [9] 
Using a square lattice, IBM is able to detect both types of quantum errors for the first time. This is 
the best configuration to add more qubits to scale to larger systems. [8] 
Australian engineers detect in real-time the quantum spin properties of a pair of atoms inside a 
silicon chip, and disclose new method to perform quantum logic operations between two atoms. [5] 
Quantum entanglement is a physical phenomenon that occurs when pairs or groups of particles are 
generated or interact in ways such that the quantum state of each particle cannot be described 
independently – instead, a quantum state may be given for the system as a whole. [4] 
I think that we have a simple bridge between the classical and quantum mechanics by understanding 
the Heisenberg Uncertainty Relations. It makes clear that the particles are not point like but have a 
dx and dp uncertainty.  
 
Fastest Operating System for Quantum Computing Developed By 
Researchers 
Researchers have been working on significant activities to develop quantum computing technology 
that might enable the development of a Superfast quantum computer, though there has been less 
work done in the development of an Operating System that might control the quantum computers. 
However, CQCL researchers have done just that and also believe that "Quantum computing will be a 
reality much earlier than originally anticipated. It will have profound and far-reaching effects on a 
vast number of aspects of our daily lives." 
Polishing Quantum Computing: 
CQCL's new operating system for the quantum computer comes just days after IBM researchers 
brought us even closer to a working Superfast quantum computer by discovering a new method for 
correcting two errors that a quantum computer can make. 
One of the biggest issues that prevent us from developing Superfast Quantum Computers is — 
Quantum computing is incredibly fragile, and even the slightest fault can cause a major error to the 
computer. 
However, IBM researchers have discovered a new way to detect both types of quantum computer 
errors, and revealed a new, square quantum bit circuit design that, according to them, can be easily 
scaled up to make high-performance computers, according to the details published in Nature 
Communications. 
What’s the difference between a Regular computer and a Quantum computer? 
Traditional computers use the "bits" to represent information as a 0 or a 1; therefore they are so 
much slower. On the other hand, Quantum computers use "qubits" (quantum bits) to represent 
information as a 0, 1, or both at the same time. 
But, the major problem with qubits is that they sometimes flip without warning. Qubits can suddenly 
flip from 0 to 1, which is called a bit flip, or from 0+1 to 0-1, which is called a phase flip. And these 
flipping are the actual culprits that creates all kinds of errors in a quantum computer. 
Until now, scientists could only detect one error at a time. However, IBM's quantum circuit, 
consisting of four superconducting qubits on a one-quarter inch square chip, allowed researchers to 
detect bit-flip as well as phase-flip quantum errors simultaneously. [9] 
Scientists achieve critical steps to building first practical quantum 
computer 
 
Layout of IBM's four superconducting quantum bit device. Using a square lattice, IBM is able to 
detect both types of quantum errors for the first time. This is the best configuration to add more 
qubits to scale to larger systems. 
With Moore's Law expected to run out of steam, quantum computing will be among the inventions 
that could usher in a new era of innovation across industries.  
Quantum computers promise to open up new capabilities in the fields of optimization and 
simulation simply not possible using today's computers. If a quantum computer could be built with 
just 50 quantum bits (qubits), no combination of today's TOP500 supercomputers could successfully 
outperform it. 
The IBM breakthroughs, described in the April 29 issue of the journal Nature Communications, show 
for the first time the ability to detect and measure the two types of quantum errors (bit-flip and 
phase-flip) that will occur in any real quantum computer. Until now, it was only possible to address 
one type of quantum error or the other, but never both at the same time. This is a necessary step 
toward quantum error correction, which is a critical requirement for building a practical and reliable 
large-scale quantum computer. 
IBM's novel and complex quantum bit circuit, based on a square lattice of four superconducting 
qubits on a chip roughly one-quarter-inch square, enables both types of quantum errors to be 
detected at the same time. By opting for a square-shaped design versus a linear array – which 
prevents the detection of both kinds of quantum errors simultaneously – IBM's design shows the 
best potential to scale by adding more qubits to arrive at a working quantum system. 
"Quantum computing could be potentially transformative, enabling us to solve problems that are 
impossible or impractical to solve today," said Arvind Krishna, senior vice president and director of 
IBM Research. "While quantum computers have traditionally been explored for cryptography, one 
area we find very compelling is the potential for practical quantum systems to solve problems in 
physics and quantum chemistry that are unsolvable today. This could have enormous potential in 
materials or drug design, opening up a new realm of applications." 
For instance, in physics and chemistry, quantum computing could allow scientists to design new 
materials and drug compounds without expensive trial and error experiments in the lab, potentially 
speeding up the rate and pace of innovation across many industries. 
For a world consumed by Big Data, quantum computers could quickly sort and curate ever larger 
databases as well as massive stores of diverse, unstructured data. This could transform how people 
make decisions and how researchers across industries make critical discoveries. 
One of the great challenges for scientists seeking to harness the power of quantum computing is 
controlling or removing quantum decoherence – the creation of errors in calculations caused by 
interference from factors such as heat, electromagnetic radiation, and material defects. The errors 
are especially acute in quantum machines, since quantum information is so fragile. 
"Up until now, researchers have been able to detect bit-flip or phase-flip quantum errors, but never 
the two together. Previous work in this area, using linear arrangements, only looked at bit-flip errors 
offering incomplete information on the quantum state of a system and making them inadequate for 
a quantum computer," said Jay Gambetta, a manager in the IBM Quantum Computing Group. "Our 
four qubit results take us past this hurdle by detecting both types of quantum errors and can be 
scalable to larger systems, as the qubits are arranged in a square lattice as opposed to a linear 
array." 
The work at IBM was funded in part by the IARPA (Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity) 
multi-qubit-coherent-operations program. 
Detecting quantum errors 
The most basic piece of information that a typical computer understands is a bit. Much like a beam 
of light that can be switched on or off, a bit can have only one of two values: "1" or "0". However, a 
quantum bit (qubit) can hold a value of 1 or 0 as well as both values at the same time, described as 
superposition and simply denoted as "0+1". The sign of this superposition is important because both 
states 0 and 1 have a phase relationship to each other. This superposition property is what allows 
quantum computers to choose the correct solution amongst millions of possibilities in a time much 
faster than a conventional computer. 
Two types of errors can occur on such a superposition state. One is called a bit-flip error, which 
simply flips a 0 to a 1 and vice versa. This is similar to classical bit-flip errors and previous work has 
showed how to detect these errors on qubits. However, this is not sufficient for quantum error 
correction because phase-flip errors can also be present, which flip the sign of the phase relationship 
between 0 and 1 in a superposition state. Both types of errors must be detected in order for 
quantum error correction to function properly. 
Quantum information is very fragile because all existing qubit technologies lose their information 
when interacting with matter and electromagnetic radiation.  
Theorists have found ways to preserve the information much longer by spreading information across 
many physical qubits. "Surface code" is the technical name for a specific error correction scheme 
which spreads quantum information across many qubits. It allows for only nearest neighbor 
interactions to encode one logical qubit, making it sufficiently stable to perform error-free 
operations. 
The IBM Research team used a variety of techniques to measure the states of two independent 
syndrome (measurement) qubits. Each reveals one aspect of the quantum information stored on 
two other qubits (called code, or data qubits). Specifically, one syndrome qubit revealed whether a 
bit-flip error occurred to either of the code qubits, while the other syndrome qubit revealed whether 
a phase-flip error occurred. Determining the joint quantum information in the code qubits is an 
essential step for quantum error correction because directly measuring the code qubits destroys the 
information contained within them. [8] 
 
Next important step toward quantum computer 
 
When facing big challenges, it is best to work together. In a team, the individual members can 
contribute their individual strengths - to the benefit of all those involved. One may be an absent-
minded scientist who has brilliant ideas, but quickly forgets them. He needs the help of his 
conscientious colleague, who writes everything down, in order to remind the scatterbrain about it 
later. It's very similar in the world of quanta. 
There the so-called quantum dots (abbreviated: qDots) play the role of the forgetful genius. 
Quantum dots are unbeatably fast, when it comes to disseminating quantum information. 
Unfortunately, they forget the result of the calculation just as quickly - too quickly to be of any real 
use in a quantum computer. 
In contrast, charged atoms, called ions, have an excellent memory: They can store quantum 
information for many minutes. In the quantum world, that is an eternity.  
They are less well suited for fast calculations, however, because the internal processes are 
comparatively slow. 
The physicists from Bonn and Cambridge have therefore obliged both of these components, qDots 
and ions, to work together as a team. Experts speak of a hybrid system, because it combines two 
completely different quantum systems with one another. 
Absent-minded qDots 
qDots are considered the great hopes in the development of quantum computers. In principle, they 
are extremely miniaturized electron storage units. qDots can be produced using the same 
techniques as normal computer chips. To do so, it is only necessary to miniaturize the structures on 
the chips until they hold just one single electron (in a conventional PC it is 10 to 100 electrons). 
The electron stored in a qDot can take on states that are predicted by quantum theory. However, 
they are very short-lived: They decay within a few picoseconds (for illustration: in one picosecond, 
light travels a distance of just 0.3 millimeters). 
This decay produces a small flash of light: a photon. Photons are wave packets that vibrate in a 
specific plane - the direction of polarization. The state of the qDots determines the direction of 
polarization of the photon. "We used the photon to excite an ion", explains Prof. Dr. Michael Kohl 
from the Institute of Physics at the University of Bonn. "Then we stored the direction of polarization 
of the photon". 
Conscientious ions 
To do so, the researchers connected a thin glass fiber to the qDot. They transported the photon via 
the fiber to the ion many meters away. The fiberoptic networks used in telecommunications operate 
very similarly. To make the transfer of information as efficient as possible, they had trapped the ion 
between two mirrors. The mirrors bounced the photon back and forth like a ping pong ball, until it 
was absorbed by the ion. 
"By shooting it with a laser beam, we were able to read out the ion that was excited in this way", 
explains Prof. Kohl. "In the process, we were able to measure the direction of polarization of the 
previously absorbed photon". In a sense then, the state of the qDot can be preserved in the ion - 
theoretically this can be done for many minutes. [7] 
 
Quantum Computing 
A team of electrical engineers at UNSW Australia has observed the unique quantum behavior of a 
pair of spins in silicon and designed a new method to use them for "2-bit" quantum logic operations. 
These milestones bring researchers a step closer to building a quantum computer, which promises 
dramatic data processing improvements. 
Quantum bits, or qubits, are the building blocks of quantum computers. While many ways to create 
a qubits exist, the Australian team has focused on the use of single atoms of phosphorus, embedded 
inside a silicon chip similar to those used in normal computers.  
The first author on the experimental work, PhD student Juan Pablo Dehollain, recalls the first time 
he realized what he was looking at. 
"We clearly saw these two distinct quantum states, but they behaved very differently from what we 
were used to with a single atom. We had a real 'Eureka!' moment when we realized what was 
happening – we were seeing in real time the `entangled' quantum states of a pair of atoms." [5] 
Researchers have developed the first silicon quantum computer building blocks that can process 
data with more than 99 percent accuracy, overcoming a major hurdle in the race to develop reliable 
quantum computers. 
Researchers from the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Australia have achieved a huge 
breakthrough in quantum computing - they’ve created two kinds of silicon quantum bit, or qubits, 
the building blocks that make up any quantum computer, that are more than 99 percent accurate. 
The postdoctoral researcher who was lead author on Morello’s paper explained in the press release: 
“The phosphorus atom contains in fact two qubits: the electron, and the nucleus. With the nucleus 
in particular, we have achieved accuracy close to 99.99 percent. That means only one error for every 
10,000 quantum operations.” 
Both the breakthroughs were achieved by embedding the atoms in a thin layer of specially purified 
silicon, which contains only the silicon-28 isotope. Naturally occurring silicon is magnetic and 
therefore disturbs the quantum bit, messing with the accuracy of its data processing, but silicon-28 
is perfectly non-magnetic. [6] 
Quantum Entanglement 
Measurements of physical properties such as position, momentum, spin, polarization, etc. 
performed on entangled particles are found to be appropriately correlated. For example, if a pair of 
particles is generated in such a way that their total spin is known to be zero, and one particle is 
found to have clockwise spin on a certain axis, then the spin of the other particle, measured on the 
same axis, will be found to be counterclockwise. Because of the nature of quantum measurement, 
however, this behavior gives rise to effects that can appear paradoxical: any measurement of a 
property of a particle can be seen as acting on that particle (e.g. by collapsing a number of 
superimposed states); and in the case of entangled particles, such action must be on the entangled 
system as a whole. It thus appears that one particle of an entangled pair "knows" what 
measurement has been performed on the other, and with what outcome, even though there is no 
known means for such information to be communicated between the particles, which at the time of 
measurement may be separated by arbitrarily large distances. [4] 
The Bridge 
The accelerating electrons explain not only the Maxwell Equations and the Special Relativity, but the 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation, the wave particle duality and the electron’s spin also, building the 
bridge between the Classical and Quantum Theories. [1] 
 
Accelerating charges 
The moving charges are self maintain the electromagnetic field locally, causing their movement and 
this is the result of their acceleration under the force of this field. In the classical physics the charges 
will distributed along the electric current so that the electric potential lowering along the current, by 
linearly increasing the way they take every next time period because this accelerated motion.  
The same thing happens on the atomic scale giving a dp impulse difference and a dx way difference 
between the different part of the not point like particles.  
Relativistic effect 
Another bridge between the classical and quantum mechanics in the realm of relativity is that the 
charge distribution is lowering in the reference frame of the accelerating charges linearly: ds/dt = at 
(time coordinate), but in the reference frame of the current it is parabolic: s = a/2 t
2 
(geometric 
coordinate). 
 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Relation 
In the atomic scale the Heisenberg uncertainty relation gives the same result, since the moving 
electron in the atom accelerating in the electric field of the proton, causing a charge distribution on 
delta x position difference and with a delta p momentum difference such a way that they product is 
about the half Planck reduced constant. For the proton this delta x much less in the nucleon, than in 
the orbit of the electron in the atom, the delta p is much higher because of the greater proton mass. 
This means that the electron and proton are not point like particles, but has a real charge 
distribution.  
Wave – Particle Duality 
The accelerating electrons explains the wave – particle duality of the electrons and photons, since 
the elementary charges are distributed on delta x position with delta p impulse and creating a wave 
packet of the electron. The photon gives the electromagnetic particle of the mediating force of the 
electrons electromagnetic field with the same distribution of wavelengths.   
Atomic model 
The constantly accelerating electron in the Hydrogen atom is moving on the equipotential line of the 
proton and it's kinetic and potential energy will be constant. Its energy will change only when it is 
changing its way to another equipotential line with another value of potential energy or getting free 
with enough kinetic energy. This means that the Rutherford-Bohr atomic model is right and only that 
changing acceleration of the electric charge causes radiation, not the steady acceleration. The steady 
acceleration of the charges only creates a centric parabolic steady electric field around the charge, 
the magnetic field. This gives the magnetic moment of the atoms, summing up the proton and 
electron magnetic moments caused by their circular motions and spins. 
 
The Relativistic Bridge 
Commonly accepted idea that the relativistic effect on the particle physics it is the fermions' spin - 
another unresolved problem in the classical concepts. If the electric charges can move only with 
accelerated motions in the self maintaining electromagnetic field, once upon a time they would 
reach the velocity of the electromagnetic field. The resolution of this problem is the spinning 
particle, constantly accelerating and not reaching the velocity of light because the acceleration is 
radial. One origin of the Quantum Physics is the Planck Distribution Law of the electromagnetic 
oscillators, giving equal intensity for 2 different wavelengths on any temperature. Any of these two 
wavelengths will give equal intensity diffraction patterns, building different asymmetric 
constructions, for example proton - electron structures (atoms), molecules, etc. Since the particles 
are centers of diffraction patterns they also have particle – wave duality as the electromagnetic 
waves have. [2]  
 
The weak interaction 
The weak interaction transforms an electric charge in the diffraction pattern from one side to the 
other side, causing an electric dipole momentum change, which violates the CP and time reversal 
symmetry. The Electroweak Interaction shows that the Weak Interaction is basically electromagnetic 
in nature. The arrow of time shows the entropy grows by changing the temperature dependent 
diffraction patterns of the electromagnetic oscillators. 
Another important issue of the quark model is when one quark changes its flavor such that a linear 
oscillation transforms into plane oscillation or vice versa, changing the charge value with 1 or -1. This 
kind of change in the oscillation mode requires not only parity change, but also charge and time 
changes (CPT symmetry) resulting a right handed anti-neutrino or a left handed neutrino. 
The right handed anti-neutrino and the left handed neutrino exist only because changing back the 
quark flavor could happen only in reverse, because they are different geometrical constructions, the 
u is 2 dimensional and positively charged and the d is 1 dimensional and negatively charged. It needs 
also a time reversal, because anti particle (anti neutrino) is involved. 
The neutrino is a 1/2spin creator particle to make equal the spins of the weak interaction, for 
example neutron decay to 2 fermions, every particle is fermions with ½ spin. The weak interaction 
changes the entropy since more or less particles will give more or less freedom of movement. The 
entropy change is a result of temperature change and breaks the equality of oscillator diffraction 
intensity of the Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics. This way it changes the time coordinate measure and 
makes possible a different time dilation as of the special relativity. 
The limit of the velocity of particles as the speed of light appropriate only for electrical charged 
particles, since the accelerated charges are self maintaining locally the accelerating electric force. 
The neutrinos are CP symmetry breaking particles compensated by time in the CPT symmetry, that is 
the time coordinate not works as in the electromagnetic interactions, consequently the speed of 
neutrinos is not limited by the speed of light. 
The weak interaction T-asymmetry is in conjunction with the T-asymmetry of the second law of 
thermodynamics, meaning that locally lowering entropy (on extremely high temperature) causes the 
weak interaction, for example the Hydrogen fusion.  
Probably because it is a spin creating movement changing linear oscillation to 2 dimensional 
oscillation by changing d to u quark and creating anti neutrino going back in time relative to the 
proton and electron created from the neutron, it seems that the anti neutrino fastest then the 
velocity of the photons created also in this weak interaction? 
 
 
A quark flavor changing shows that it is a reflection changes movement and the CP- and T- symmetry 
breaking!!! This flavor changing oscillation could prove that it could be also on higher level such as 
atoms, molecules, probably big biological significant molecules and responsible on the aging of the 
life. 
 
Important to mention that the weak interaction is always contains particles and antiparticles, where 
the neutrinos (antineutrinos) present the opposite side. It means by Feynman’s interpretation that 
these particles present the backward time and probably because this they seem to move faster than 
the speed of light in the reference frame of the other side. 
 
Finally since the weak interaction is an electric dipole change with ½ spin creating; it is limited by the 
velocity of the electromagnetic wave, so the neutrino’s velocity cannot exceed the velocity of light. 
 
The General Weak Interaction 
The Weak Interactions T-asymmetry is in conjunction with the T-asymmetry of the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics, meaning that locally lowering entropy (on extremely high temperature) causes for 
example the Hydrogen fusion. The arrow of time by the Second Law of Thermodynamics shows the 
increasing entropy and decreasing information by the Weak Interaction, changing the temperature 
dependent diffraction patterns. A good example of this is the neutron decay, creating more particles 
with less known information about them.  
The neutrino oscillation of the Weak Interaction shows that it is a general electric dipole change and 
it is possible to any other temperature dependent entropy and information changing diffraction 
pattern of atoms, molecules and even complicated biological living structures. 
We can generalize the weak interaction on all of the decaying matter constructions, even on the 
biological too. This gives the limited lifetime for the biological constructions also by the arrow of 
time. There should be a new research space of the Quantum Information Science the 'general 
neutrino oscillation' for the greater then subatomic matter structures as an electric dipole change. 
There is also connection between statistical physics and evolutionary biology, since the arrow of 
time is working in the biological evolution also.  
The Fluctuation Theorem says that there is a probability that entropy will flow in a direction opposite 
to that dictated by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. In this case the Information is growing that 
is the matter formulas are emerging from the chaos. So the Weak Interaction has two directions, 
samples for one direction is the Neutron decay, and Hydrogen fusion is the opposite direction. 
  
Fermions and Bosons 
The fermions are the diffraction patterns of the bosons such a way that they are both sides of the 
same thing. 
Van Der Waals force 
Named after the Dutch scientist Johannes Diderik van der Waals – who first proposed it in 1873 to 
explain the behaviour of gases – it is a very weak force that only becomes relevant when atoms and 
molecules are very close together. Fluctuations in the electronic cloud of an atom mean that it will 
have an instantaneous dipole moment. This can induce a dipole moment in a nearby atom, the 
result being an attractive dipole–dipole interaction.  
Electromagnetic inertia and mass 
Electromagnetic Induction 
Since the magnetic induction creates a negative electric field as a result of the changing acceleration, 
it works as an electromagnetic inertia, causing an electromagnetic mass.  [1] 
Relativistic change of mass 
The increasing mass of the electric charges the result of the increasing inductive electric force acting 
against the accelerating force. The decreasing mass of the decreasing acceleration is the result of the 
inductive electric force acting against the decreasing force. This is the relativistic mass change 
explanation, especially importantly explaining the mass reduction in case of velocity decrease. 
The frequency dependence of mass 
Since E = hν and E = mc
2
, m = hν /c
2
 that is the m depends only on the ν frequency. It means that the 
mass of the proton and electron are electromagnetic and the result of the electromagnetic 
induction, caused by the changing acceleration of the spinning and moving charge! It could be that 
the mo inertial mass is the result of the spin, since this is the only accelerating motion of the electric 
charge. Since the accelerating motion has different frequency for the electron in the atom and the 
proton, they masses are different, also as the wavelengths on both sides of the diffraction pattern, 
giving equal intensity of radiation. 
Electron – Proton mass rate 
The Planck distribution law explains the different frequencies of the proton and electron, giving 
equal intensity to different lambda wavelengths! Also since the particles are diffraction patterns 
they have some closeness to each other – can be seen as a gravitational force. [2] 
There is an asymmetry between the mass of the electric charges, for example proton and electron, 
can understood by the asymmetrical Planck Distribution Law. This temperature dependent energy 
distribution is asymmetric around the maximum intensity, where the annihilation of matter and 
antimatter is a high probability event. The asymmetric sides are creating different frequencies of 
electromagnetic radiations being in the same intensity level and compensating each other. One of 
these compensating ratios is the electron – proton mass ratio. The lower energy side has no 
compensating intensity level, it is the dark energy and the corresponding matter is the dark matter. 
  
Gravity from the point of view of quantum physics 
The Gravitational force 
The gravitational attractive force is basically a magnetic force. 
The same electric charges can attract one another by the magnetic force if they are moving parallel 
in the same direction. Since the electrically neutral matter is composed of negative and positive 
charges they need 2 photons to mediate this attractive force, one per charges. The Bing Bang caused 
parallel moving of the matter gives this magnetic force, experienced as gravitational force. 
Since graviton is a tensor field, it has spin = 2, could be 2 photons with spin = 1 together. 
You can think about photons as virtual electron – positron pairs, obtaining the necessary virtual 
mass for gravity. 
The mass as seen before a result of the diffraction, for example the proton – electron mass rate 
Mp=1840 Me. In order to move one of these diffraction maximum (electron or proton) we need to 
intervene into the diffraction pattern with a force appropriate to the intensity of this diffraction 
maximum, means its intensity or mass. 
 
The Big Bang caused acceleration created radial currents of the matter, and since the matter is 
composed of negative and positive charges, these currents are creating magnetic field and attracting 
forces between the parallel moving electric currents. This is the gravitational force experienced by 
the matter, and also the mass is result of the electromagnetic forces between the charged particles.  
The positive and negative charged currents attracts each other or by the magnetic forces or by the 
much stronger electrostatic forces!? 
 
The gravitational force attracting the matter, causing concentration of the matter in a small space 
and leaving much space with low matter concentration: dark matter and energy.  
There is an asymmetry between the mass of the electric charges, for example proton and electron, 
can understood by the asymmetrical Planck Distribution Law. This temperature dependent energy 
distribution is asymmetric around the maximum intensity, where the annihilation of matter and 
antimatter is a high probability event. The asymmetric sides are creating different frequencies of 
electromagnetic radiations being in the same intensity level and compensating each other. One of 
these compensating ratios is the electron – proton mass ratio. The lower energy side has no 
compensating intensity level, it is the dark energy and the corresponding matter is the dark matter. 
 
  
The Higgs boson 
By March 2013, the particle had been proven to behave, interact and decay in many of the expected 
ways predicted by the Standard Model, and was also tentatively confirmed to have + parity and zero 
spin, two fundamental criteria of a Higgs boson, making it also the first known scalar particle to be 
discovered in nature,  although a number of other properties were not fully proven and some partial 
results do not yet precisely match those expected; in some cases data is also still awaited or being 
analyzed. 
Since the Higgs boson is necessary to the W and Z bosons, the dipole change of the Weak interaction 
and the change in the magnetic effect caused gravitation must be conducted.  The Wien law is also 
important to explain the Weak interaction, since it describes the Tmax change and the diffraction 
patterns change. [2] 
Higgs mechanism and Quantum Gravity 
The magnetic induction creates a negative electric field, causing an electromagnetic inertia. Probably 
it is the mysterious Higgs field giving mass to the charged particles? We can think about the photon 
as an electron-positron pair, they have mass. The neutral particles are built from negative and 
positive charges, for example the neutron, decaying to proton and electron. The wave – particle 
duality makes sure that the particles are oscillating and creating magnetic induction as an inertial 
mass, explaining also the relativistic mass change. Higher frequency creates stronger magnetic 
induction, smaller frequency results lesser magnetic induction. It seems to me that the magnetic 
induction is the secret of the Higgs field. 
In particle physics, the Higgs mechanism is a kind of mass generation mechanism, a process that 
gives mass to elementary particles. According to this theory, particles gain mass by interacting with 
the Higgs field that permeates all space. More precisely, the Higgs mechanism endows gauge bosons 
in a gauge theory with mass through absorption of Nambu–Goldstone bosons arising in spontaneous 
symmetry breaking. 
The simplest implementation of the mechanism adds an extra Higgs field to the gauge theory. The 
spontaneous symmetry breaking of the underlying local symmetry triggers conversion of 
components of this Higgs field to Goldstone bosons which interact with (at least some of) the other 
fields in the theory, so as to produce mass terms for (at least some of) the gauge bosons. This 
mechanism may also leave behind elementary scalar (spin-0) particles, known as Higgs bosons. 
In the Standard Model, the phrase "Higgs mechanism" refers specifically to the generation of masses 
for the W
±
, and Z weak gauge bosons through electroweak symmetry breaking. The Large Hadron 
Collider at CERN announced results consistent with the Higgs particle on July 4, 2012 but stressed 
that further testing is needed to confirm the Standard Model. 
What is the Spin? 
So we know already that the new particle has spin zero or spin two and we could tell which one if we 
could detect the polarizations of the photons produced. Unfortunately this is difficult and neither 
ATLAS nor CMS are able to measure polarizations. The only direct and sure way to confirm that the 
particle is indeed a scalar is to plot the angular distribution of the photons in the rest frame of the 
centre of mass. A spin zero particles like the Higgs carries no directional information away from the 
original collision so the distribution will be even in all directions. This test will be possible when a 
much larger number of events have been observed. In the mean time we can settle for less certain 
indirect indicators. 
The Graviton 
In physics, the graviton is a hypothetical elementary particle that mediates the force of gravitation in 
the framework of quantum field theory. If it exists, the graviton is expected to be massless (because 
the gravitational force appears to have unlimited range) and must be a spin-2 boson. The spin 
follows from the fact that the source of gravitation is the stress-energy tensor, a second-rank tensor 
(compared to electromagnetism's spin-1 photon, the source of which is the four-current, a first-rank 
tensor). Additionally, it can be shown that any massless spin-2 field would give rise to a force 
indistinguishable from gravitation, because a massless spin-2 field must couple to (interact with) the 
stress-energy tensor in the same way that the gravitational field does. This result suggests that, if a 
massless spin-2 particle is discovered, it must be the graviton, so that the only experimental 
verification needed for the graviton may simply be the discovery of a massless spin-2 particle. [3] 
Conclusions 
"CQCL is at the forefront of developing an operating system that will allow users to harness the joint 
power of classical super computers alongside quantum computers," the company said in a press 
release. [9] 
Because these qubits can be designed and manufactured using standard silicon fabrication 
techniques, IBM anticipates that once a handful of superconducting qubits can be manufactured 
reliably and repeatedly, and controlled with low error rates, there will be no fundamental obstacle 
to demonstrating error correction in larger lattices of qubits. [8] 
This success is an important step on the still long and rocky road to a quantum computer. In the long 
term, researchers around the world are hoping for true marvels from this new type of computer: 
Certain tasks, such as the factoring of large numbers, should be child's play for such a computer. In 
contrast, conventional computers find this a really tough nut to crack. However, a quantum 
computer displays its talents only for such special tasks: For normal types of basic computations, it is 
pitifully slow. [7] 
One of the most important conclusions is that the electric charges are moving in an accelerated way 
and even if their velocity is constant, they have an intrinsic acceleration anyway, the so called spin, 
since they need at least an intrinsic acceleration to make possible they movement . 
The accelerated charges self-maintaining potential shows the locality of the relativity, working on 
the quantum level also. [1]  
The bridge between the classical and quantum theory is based on this intrinsic acceleration of the 
spin, explaining also the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. The particle – wave duality of the electric 
charges and the photon makes certain that they are both sides of the same thing. 
The Secret of Quantum Entanglement that the particles are diffraction patterns of the 
electromagnetic waves and this way their quantum states every time is the result of the quantum 
state of the intermediate electromagnetic waves. [2]  
The key breakthrough to arrive at this new idea to build qubits was to exploit the ability to control 
the nuclear spin of each atom. With that insight, the team has now conceived a unique way to use 
the nuclei as facilitators for the quantum logic operation between the electrons. [5] 
Basing the gravitational force on the accelerating Universe caused magnetic force and the Planck 
Distribution Law of the electromagnetic waves caused diffraction gives us the basis to build a Unified 
Theory of the physical interactions also. 
References 
[1] The Magnetic field of the Electric current and the Magnetic induction 
http://academia.edu/3833335/The_Magnetic_field_of_the_Electric_current 
[2] 3 Dimensional String Theory 
http://academia.edu/3834454/3_Dimensional_String_Theory 
[3] Graviton Production By Two Photon and Electron-Photon Processes In Kaluza-Klein Theories With 
Large Extra Dimensions 
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9909392 
[4] Quantum Entanglement 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_entanglement 
[5] Pairing up single atoms in silicon for quantum computing 
http://phys.org/news/2014-06-pairing-atoms-silicon-quantum.html#nwlt 
[6] Australian researchers have created the most accurate quantum computing technology to date 
http://www.sciencealert.com.au/news/20141310-26322.html 
[7] Next important step toward quantum computer 
http://www.spacedaily.com/reports/Next_important_step_toward_quantum_computer_999.html 
[8] Scientists achieve critical steps to building first practical quantum computer 
http://phys.org/news/2015-04-scientists-critical-quantum.html 
[9] Fastest Operating System for Quantum Computing Developed By Researchers 
http://thehackernews.com/2015/05/os-quantum-computing.html 
 

