International Journal of Research in Computer and
Communication Technology, Vol 2, Issue 11, November- 2013
ISSN (Online) 2278- 5841
ISSN (Print)    2320- 5156
www.ijrcct.org Page 1123
Windows, Linux and Mac Operating system Booting Process: a
Comparative Study
Prof. Amar Rajendra Mudiraj
Assistant Professor
MIT (E), Aurangabad,Maharashtra, India.
Email:amarmudiraj@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper presents a comparative study of Booting
Paradigm of Windows, Linux and Mac, the three popular
operating systems. Booting process is the essential and first
step perform by the OS after this process execution all
other processes can get the chance to execute , so we may
say that booting is the first process because of which all
other OS processes can execute.  This experimental study
gives an overview on the similarity and difference in
Booting Process. As every operating system have to
initially do the booting and as every OS providing different
feature of each others, the paper is highlighting those
micro and essential similarities and differences having by
the operating systems during the Booting Process.
Keywords: Booting, Cold booting, Worm booting, Linux
Booting, Windows Booting, Mac Booting.
1. Introduction
Booting Process is the first step gets happened in the
computer system when you switch on the computer.
In computing, booting is the initial set of operations that
a computer system performs when electrical power to the
CPU is switched on. The process begins when a computer
is turned on for the first time or is re-energized after being
turned off, and ends when the computer is ready to perform
its normal operations.
Booting includes four main steps in computer including
power On and secondly it load the initial instructions from
the ROM memory next it detect the operating system in the
Hard-disk and finding other hardware attached to computer
Finally it start the certain essential computer application as
per the default setting done by the operating system or by
the computer user
The most general types of computer booting are Cold
Booting  and Warm Booting , The Cold Booting is the
booting when the computer since to be off over a period
of time. In which all the primary memory and internal
setting completely cleared.
In Worm Booting the computer get restart without shut-
down the system, in which the system application and
memory just get cleared and then reloading the operating
system in primary memory. With the above two booting
types we also have some other flavor in the computer
booting like Sleep, Hibernate.
Figure 1: Computer Booting Steps
2. Operating system overview:
Operating system is the program which operates all other
program in the computer system. Whenever we want to
interact with the computers we must have an operating
system on it.
The operating system was developed for the better
computer usage and providing better platform to the users
application. According to the betterment and demands of
the user the operating systems are get grow right from
simple operating system like Command oriented (DOS),
and Some GUI based Operating system Like Windows ,
Linux, Mac. The mention operating system are also create
the differences according to their features like Number of
user can work on the operating system at a simultaneously
Power - ON
Load Instruction from ROM
Detect OS from HDD
Find Attached H/W
Start Initial Computer Application
www.ijrcct.org Page 1124
1124
(Single-user or Multi-user, Multi-processing, Multi-
programming, Network, Distributed, Real Time)
2.1 Windows
The most popular operating system now a day in all over
the world. The operating system comes in very different
format like single user, multi-user, network operating
system etc. Windows was developed by Microsoft
Corporation in 1980s. The first GUI operating system
developed by Microsoft was Windows 3.0 in 1989. The
organization also developed on command based and most
popular operating system named as MS-DOS (Microsoft-
Disk Operating System) in 1981. Windows XP was the
most popular and widely using operating system till date,
because of user-friendliness and easy to operate the
operating system still use by most of the people in the
word. The latest version of Windows in market is
Windows 8 launched commercially in Oct 2012.
2.1.1 Booting in Windows
The booting process in windows is very easy just like its
user friendly features. There are four basic steps are there
in Windows operating system while booting. The first
process starting when you turn on your computer is BIOS
i.e., Basic Input Output System.
Figure 2:- windows booting Steps
Step 01: In First step POST stands for Power On Self-
Test, which is initially inventory step and very critical step,
where hardware configuration and detection has been
perform, by looking and listen the errors and diagnosis
reports e.g. Error codes, beeps codes, numeric codes
Step 02: Now BIOS will look for the Booting Priority, like
from where the computer will get the operating system e.g.
from hard-disk, floppy disk, or network. This record in
booting process is called MBR (Master Boot Record).
Which stored on first sector of the hard disk from where
the operating system start it’s loading in Primary memory.
It also provide the Booting partition information
Step 03: Now the BIOS knows the MBR and Booting
Partition where the operating system loads the small
system software called KERNEL into main memory.
Finding NTLDR (NT Loader) who will load the partitions
in the computer system and try to identifying other
partition other than primary partitions. In same step
boot.inf file check the partitions for other Operating system
existence, where the user will select the operating system
loading into memory
Step 04: Other important booting support file line win.sys,
NTOSKERNEL.exe, HAL.DLL, system.ini, win.ini,
sysedit.exe, config.exe, autoexec.BAT, MSCONFIG.exe
these file are help in different system software installation
for which the application oriented environment has to get
implemented  and  Microsoft Corporation developed some
standard configuration done while booting the system.
2.2 Linux
Linux is free open source operating system allowing the
free distribution and licensed by GNU (General Public
license. Any developer can try to modify the system codes
as long as he/she will not going to sale the code. Linux is
the first multitasking and platform portable operating
system.   The main benefit of the Linux operating system is
its free to use and its open source operating system which
make it user level modifying operating system which make
more user oriented than windows operating system. The
Linux also provide the inbuilt utilities like system drivers,
antivirus, reliability feature which make them more non-
stop works on the client server environment without having
reboot of the system. Now days the Linux operating system
used as one of the most secure and anti threats operating
system which is the one of the best protection mechanism
providing operating system.
2.2.1 Booting in Linux
The booting process in Linux is quite different than
windows except the BIOS and MBR features. There are
four basic steps in Linux operating system while booting.
The first process starting when you turn on your computer
is BIOS i.e., Basic Input Output System.
www.ijrcct.org Page 1125
1125
Figure 3 :- Linux Booting Steps
Step01: In First step POST stands for Power On Self-Test,
which is initially inventory step and very critical step,
where hardware configuration and detection has been
perform, by looking and listen the errors and diagnosis
reports e.g. Error codes, beeps codes, numeric codes. Will
take care of identifying the Master boot record for the
initializing the booting process.
Step02: Now BIOS will look for the Booting Priority, like
from where the computer will get the operating system e.g.
from hard-disk, floppy disk, or network. This record in
booting process is called MBR (Master Boot Record).
Which stored on first sector of the hard disk from where
the operating system start it’s loading in Primary memory.
Some time it may stores in some ware else like floppy,
bootable Compact disk (CD), or flash drive.  It also
provide the Booting partition information from where the
operating system starts its loading on the computer.
Step03: after getting the idea about the primary partition
the first bootstrap loader load into the memory is GRUB
(Grand Unified Boot Loader) or LiLo (Linux Loader)
which try to load the operating system feature form the
supporting resources the initial loading file is initrd
(Initial RAM-DISK) which take care to create the ram-
disk initialization for the keep ready the RAM disk for the
loading the operating system from the sources. one of the
most important function of the GRUB is load the Kernel
into the memory during the booting by loading LinuxRC
which stands for Linux Run Command for initializing the
basic hardware for necessary during the booting process
during this configuration nest phase is un-mount the   initrd
un-mounting so that the basic information is stored in the
RamDisk and now the real disk can be use by the operating
system for further. The finally the Grub complete is part by
initializing the file system mounting though INIT root
directory by mounting the initial file system for further
activity of loading other supporting file of Linux operating
system .
Step04: Other important booting support file like
/sbin//init, /etc/inittb, /etc/rc.local, /runlevel
These file are help in different system software installation
for which the application oriented environment has to get
implemented, which help to create the GUI or Console
base environment for the user to use the operating system.
2.3 Mac
Mac operating system was developed by the apple in 1984
by the Apple Inc. The Apple Inc.  Produce proprietary
hardware and software for better integration of the OS and
the hardware s increase the fastest and smoothest way to
handle and use of operating system by the end-users.
Macintosh computers used the Motorola PowerPC Chip set
with an advanced architecture enhanced for graphics and
multimedia interface and usability. Since 2005 the Apple
Mac line of computers are Intel-based, but the Mac OS is
only licensed to run on an Apple Mac which is the first
multitasking operating system. The preferred file system
for Mac OS X is HFS, HFS+, a robust file system that
includes support for file permissions, but it also supports
other file systems.
Macintosh OSs was strictly GUI environments, with no
command-line option. Mac OS X, with its UNIX origins,
gives you the option of a character-based interface Apple
Computers is the only manufacturer of Macintosh
computers. Mac Operating system is Hardware oriented
which  has its own keyboard and mouse where mouse is
only has one button as left and right click button like
normal mouse use in other operating system. As compare
to the other operating systems the MAC operating system
is expensive because it’s not only OS but also it’s an entire
(Specific) system expected to purchase by the consumer to
run the MAC operating system. Mac OS X Tiger 10.4, the
newest version of the operating system apple released in
the year 2006 and then apple introduced the latest version
of OS X version of Mac was Snow Leopard (10.6) in the
year 2010.
2.3.1 Booting in Mac
One of the most unique feature of the Mac operating
system booting process is it does not support the BIOS
instead of having the BIOS it support the firmware utility
call BootROM When the power to a Macintosh computer
is turned on, the BootROM firmware is activated.
BootROM (which is part of the computer’s hardware) has
two primary responsibilities: it initializes system hardware
and it selects an operating system to run.
www.ijrcct.org Page 1126
1126
Figure 4: Mac Booting Steps
Step01: BootROM work on two function for Mac system
to help it carry out the boot process : First is POST
(Power-On Self Test), where it initializes hardware
interfaces and verifies the  sufficient availability of the
memory and  EFI which verifying the basic hardware
initialization and selects which operating system suppose
to use.
If there are multiple installations of OS X are available,
BootROM check the previous booting process and choose
the one that was last selected by the Startup Disk System
Preference process. The user can override this choice while
the computer boots, which causes EFI to display a screen
for choosing the boot volume.
Step02: Once BootROM is finished and an OS X partition
has been selected, control passes to the boot.efi boot
loader.
The fundamental job of the boot loader is load the kernel
into the memory. If full-disk encryption is enabled, the
boot loader is responsible for drawing the login UI and
prompting for the user’s password, which needed to access
the encrypted disk to boot from it. The boot loader can be
found in the /System/Library/CoreServices directory on the
root partition, in a file named boot.efi.
Step03: Once the kernel and all drivers necessary for
booting are loaded, the boot loader starts the kernel’s
initialization procedure. At this point, enough drivers are
loaded for the kernel to find the root device.
The kernel initializes the Mach and BSD data structures
and then initializes the I/O Kit. The I/O Kit links the
loaded drivers into the kernel, using the device tree to
determine which drivers to link As used here, the term
“root” refers to mounting a partition as the root, or top-
level, file system. Boot≠Root is a technology that allows
the system to boot from a partition other than the root
partition. Boot≠Root uses a helper partition to store the
files needed to boot, such as the kernel cache.
Step04: now the mandatory file are get loaded during the
booting process now the turn on for the supporting and the
system software who also have equal importance in the
operating system for make operating system workable like
the mach_init and init processes have been replaced by
"launchd" . "launchd" is now the root system process.
"launchd" then also replace and handle Various system
script including /etc/rc, Run starts up items,  Prepare the
system for the user, Coordinate the launching of system
daemons in an orderly manner. "launchd" frees up memory
and other resources associated with the daemon. "launchd"
starts SystemStarter,  "loginwindow" is a program that
controls several aspects of user sessions and coordinates
the display of the login window and the authentication
users.
3. Comparative chart of Windows, Linux
and Mac Booting Process
OS
Features Windows Linux Mac
BIOS Yes Yes No
POST Yes Yes Yes
Boot
Loader NLTDR
GRUB or
LiLo
BootX or
boot.efi
Kernel NTOSKERNEL INIT ,initrd
mach_init ,
launchd
Supporting
Files
win.sys,
HAL.DLL,
system.ini,sysedi
t.exe,config.exe,
autoexec.BAT,
MSCONFIG.exe
/sbin//init,
/etc/inittb
/etc/rc.local
,
/runlevel
mkextcache,
launchd,
loginwindow ,
/System/Libra
ry/CoreServic
es
Table 1 :- Comparative Chart of Booting Features of
Different Operating System
4. Future Scope
This experiment also give the motivation to the
comparative study of other operating systems like android,
Solaris, server operating system where advance features of
the operating system also include the new and advance
www.ijrcct.org Page 1127
1127
steps in the booting process than the existing step which
this experiment covered.
5. Conclusion
In the paper we compare the booting aspects with respect
to the different operating system scenario such as windows,
Linux and Mac operating system. The experiments give the
idea about the booting process difference and similarities
in these operating system. The experiment give the
conclusion that every Operating system (Considered in this
research paper) has same POST  step common and first
step the operating system must processed during the
booting process. This experiment also shows the Mac is
the only operating system which does not support any
BIOS kind mechanism while booting, it has its own
mechanism such as BootROM where it has its operating
system boot loader called BootX  or Boot.efi . This
experiment also gives the idea about the different boot
loader and kernel used by the operating system during the
booting process of individual.
References
[01]. Silberschatz, A., P.B. Galvin and G. Gagne;
Operating Systems Concepts.7th Edn. ; John Wiley and
Sons, (2004)
[02]. Stallings W.: Operating Systems Internals and
Design Principles; 5thedn. Prentice Hall, (2004).
[03]. Andrew S. Tanenbaum; Modern Operating System ;
3rd Edn. PHI Learning Private Limited (2012).
[04]. Dhananjay M. Dhamdhere; Operating System A
Concept- Based Approach; 3rd Edn. ; TMH Edn. (2012).
[05]. Richard Petersen; The Complete Reference RedHat
Linux; 6.2 Version; TMH Edn (2001).
[06]. Robin Williams; The Robin Williams Mac OS X
Book Jaguar Edition.
[07]. Darby Tober;”Introduction to Macs for PC Users”;
University of Texas at Austin (2005).
[08]. Joe Cabrera; “Linux vs. Windows: A comparative
study “Technical Writing – N4 Spring 2009.
[09].http://www.csus.edu/trainning/handouts/workshop/Ma
c_OS_Xhandout.pdf.
[10].http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_boot_loa
ders.
[11]. Apple: http://www.apple.com/macosx.
[12]. MacWorld: http://www.macworld.com.
[13]. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_startup_process.
[14]..http://zalloc.blogspot.in/2010/08/mac-os-x-boot-
process.html.

