Received February 3, 2013, accepted April 8, 2013, date of publication May 10, 2013, date of current version May 29, 2013.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2013.2260813
Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications for 5G
Cellular: It Will Work!
THEODORE S. RAPPAPORT1, SHU SUN1, RIMMA MAYZUS1, HANG ZHAO1, YANIV AZAR1,
KEVIN WANG1, GEORGE N. WONG1, JOCELYN K. SCHULZ1, MATHEW SAMIMI1, AND
FELIX GUTIERREZ1
1NYU WIRELESS, Polytechnic Institute of New York University, New York, NY 11201, USA
Corresponding author: T. S. Rappaport (tsr@nyu.edu)
This work was supported by Samsung DMC R&D Communications Research Team and Samsung Telecommunications America, LLC.
ABSTRACT The global bandwidth shortage facing wireless carriers has motivated the exploration of the
underutilized millimeter wave (mm-wave) frequency spectrum for future broadband cellular communication
networks. There is, however, little knowledge about cellular mm-wave propagation in densely populated
indoor and outdoor environments. Obtaining this information is vital for the design and operation of future
fifth generation cellular networks that use the mm-wave spectrum. In this paper, we present the motivation
for new mm-wave cellular systems, methodology, and hardware for measurements and offer a variety of
measurement results that show 28 and 38 GHz frequencies can be used when employing steerable directional
antennas at base stations and mobile devices.
INDEX TERMS 28GHz, 38GHz, millimeter wave propagation measurements, directional antennas, channel
models, 5G, cellular, mobile communications, MIMO.
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid increase of mobile data growth and the use of
smartphones are creating unprecedented challenges for wire-
less service providers to overcome a global bandwidth short-
age [1], [2]. As today’s cellular providers attempt to deliver
high quality, low latency video and multimedia applications
for wireless devices, they are limited to a carrier frequency
spectrum ranging between 700 MHz and 2.6 GHz. As shown
in Table 1, the global spectrum bandwidth allocation for all
cellular technologies does not exceed 780 MHz, where each
major wireless provider has approximately 200 MHz across
all of the different cellular bands of spectrum available to
them. Servicing legacy users with older inefficient cellphones
as well as customers with newer smartphones requires simul-
taneous management of multiple technologies in the same
band-limited spectrum. Currently, allotted spectrum for oper-
ators is dissected into disjoint frequency bands, each of which
possesses different radio networks with different propagation
characteristics and building penetration losses. This means
that base station designs must service many different bands
with different cell sites, where each site has multiple base
stations (one for each frequency or technology usage e.g.
third generation (3G), fourth generation (4G), and Long Term
Evolution - Advanced (LTE-A)) [3], [4]. To procure new
spectrum, it can take a decade of administration through reg-
ulatory bodies such as the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) and the U.S. Federal Communications Commis-
sion (FCC). When spectrum is finally licensed, incumbent
users must be moved off the spectrum, causing further delays
and increasing costs.
TABLE 1. Current 2G, 3G, 4G, & LTE-A spectrum and bandwidth
allocations [5].
VOLUME 1, 2013 2169-3536/$31.00 
 2013 IEEE 335
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
Mobile broadband networks need to support ever-growing
consumer data rate demands and will need to tackle the
exponential increase in the predicted traffic volumes. An effi-
cient radio access technology combined with more spectrum
availability is essential to achieve the ongoing demands faced
by wireless carriers.
A. THE WIRELESS EVOLUTION
To date, four generations of cellular communication systems
have been adopted in the USA with each new mobile gener-
ation emerging every 10 years or so since around 1980: first
generation analog FM cellular systems in 1981; second gener-
ation digital technology in 1992, 3G in 2001, and 4G LTE-A
in 2011 [6]. The evolution from 1G to 4G is summarized in
Table 2.
TABLE 2. Requirements and realities of 1G through 4G cellular systems
[7].
First generation cellular networks were basic analog sys-
tems designed for voice communications. A move to early
data services and improved spectral efficiency was real-
ized in 2G systems through the use of digital modula-
tions and time division or code division multiple access.
3G introduced high-speed Internet access, highly improved
video and audio streaming capabilities by using technolo-
gies such as Wideband Code Division Multiple Access
(W-CDMA) and High Speed Packet Access (HSPA). HSPA
is an amalgamation of two mobile telephony protocols,
High Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA) and High
Speed Uplink Packet Access (HSUPA), which extends and
improves the performance of existing 3G mobile telecom-
munication networks utilizing WCDMA protocols. An
improved 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project) stan-
dard, Evolved HSPA (also known as HSPA+), was released
in late 2008 with subsequent worldwide utilization beginning
in 2010. HSPA has been deployed in over 150 countries by
more than 350 communications service providers (CSP) on
multiple frequency bands and is now the most extensively
sold radio technology worldwide [8], although LTE is closing
the gap rapidly.
The International Mobile Telecommunications-Advanced
(IMT-Advanced) standard is the next-generation of mobile
communications technology defined by the ITU and
includes capabilities outstripping those of IMT-2000 (3G)
mobile communication. ITU refers to IMT-Advanced as
a 4G mobile communications technology, although it
should be noted that there is no universally accepted
definition of the term 4G. LTE radio access technol-
ogy has been developed by the 3GPP to offer a fully
4G-capable mobile broadband platform [9]. LTE is an orthog-
onal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM)-based radio
access technology that supports a scalable transmission band-
width up to 20 MHz and advanced multi-antenna transmis-
sion. As a key technology in supporting high data rates
in 4G systems, Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO)
enables multi-stream transmission for high spectrum effi-
ciency, improved link quality, and adaptation of radiation
patterns for signal gain and interference mitigation via adap-
tive beamforming using antenna arrays [10]–[12]. The coa-
lescence of HSPA and LTE will increase the peak mobile
data rates of the two systems, with data rates exceeding
100 Mbps, and will also allow for optimal dynamic load
balancing between the two technologies [8].
As the demand for capacity in mobile broadband commu-
nications increases dramatically every year, wireless carriers
must be prepared to support up to a thousand-fold increase
in total mobile traffic by 2020, requiring researchers to seek
greater capacity and to find newwireless spectrum beyond the
4G standard [13]. To improve the existing LTE network, the
wireless technology roadmap now extends to IMT-Advanced
with LTE-Advanced defined to meet IMT-Advanced require-
ments, which will be theoretically capable of peak through-
put rates that exceed 1 Gigabit per second (Gbps). LTE-
Advanced supports heterogeneous networks with co-existing
large macro, micro, and pico cells, and Wi-Fi access points.
Low cost deployment will be realized by self-organizing
features and repeaters/relays
As fifth generation (5G) is developed and implemented, we
believe the main differences compared to 4G will be the use
of much greater spectrum allocations at untapped mm-wave
frequency bands, highly directional beamforming antennas
at both the mobile device and base station, longer battery
life, lower outage probability, much higher bit rates in larger
portions of the coverage area, lower infrastructure costs, and
higher aggregate capacity for many simultaneous users in
both licensed and unlicensed spectrum (e.g. the convergence
of Wi-Fi and cellular). The backbone networks of 5G will
move from copper and fiber to mm-wave wireless connec-
tions, allowing rapid deployment and mesh-like connectivity
with cooperation between base stations.
B. EARLY GLOBAL ACTIVITIES FOR Beyond 4G (B4G) AND
5G WIRELESS
The evolution of wireless communication systems requires
global collaboration, involving worldwide mobile commu-
nication companies and governments. The Electronics and
Telecommunication Research Institute (ETRI) in Korea has
actively contributed to the development of 4G systems.
In 2002, the Mobile Communication Research Laboratory
336 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
(MCRL) of ETRI initiated the R&D of the 4G radio
transmission system for HSPA and proposed their vision of
4G radio mobile communications [14]. According to ETRI,
the 4G system would satisfy the data rate requirement of
100 Mbps for high mobility with Systems Beyond IMT-2000
(SBIMT) and would provide high quality service for both
low-tier and high-tier cellular systems.
In the early 2000s, aiming at integrating voice and web
data in an IP-based mobile communications system (i.e. 4G
wireless network), Sun Microsystems engineers were design-
ing and implementing mobile IP-based protocols and tools to
implement secure, versatile and responsive wireless commu-
nication technologies [15], [16].
A memorandum of understanding (MoU) was signed by
the government of Karnataka in India with Charmed Tech-
nologies Inc. from Beverly Hills, California, and Software
Technology Parks of India in Karnataka to develop ‘‘4G’’
wireless technology in the year 2001 [17].
In 2005, Samsung envisaged the increasing demands of
higher data rates, and the eventual convergence of digital
multimedia and ubiquitous computing [18]. Samsung’s 4G
vision has mainly focused on digital convergence including
implementations of bi-directional HDTV, increasing e-health
and e-education services, and ubiquitous wireless network
services. With an evolution from fixed broadband to mobile
broadband, more converged, personalized, convenient and
seamless secure services will be achieved, and Samsung has
recently made contributions in the area of mm-wave wireless
[2], [12].
Recently, Korea has carried out a series of R&D activi-
ties toward beyond 4G evolution [19]. It aims to establish
‘‘Giga Korea’’ during 2013 to 2020 for hyper connected IT
infrastructure deployment. Those activities include the acqui-
sition of wider spectrum, green networks and devices, special
purpose networks, and new network topologies and media
[19].
Nokia Siemens Networks (NSN) has conducted research
activities in radio, together with industry and research part-
ners, making contributions to the 3GPP LTE standard. NSN
believes that with improvement in digital processing power,
radio implementation bandwidth, and the availability of opti-
cal fiber, the radio evolution will continue. The next evolu-
tionary stage, beyond 4G, is likely to support up to 1,000
times higher traffic volumes than 2010 traffic levels, with
peak and cell edge rates higher than 10 Gbps and 100 Mbps
respectively with latency less than 1 ms for local area net-
works [20], and will realize wide scale small cell (hetero-
geneous) deployments, fast interference coordination and
cancellation, Cognitive Radio Networks (CRNs), and Self
Organizing Networks (SONs) [13]. Further, future networks
may require the combinations of diverse radio access tech-
nologies such as LTE, HSPA, Wi-Fi, and B4G [13].
The University of Surrey, England, has set up a world
research hub for 5G mobile technology with a goal to expand
UK telecommunication research and innovation [21]. New
York University (NYU) and NYU-Poly recently established
the NYU WIRELESS research center, to create new tech-
nologies and fundamental knowledge for future mm-wave
wireless devices and networks [36].
C. A MILLIMETER WAVE SOLUTION FOR FUTURE 5G
CELLULAR NETWORKS
Despite industrial research efforts to deploy the most efficient
wireless technologies possible, the wireless industry always
eventually faces overwhelming capacity demands for its
currently deployed wireless technologies, brought on by the
continued advances and discoveries in computing and com-
munications, and the emergence of new customer handsets
and use cases (such as the need to access the internet). This
trendwill occur in the coming years for 4GLTE, implying that
at some point around 2020, wireless networks will face con-
gestion, as well as the need to implement new technologies
and architectures to properly serve the continuing demands
of carriers and customers. The life cycle of every new gen-
eration of cellular technology is generally a decade or less
(as shown earlier), due to the natural evolution of computer
and communications technology. Our work contemplates a
wireless future where mobile data rates expand to the multi
gigabit-per-second range, made possible by the use of steer-
able antennas and mm-wave spectrum that could simultane-
ously support mobile communications and backhaul, with the
possible convergence of cellular and Wi-Fi services.
Recent studies suggest that mm-wave frequencies could be
used to augment the currently saturated 700 MHz to 2.6 GHz
radio spectrum bands for wireless communications [2]. The
combination of cost-effective CMOS technology that can
now operate well into the mm-wave frequency bands, and
high-gain, steerable antennas at the mobile and base sta-
tion, strengthens the viability of mm-wave wireless com-
munications [22], [23] Further, mm-wave carrier frequen-
cies allow for larger bandwidth allocations, which translate
directly to higher data transfer rates. Mm-wave spectrum
would allow service providers to significantly expand the
channel bandwidths far beyond the present 20 MHz channels
used by 4G customers [1]. By increasing the RF channel
bandwidth for mobile radio channels, the data capacity is
greatly increased, while the latency for digital traffic is greatly
decreased, thus supporting much better internet-based access
and applications that require minimal latency. Mm-wave fre-
quencies, due to the much smaller wavelength, may exploit
polarization and new spatial processing techniques, such as
massive MIMO and adaptive beamforming [24]. Given this
significant jump in bandwidth and new capabilities offered
by mm-waves, the base station-to-device links, as well as
backhaul links between base stations, will be able to handle
much greater capacity than today’s 4G networks in highly
populated areas. Also, as operators continue to reduce cell
coverage areas to exploit spatial reuse, and implement new
cooperative architectures such as cooperative MIMO, relays,
and interferencemitigation between base stations, the cost per
base station will drop as they becomemore plentiful andmore
densely distributed in urban areas, making wireless backhaul
VOLUME 1, 2013 337
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
FIGURE 1. Rain attenuation in dB/km across frequency at various rainfall
rates [26]. The rain attenuation at 28 GHz has an attenuation of 7 dB/km
for a very heavy rainfall of 25 mm/hr (about 1 inch per hour). If cell
coverage regions are 200 m in radius, the rain attenuation will reduce to
1.4 dB.
essential for flexibility, quick deployment, and reduced ongo-
ing operating costs. Finally, as opposed to the disjointed spec-
trum employed by many cellular operators today, where the
coverage distances of cell sites vary widely over three octaves
of frequency between 700 MHz and 2.6 GHz, the mm-wave
spectrum will have spectral allocations that are relatively
much closer together, making the propagation characteristics
of different mm-wave bands much more comparable and
‘‘homogenous’’. The 28 GHz and 38 GHz bands are currently
available with spectrum allocations of over 1 GHz of band-
width. Originally intended for Local Multipoint Distribution
Service (LMDS) use in the late 1990’s, these licensees could
be used for mobile cellular as well as backhaul [25].
A common myth in the wireless engineering community is
that rain and atmosphere make mm-wave spectrum useless
for mobile communications. However, when one considers
the fact that today’s cell sizes in urban environments are on
the order of 200 m, it becomes clear that mm-wave cellular
can overcome these issues. Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 show the rain
attenuation and atmospheric absorption characteristics of
mm-wave propagation. It can be seen that for cell sizes on
the order of 200 m, atmospheric absorption does not create
significant additional path loss for mm-waves, particularly at
28 GHz and 38 GHz. Only 7 dB/km of attenuation is expected
due to heavy rainfall rates of 1 inch/hr for cellular propagation
at 28 GHz, which translates to only 1.4 dB of attenuation over
200 m distance. Work by many researchers has confirmed
that for small distances (less than 1 km), rain attenuation will
present a minimal effect on the propagation of mm-waves at
28 GHz to 38 GHz for small cells [26].
FIGURE 2. Atmospheric absorption across mm-wave frequencies in
dB/km [1]. The attenuation caused by atmospheric absorption is 0.012 dB
over 200 m at 28 GHz and 0.016 dB over 200 m at 38 GHz. Frequencies
from 70 to 100 GHz and 125 to 160 GHz also have small loss.
D. Mm-WAVE CELLULAR MEASUREMENTS:
UNDERSTANDING THE CHANNEL
Future wireless technologies must be validated in the most
urban environments, such as New York City. In order to
improve capacity and service quality, the cellular network
architecture needs to support higher spatial reuse. Massive
MIMO base stations and small-cell access points are two
promising approaches for future cellular. Massive MIMO
base stations allocate antenna arrays at existing macro base
stations, which can accurately concentrate transmitted energy
to the mobile users [24]. Small cells offload traffic from
base stations by overlaying a layer of small cell access
points, which actually decreases the average distance between
transmitters and users, resulting in lower propagation losses
and higher data rates and energy efficiency [24]. Both of
these important trends are readily supported and, in fact,
are enhanced by a move to mm-wave spectrum, since the
tiny wavelengths allow for dozens to hundreds of antenna
elements to be placed in an array on a relatively small physical
platform at the base station, or access point, and the natural
evolution to small cells ensures that mm-wave frequencies
will overcome any attenuation due to rain.
Understanding the radio channel is a fundamental require-
ment to develop future mm-wave mobile systems as well as
backhaul techniques. With a firm technical understanding of
the channel, researchers and industry practitioners may then
explore new methods for the air interface, multiple access,
architectural approaches that include cooperation and inter-
ference mitigation and other signal enhancement techniques.
In order to create a statistical spatial channel model (SSCM)
for mm-wave multipath channels, extensive measurements
must be made in typical and worst-case operating conditions
and environments. We have conducted extensive propagation
measurements in urban environments in New York City and
suburban environments in Austin, Texas in order to under-
stand the mm-wave channel.
338 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 3. Block diagram of the (a) TX and (b) RX for the mm-wave propagation measurements at 28 GHz in
New York City.
II. 28 GHZ BUILDING PENETRATION AND REFLECTION
CAMPAIGN IN NEW YORK CITY
A. 28 GHZ BROADBAND CHANNEL SOUNDING
HARDWARE
Using a 400 Mcps sliding correlator channel sounder with
2.3 ns multipath resolution, we conducted extensive mm-
wave propagation measurements at 28 GHz in New York
City in 2012. The block diagram of the transmitter (TX) and
receiver (RX) is given in Fig. 3. A pseudo-random noise
(PN) sequence sliding correlator was utilized as the probing
signal, which was modulated to a 5.4 GHz intermediate fre-
quency (IF) and upconverted to 28 GHz after mixing with a
22.6 GHz local oscillator (LO), in a manner similar to [27].
The transmitter power was +30 dBm (a typical value for
lower power femtocells), fed to a steerable 10◦ beamwidth
24.5 dBi horn antenna or a 30◦ beamwidth 15 dBi horn
antenna that was mechanically rotated. The receiver used the
VOLUME 1, 2013 339
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
TABLE 3. Summary of penetration losses through various common building materials at 28 GHz. Both of the horn antennas have 24.5 dBi gains with 10◦
half power beamwidth [28].
TABLE 4. Penetration losses for multiple indoor obstructions in an office environment at 28 GHz. Weak signals are denoted by locations where the SNR
was high enough to distinguish signal from noise but not enough for the signal to be acquired, i.e. penetration losses were between 64 dB to 74 dB
relative to a 5 m free space test. No signal detected denotes an outage, where penetration loss is greater than 74 dB relative to a 5 m free space test [28].
TABLE 5. Comparison of reflection coefficients for various common building materials at 28 GHz. Both of the horn antennas have 24.5 dBi gains with 10◦
half power beamwidth [28].
same type of horn antennas as the transmitter. In order to
achieve increased measurement dynamic range for increased
coverage distance, we used a sliding correlator spread
spectrum system [5]. Total measured dynamic range was
approximately 178 dB between the transmitter and receiver
using the most directional horn antennas in order to obtain
an SNR of 10 dB, on the order of future small cells. All
propagation measurement equipment used AC power outlets
that were available from various buildings, thus avoiding any
battery depletion problem.
B. 28 GHz BUILDING PENETRATION AND REFLECTION
MEASUREMENT
To understand the mm-wave propagation environment in
urban areas, signal penetration and reflection properties of
common building materials with typical smooth and rough
surfaces are required for both indoor and outdoor cases [26].
We conducted penetration and reflection measurements at
28 GHz throughout the summer of 2012 in New York
City [28]. Penetration and reflection measurements for com-
mon materials were conducted at three locations at the NYU
campus in New York City: (a) the 10th floor of 2 MetroTech
Center (MTC) in Brooklyn, (b) the Othmer Residence Hall
(ORH) in Brooklyn, and (c) Warren Weaver Hall (WWH) in
Manhattan [28]. The block diagram of the channel sounding
hardware used in this campaign is shown in Fig. 3.
Penetration losses through building materials were col-
lected by first performing a 5-meter free space reference mea-
surement resulting in 75.3 dB path loss, and then positioning
the TX and RX on opposite sides of the test material at the
340 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
FIGURE 4. Map of the penetration measurements through multiple
obstructions in an office environment located at the 10th floor of 2
MetroTech Center in Brooklyn, New York. The TX location is represented
by a yellow star, the RX locations where signals can be acquired are
represented by green circles, and the RX locations where weak signals can
be detected are in red triangles. The black cross denotes an outage [28].
same distance. Materials tested for penetration loss include:
tinted glass, brick, clear non-tinted glass, and drywall. Table 3
summarizes the penetration loss results for these common
building materials [28]. As shown in Table 3, tinted glass
and brick pillars (typical exterior surfaces of urban buildings)
have high penetration losses of 40.1 dB and 28.3 dB, respec-
tively. This illustrates the fact that building penetration of
mm-waves will be difficult for outdoor transmitters, thus pro-
viding high isolation between outdoor and indoor networks.
On the other hand, common indoor materials such as clear
non-tinted glass and drywall only have 3.6 dB and 6.8 dB of
losses, respectively, which are relatively low.
In addition to penetration measurements for individual
materials, penetration measurements were also made through
multiple obstructions in typical office environments, to deter-
mine overall average partition losses, as was done in [29]
using ‘‘primary ray tracing’’ where a single ray is drawn
between the TX and RX, and attenuations of obstructions
are determined through measurements. As shown in Fig. 4,
multiple indoor obstructions in an office building environ-
ment were characterized using 8 RX locations, in which
each RX location was selected to determine penetration
through increasing layers of obstructions. Partition layers
included multiple walls, doors, cubicles, and an elevator
bank (RX 8) [28]. We used lower TX power which limited
the maximum measurable path loss to about 169 dB.
Table 4 presents a summary of the number and type of
obstructions between the TX and RX, as well as the 28 GHz
penetration loss results caused by multiple obstructions in a
typical office environment. Note that the RX locations are
ordered in increasing TX-RX separation distances. Data is
grouped into three subsections: signal acquired (with val-
ues listed), signal detected, and no signal detected. Signal
acquired is defined as a location where the SNR is sufficiently
high for accurate acquisition, i.e. penetration loss relative to
FIGURE 5. Images of the 28 GHz reflection measurement for outdoor
tinted glass at ORH (top left), outdoor concrete wall at ORH (top right),
penetration loss measurement for indoor clear non-tinted glass at MTC
(bottom left) and tinted glass at ORH (bottom right) [28].
5 meters free space test is less than 64 dB. Signal detected is a
location where the SNR is high enough to slightly distinguish
a signal from noise but not strong enough to be acquired,
i.e. penetration loss between 64 dB to 74 dB relative to a
5 m free space test. No signal detected denotes an outage,
where the penetration loss is at least 74 dB greater than the
5 m free space test. As shown in Table 4, penetration loss
does not greatly depend on the TX-RX separation distance,
but mostly depends on the number and type of obstructions.
The RX sites with TX-RX separation distances of 25.6 m and
11.4 m have virtually identical measured penetration losses
of 45.1 dB; however, the site with 25.6 m separation distance
has obstructions of four walls and two cubicles while the other
site with 11.4 m separation distance has obstructions of three
walls and one door. Note that one outage was found at the RX
site with a separation distance of 35.8 m, a result of the large
separation distance and the inability of RF waves to penetrate
the metallic elevator bank.
Table 5 summarizes and compares the reflection coeffi-
cients for common indoor and outdoor building materials.
As indicated in Table 5, the outdoor materials have larger
reflection coefficients of 0.896 for tinted glass and 0.815
for concrete at a 10◦ incident angle, as compared to clear
non-tinted glass and drywall, which have lower reflection
coefficients of 0.740 and 0.704, respectively. The results for
outdoor tinted glass in ORH consistently show that a large
portion of the signal (= 0.896) is reflected and could not
penetrate through the glass. In contrast, the clear non-tinted
glass located inside theMTC building has a smaller reflection
coefficient (= 0.740) and causes only 3.9 dB of penetration
loss compared to the 40.1 dB loss for the outdoor tinted glass
in ORH. The high penetration loss through outdoor building
materials and low attenuation through indoor materials sug-
gest that RF energy can be contained in intended areas within
VOLUME 1, 2013 341
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
buildings which reduces interference, yet making outdoor-
to-indoor building penetration more difficult. Fig. 5 presents
photographs of the penetration and reflection measurements
of common building materials at 28 GHz.
III. 28 GHz URBAN PROPAGATION CAMPAIGN IN NEW
YORK CITY
A. MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE
The hardware system of Fig, 3 was used in the outdoor propa-
gation measurement campaign in NewYork City.We selected
one TX and 11 RX measurement locations at the NYU-Poly
campus in downtown Brooklyn. The distance between the TX
and RX ranged from 75 m to 125 m. At the NYU campus in
Manhattan, 3 TX and 75 RX locations (with 25 RX sites for
each TX site) were chosen with TX-RX separations varying
from 19 m to 425 m to emulate future cellular base stations.
At three of the measurement locations in Brooklyn, the RX
was moved on an automated linear track of 10 wavelengths
(107 mm) in half-wavelength (5.35mm) increments to study
small scale signal level variations, i.e. small scale fading. At
each track position, a 360◦ azimuthal sweep was performed
in steps of 10◦ (if using the 10◦ beamwidth 24.5 dBi narrow-
beam horn antenna), or 30◦ (if using the 30◦ beamwidth 15
dBi wide-beam horn antenna). Large scale propagation char-
acteristics were investigated in the remaining eight RX loca-
tions in Brooklyn and all the Manhattan measurements using
24.5 dBi narrow beam antennas. At each TX and RX location,
extensive measurements were conducted for three different
TX azimuth angles, −5◦ , 0◦ , and +5◦ from boresight to the
receiver, and for three different RX elevation angles of −20◦
, 0◦ , and +20◦ creating nine possible antenna pointing com-
binations between TX and RX. For each of the nine antenna
pointing combinations, the RX antenna was swept 360◦ in the
azimuth plane in 10◦ steps, and measurements were recorded
if energy was received. Finally, cross polarization measure-
ments were done at all Brooklyn RX sites where both vertical
and horizontal electric polarization fields were measured.
Propagation measurements were conducted in New York
City around the NYU campuses in Manhattan and Brooklyn.
Each location had the potential to collect 324 power delay
profiles (PDPs) for all combinations (36 RX azimuth angles,
3 TX azimuth angles, and 3 RX elevation angles). Not all
azimuth angles yielded a detectable signal.
B. PATH LOSS AND SIGNAL OUTAGE ANALYSIS
Given the highly reflective outdoor environment, PDPs dis-
played numerous multipath with large excess delay for both
line-of sight (LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) environ-
ments. The average number of resolvable multipath compo-
nents in a LOS environment was 7.2 with a standard deviation
of 2.2 for a TX-RX separation of less than 200 meters. NLOS
measurements with TX-RX separation less than 100 meters
showed that the number of average received multipath com-
ponents is 6.8 with a standard deviation equal to that of a
LOS case. With a 52 meter separation, in a LOS environment,
FIGURE 6. Measured path loss values relative to 5 m free space path loss
for 28 GHz outdoor cellular channels. These path loss values were
measured using a 24.5 dBi narrow beam antenna. The antennas were
rotated in the azimuth plane, recording measurements at 10◦ incremental
steps. The values in the legend represent the PLE of each environment
(LOS and NLOS) [31].
FIGURE 7. Map showing all Manhattan coverage cells with radii of 200 m
and their different sectors. Measurements were recorded for each of the
25 RX sites from each of the three TX sites (yellow stars). Signal Acquired
means that signal was detected and acquired. Signal Detected means that
signal was detected, but low SNR prevented data acquisition by the
system [31].
a large 753.5 ns excess delay was observed, and a NLOS
excess delay over 423 meters extended to 1388.4 ns. While
these results were not commonly observed, these cases are
evidence that enough signal strength can propagate through a
highly reflective environment over a long distance to create a
TX-RX link. When path loss was calculated for all locations,
the best LOS path loss exponent (PLE) was n = 1.68 (here
‘‘best’’ means ‘‘smallest’’). The LOS PLE resulting from all
the measurements acquired in New York City was n = 2.55
(which included many cases where the TX and RX had an
optical LOS environment between them but the directional
antennas were not precisely lined up on boresight). The aver-
age PLE over all NLOS locations increased to n = 5.76, as
342 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
FIGURE 8. Maximum coverage distance at 28 GHz with 119 dB maximum path loss dynamic
range without antenna gains and 10 dB SNR, as a function of path loss exponent n.
shown in Fig. 6. However, the NLOS PLE was significantly
reduced when pointing the TX and RX directional antennas to
the best angle combination at each RX location, resulting in
an average ‘‘best’’ NLOS PLE of n = 4.58, an improvement
of 11.8 dB/decade in path loss, which is significant to cellular
providers for range extension. By finding the best antenna
orientations at any location, the NLOS PLE of n = 4.58 is
virtually identical to NLOS path loss experienced in today’s
700 MHz ∼ 2.6 GHz bands [30].
An outage study was conducted in Manhattan, New York,
to find the locations and distances where energy could not
be detected [31]. As seen in Fig. 7, the map is sectioned into
sectors corresponding to TX locations. Signal acquired by the
RX for all cases was within 200meters.While most of the RX
locations within the range of 200meters from the TX detected
a signal, in some instances, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was
not high enough for a signal to be acquired by the hardware.
Of the measurements taken in Manhattan, it was found that
57% of locations were outages due to the obstructive nature
of the channel with most outages occurring beyond 200 m
from the TX.
The outage probability is greatly affected by the transmit-
ted power, antenna gains as well as the propagation envi-
ronment. Fig. 8 displays the relationship between the max-
imum coverage distance of the base station and the combined
TX-RX antenna gain. To calculate the maximum coverage
distance, we subtracted the 49 dBi combined antenna gain
from the total measurable path loss of 178 dB (which was
obtained using the two 24.5 dBi antennas), resulting in the
dynamic range without the antenna gain. Since our system
requires approximately 10 dB SNR for a reliable detecting
level, the actual maximum measureable path loss is 119 dB
without including antenna gains, and this was used to com-
pute the coverage distances corresponding to various antenna
gains. The four blue curves denote the cases for PLEs equal
to 3, 4, 5 and 5.76. The red squares in Fig. 8 highlight the
coverage distance corresponding to the two 15 dBi horn
antennas and 24.5 dBi horn antennas at the TX and RX. Obvi-
ously, themaximum coverage distance increaseswith increas-
ing antenna gains and a decrease of the PLE. For example, the
radio waves can propagate about 200 m in a highly obstructed
environment with a PLE of 5.76 when the combined
TX-RX antenna gain is 49 dBi, which agrees with our mea-
sured values (200 m) very well. This suggests that we can
enlarge the coverage region of a base station by increasing
antenna gains, and may use less antenna gain (or TX power)
when in LOS conditions.
C. 28 GHz AOA AND AOD ANALYSIS
By employing highly directional steerable horn antennas to
simulate an antenna array, we were able to obtain angle of
arrival (AOA) and angle of departure (AOD) data necessary
to determine the multipath angular spread at the transmitter
for AOD and at the receiver for AOA. By completing a 360◦
exhaustive sweep of the TX and RX antennas, we were able
to determine the angles with the highest received power.
Data collected at environments classified as LOS, partially
obstructed LOS, and NLOS provide a basis for the devel-
opment of a spatial channel model. The path loss and root
mean squared (RMS) delay spreads can be used to accurately
characterize the channel [31].
Fig. 9 demonstrates a polar plot of received power at the
RX on the corner of Greene and Broadway in downtown
Manhattan, a location categorized as a NLOS environment.
The distance between the TX and RX was 78 m. In the
figure, each dot represents the received power level in dBm
(denoted on the radius of the polar plot) at the correspond-
ing RX azimuth angle. The number of resolvable multipath
components, path loss in dB with respect to the 5 m free
space reference, and RMS delay spread in nanoseconds are
displayed from left to right on the periphery of the plot.
As can be seen, TX-RX links were successfully established
VOLUME 1, 2013 343
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
FIGURE 9. Polar plot showing the received power at a NLOS location. This
plot shows an AOA measurement at the RX on Greene and Broadway
from the TX on the five-story Kaufman building (78 m T-R separation). The
polar plot shows the received power in dBm, the number of resolvable
multipath components, the path loss in dB with respect to the 5 m free
space reference, and RMS delay spread with varying RX azimuth
angles [31].
at 22 out of 36 RX azimuth angles. Furthermore, it is obvious
that a wealth of multipath components exist at numerous
different pointing angles, providing great diversity which can
be utilized for beam combining and link improvement in
future 5G systems.
Small scale fading has also been explored by moving
the RX at half-wavelength (5.35 mm) increments along
a small scale linear track of 10 wavelengths (107 mm),
while the TX was fixed at a certain location [32]. Fig. 10
shows the 3D power delay profiles of small scale fading
for the TX-RX angle combination for the strongest received
power. The maximum and minimum received signal pow-
ers were −68 dBm/ns and −74 dBm/ns, respectively, yield-
ing merely ± 3 dB fading variation. This outcome indi-
cates that movements over the small scale track exert little
influence on the AOA or the received power level of multipath
signals.
IV. 38 GHz CELLULAR URBAN PROPAGATION
CAMPAIGN IN AUSTIN
A. 38 GHz BROADBAND CHANNEL SOUNDING
HARDWARE AND MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE
An 800 MHz null-to-null bandwidth spread spectrum sliding
correlator channel sounder was employed in the 38GHz prop-
agation measurement campaign in Austin. The PN sequence
was operating at 400 Mcps and 399.9Mcps at the TX and
RX, respectively, to offer a slide factor of 8000 and adequate
processing gain [33]. The PN sequence was modulated by a
5.4 GHz IF signal, which was input into the upconverter that
contained LO frequency multipliers to generate a carrier fre-
quency of 37.625 GHz with a +22 dBm output power before
the TX antenna. A 25-dBi gain Ka-band vertically polarized
FIGURE 10. Power delay profiles measured over a 10-wavelength linear
track at 28 GHz. The RX was 135 meters away from the TX. The TX and RX
were pointed for maximum signal power. Track step size was half
wavelength using 24.5 dBi horn antennas with beamwidths of 10.9◦ on
the TX and RX.
horn antenna with 7.8◦ half-power beamwidth was utilized
at the TX, and an identical antenna (and also a wider beam
13.3-dBi gain (49.4◦ beamwidth) vertically polarized horn
antenna) were used at the RX. Themaximummeasurable path
loss was about 160 dB [23], [33]–[35].
38 GHz cellular propagations measurements were con-
ducted in Austin, Texas at the University of Texas main
campus [33]. TX locations were placed on four rooftops with
different heights, WRW-A (23 meters), ENS-A (36 meters),
ENS-B (36 meters), and ECJ (8 meters). A total of 43 TX-RX
combinations were measured with up to 12 various antenna
configurations for each measurement location [33]. The RX
was positioned in a number of LOS, partially obstructed LOS,
and NLOS locations representative of an outdoor urban envi-
ronment including foliage, high-rise buildings, and pedestrian
and vehicular traffic. At each receiver location, measurements
were acquired using a circular track with 8 equally spaced
local area measurement points separated by 45◦ increments.
The radius of the circular track yielded a 10λ separation dis-
tance between consecutive points along the circular track. For
LOS links, the TX and RXwere pointed directly at each other
in both azimuth and elevation. The captured PDPs for each
complete track measurement were then averaged and a new
RX location was selected. NLOS conditions were taken over
the circular track and a subsequent 360◦ azimuth exhaustive
signal search was conducted.
B. 38 GHz OUTDOOR MEASUREMENT RESULTS
AOA measurements were shown to be most common when
the RX azimuth angle was between−20◦ and +20◦ about the
boresight of the TX azimuth angle [34]. After examining data
for all RX locations for each corresponding TX, it was shown
that a lower base station height is more likely to have more
links with varying the TX azimuth angle. However, the site
specific location of the RX impacts the observed AOA and
multipath response. Designing for future base stations will
require site specific deployment technologies.
344 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
FIGURE 11. Path loss scatter plot using 25dBi Rx antenna at 38 GHz. LOS
and NLOS measurements have path loss exponents of 2.30 and 3.86,
respectively, while the best NLOS links have a path loss exponent of
3.2 [35].
FIGURE 12. RMS delay spread as a function of arc length at 38 GHz. The
delay spread decreases over longer arc lengths, which indicates that
distance surmounts angle in determining delay spread. Nevertheless,
a close-up of low arc lengths shows the angle playing a larger role in
determining delay spread [35].
Path loss was determined for 38 GHz in Austin using
13.3 dBi and 25 dBi horn antennas [35]. For all TX locations,
measurements at ECJ yielded the highest path loss using both
antennas. The LOS PLE for the 25 dBi horn antennas was
measured to be n = 2.30 and NLOS PLE was measured
to be n = 3.86, as demonstrated in Fig. 11. Compared to
measurements in Manhattan at 28 GHz, where the LOS PLE
and NLOS PLE were 2.55 and 5.76 respectively, it is clear
that PLE at 38 GHz in the light urban environment in Austin
is considerably lower.
Analysis of the RMS delay spread at 38 GHz showed sen-
sitivity to antenna gains [23], [33]–[35]. While all cumulative
distribution functions (CDF) for LOS and NLOS links are
similar, a lower antenna gain was shown to have a higher
RMS delay spread, whereas the 25 dBi antenna showed lower
delays with greater TX-RX separation. Fig. 12 shows RMS
delay spreads for the 25 dBi and 13.3 dBi steerable receiver
antennas plotted as a function of arc length.
By conducting an outage study in Austin, we were able
to further establish that lower base station heights provide
better close-in coverage. By comparing ENS and WRW,
36 and 18 meters in height respectively, we found that no
FIGURE 13. RMS delay spread as a function of TX-RX separation for all
links using all possible pointing angles at 28 GHz in New York City. The
green stars and blue circles denote the RMS delay spread in the NLOS and
LOS measurement locations, respectively.
FIGURE 14. RMS delay spread as a function of TX-RX separation for all
links using all possible pointing angles at 38 GHz in Austin, Texas. The
green stars and blue circles denote the RMS delay spread in the NLOS and
LOS environment, respectively.
FIGURE 15. Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the RMS delay
spread at 28 GHz measured for all links using all possible pointing angles
in the dense urban environment in New York City. The CDFs for LOS and
NLOS links over all TX-RX locations are distinguished by the extremely
low delay spread in LOS, and extremely mutative spreads in NLOS.
outages occurredwithin a 200m cell radius. However, beyond
200 m, 52.8% of locations were outages, 10% of those
belong to WRW, and 27.3% to ENS. The coverage radius
of 200 m is identical to that measured in New York City,
thus suggesting that 200 m is a very achievable cell size
for future 5G mm-wave cellular communications systems
[23], [33]–[35].
VOLUME 1, 2013 345
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
FIGURE 16. CDF of the RMS delay spread of the 38 GHz cellular channel
for all links using all possible pointing angles measured in Austin, Texas
[23].
V. STATISTICAL MODELS FOR RMS DELAY SPREAD
Fig. 13 shows the relationship between RMS delay spread
and TX-RX separation for the 28 GHz New York City
measurements. We note that the maximum value of RMS
delay spread appears to be roughly even up to 170-
m TX-RX separation, and then decreases for distances
greater than 170 m. The delay spread at relatively large
TX-RX separations is caused by multipath, which illustrates
the highly reflective nature of the dense urban environment
in New York City. Yet, when the distance between the TX
and RX is too large (close to or exceeding 200 m), the
path loss is so great that the power of the transmitted sig-
nal declines to zero before reaching the RX, resulting in
fewer or no received multipath. The relationship between
RMS delay spread and TX-RX separation for 38 GHz Austin
measurements is shown in Fig. 14. As seen in Fig. 14,
signals in Austin, Texas could still be acquired for TX-
RX distances greater than 200 m, and the average RMS
delay spread is much lower than that at 28 GHz, thus
indicating the relatively sparse urban environment of the
UT-Austin campus, where there were fewer buildings to cause
obstructions or reflections.
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the RMS
delay spread at 28 GHz in New York City is illustrated
in Fig. 15. In LOS cases, the TX and RX antennas were
directly pointed at each other, and very fewmultipath existed,
thus resulting in virtually non-existent RMS delay spread. In
NLOS cases, the majority of measured multipath components
have RMS delay spreads below 200 ns, while some are as
high as 700 ns. As a comparison, the average and maximum
RMS delay spread in NLOS cases obtained from 38 GHz cel-
lular measurements in Austin, Texas are 12.2 ns and 117 ns,
respectively (see Fig. 16), which are much lower than those at
28 GHz, further demonstrating the propagation conditions in
the less cluttered, less dense nature of the urban environment
measured in Austin, Texas.
The variation of RMS delay spread versus path loss in
NLOS for all TX-RX location combinations at 28 GHz in
FIGURE 17. RMS delay spread as a function of path loss over all viable
pointing angles at 28 GHz in New York City. The blue triangles represent
the measured RMS delay spread and the red line denotes a linear fit for
the average RMS delay spread.
FIGURE 18. RMS delay spread as a function of path loss over all viable
pointing angles at 38 GHz in Austin, Texas. The blue triangles represent
the measured RMS delay spread, and the red line denotes a linear fit for
the average RMS delay spread.
NewYork City is displayed in Fig. 17. It is clear from the plot
that RMS delay spread increases with path loss, which is sim-
ilar to the result at 1.9 GHz in [30]. A linear model is adopted
to investigate the relationship between RMS delay spread and
path loss for the 28 GHz measurements in Manhattan, wher
e σ denotes the average RMS delay spread in nanoseconds
for a particular value of path loss, and PL is the path loss
in decibels ranging from 109 dB to 168 dB. Combined with
Fig. 6, the path loss and RMS delay spread models can
be utilized to predict outage ranges in microcell mm-wave
communication systems. A similar fit is done in Fig. 18 for
38 GHz measurement data from Austin, wherein the average
RMS delay spread is found to be virtually identical (14 ns)
over the path loss range of 100 dB to 160 dB.
VI. CONCLUSION
Given the worldwide need for cellular spectrum, and the
relatively limited amount of research done on mm-wave
mobile communications, we have conducted extensive prop-
agation measurement campaigns at 28 GHz and 38 GHz to
gain insight on AOA, AOD, RMS delay spread, path loss,
and building penetration and reflection characteristics for
346 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
the design of future mm-wave cellular systems. This work
presents data collected in the urban environments around
the University of Texas at Austin (38 GHz) and New York
University (28 GHz). Outage studies conducted at 28 GHz
and 38 GHz showed that consistent coverage can be achieved
by having base stations with a cell-radius of 200 metres.
Path loss was larger in New York City than in Austin, due
to the nature of the denser urban environment. In New York
City, reflection coefficients for outdoor materials were signif-
icantly higher, for example, 0.896 for tinted glass, and 0.740
for clear non-tinted glass, compared with those of indoor
building materials. Similarly, penetration losses were larger
for outdoor materials in New York City. Since signals cannot
readily propagate through outdoor building materials, indoor
networks will be isolated from outdoor networks and this
suggests that data showers, repeaters, and access points may
need to be installed for handoffs at entrances of commercial
and residential buildings.
By observing the measured path loss and delay spread
values from the heavy urban environment of New
York City and the light urban environment of Austin,
Texas, we found substantial differences in propagation
parameters.
Multipath delay spread is found to be much larger in New
York City than in Austin, due to the highly reflective nature
of the dense urban environment.
Small scale fading, a key factor for the design of urban
cellular, has been tested and shows little change in received
power and impulse responsewhen highly directional antennas
and 400 Mcps signals are used.
The data collected over the course of these measurement
campaigns allows for development of statistical channel mod-
els for urban environments, and are highly valuable for the
development of 5G cellular communications at mm-wave
bands in the coming decade.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was sponsored by Samsung DMC R&D
Communications Research Team (CRT), and by Sam-
sung Telecommunications America, LLC. The authors
thank George R. MacCartney, Shuai Nie, and Junhong Zhang
for their contributions to this project, as well as researchers
at Samsung, including W. Roh, D. Hwang, S. Abu-Surru,
F. Kahn, and Z. Pi for their on-going interest and support of
this work. Hughes Research Laboratory and National Instru-
ments provided equipment used in this work. The authors
also thank the NYU administration, NYU Public Safety, and
the New York Police Department for their support of these
measurements. Measurements were conducted under U.S.
FCC experimental license 0040-EX-ML-2012.
REFERENCES
[1] T. S. Rappaport, J. N. Murdock, and F. Gutierrez, ‘‘State of the art in
60 GHz integrated circuits & systems for wireless communications,’’ Proc.
IEEE, vol. 99, no. 8, pp. 1390–1436, Aug. 2011.
[2] Z. Pi and F. Khan, ‘‘An introduction to millimeter-wave mobile broadband
systems,’’ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 101–107, Jun. 2011.
[3] Spatial Channel Model for Multiple Input Multiple Output
(MIMO) Simulations (Release 10), Standard 3GPP TR 25.996,
Mar. 2011.
[4] Guidelines for Evaluation of Radio Interference Technologies for IMT-
Advanced, Standard ITU-R M.2135, 2008.
[5] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, 2nd
ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[6] L. Xichun, A. Gani, R. Salleh, and O. Zakaria, ‘‘The future of mobile
wireless communication networks,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. Softw.
Netw., Feb. 2009, pp. 554–557.
[7] P. Rysavy. (2010). Transition to 4G: 3GPP Broadband Evolution
to IMT-Advanced (4G) [Online]. Available: http: // www.3gamericas.
org / documents/Transition%20to%204G-HSPA%20LTE%20Advanced%
20Rysavy%202010%20PPT.pdf
[8] Nokia Siemens Networks. (2010). Long Term HSPA Evolution:
Mobile Broadband Evolution Beyond 3GPP Release 10, Espoo, Finland
[Online]. Available: http://lteworld.org/whitepaper/long-term-hspa-
evolution-mobile-broadband-evolution-beyond-3gpp-release-10
[9] Ericsson. (2011, Apr.). LTE-A 4G Solution, Stockholm, Sweden
[Online]. Available: http://www.ericsson.com/news/110415_wp_
4g_244188810_c
[10] A. F. Molisch, M. Steinbauer, M. Toeltsch, E. Bonek, and R. Thoma,
‘‘Capacity of MIMO systems based on measured wireless chan-
nels,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 561–569,
Apr. 2002.
[11] J. Fuhl, A. F. Molisch, and E. Bonek, ‘‘A unified channel model for mobile
radio systems with smart antennas,’’ Proc. Inst. Electr. Eng.-Radar, Sonar
Navigat., Special Issue Antenna Array Process. Tech., vol. 145, no. 1,
pp. 32–41, Feb. 1998.
[12] S. Rajagopal, S. Abu-Surra, Z. Pi, and F. Khan, ‘‘Antenna array design for
multi-Gbps mmwave mobile broadband communication,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Global Telecommun. Conf., Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[13] Nokia Siemens Networks. (2011). 2020: Beyond 4G: Radio Evo-
lution for the Gigabit Experience, Espoo, Finland [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.nokiasiemensnetworks.com/file/15036/2020-beyond-4g-
radio-evolution-for-the-gigabit-experience
[14] S. Hwang, D. Lyu, and K. Chang, ‘‘4G vision and technology development
in Korea,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Technol., vol. 1. Apr. 2003,
pp. 26–27.
[15] (2002). All IP Wireless—All the Way [Online]. Available: http://www.
mobileinfo.com/3G/4G_Sun_MobileIP.htm
[16] K. R. Santhi, V. K. Srivastava, G. SenthilKumaran, and A. Butare, ‘‘Goals
of true broad band’s wireless next wave (4G-5G),’’ in Proc. IEEE 58th Veh.
Technol. Conf., vol. 4. Oct. 2003, pp. 2317–2321.
[17] L. George, ‘‘Another generation,’’ Global Telephony, vol. 9 no. 2,
pp. 1–10, Feb. 2001.
[18] Y. Kim. (2012). Global Competition, Interconnectivity, Smarter
Customers, and Deregulation [Online]. Available: http://www.
3g4g.co.uk/4G/News/20050205.html
[19] L. HyeonWoo, ‘‘4G and B4G R&D activities in Korea,’’ in Proc. Int.
Mobile Commun. Symp., Sep. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[20] M. Cudak, A. Ghosh, T. Kovarik, R. Ratasuk, T. Thomas, F. Vook,
and P. Moorut, ‘‘Moving towards mmwave-based beyond-4G (B-
4G) Technology,’’ in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Soc. Conf., 2013,
pp. 1–17.
[21] Y. Chen, S. De, R. Kernchen, and K. Moessner, ‘‘Device discovery in
future service platforms through SIP,’’ in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf.,
Sep. 2012, pp. 1–5.
[22] F. Gutierrez, S. Agarwal, K. Parrish, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘On-
chip integrated antenna structures in CMOS for 60 GHz WPAN sys-
tems,’’ IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1367–1378,
Oct. 2009.
[23] T. S. Rappaport, E. Ben-Dor, J. N. Murdock, and Y. Qiao, ‘‘38 GHz
and 60 GHz Angle-dependent Propagation for Cellular and peer-to-peer
wireless communications,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2012,
pp. 4568–4573.
[24] F. Rusek, D. Persson, B. Lau, E. Larsson, T. Marzetta, O. Edfors,
and F. Tufvesson, ‘‘Scaling up MIMO: Opportunities and challenges
with very large arrays,’’ IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 40–60, Jan. 2013.
VOLUME 1, 2013 347
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
[25] S. Y. Seidel and H. W. Arnold, ‘‘Propagation measurements at 28 GHz
to investigate the performance of local multipoint distribution service
(LMDS),’’ in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., vol. 1. Nov. 1995,
pp. 754–757.
[26] Q. Zhao and J. Li, ‘‘Rain attenuation in millimeter wave ranges,’’
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Antennas, Propag. EM Theory, Oct. 2006,
pp. 1–4.
[27] C. R. Anderson and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘In-building wideband partition loss
measurements at 2.5 and 60 GHz,’’ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 3,
no. 3, pp. 922–928, May 2004.
[28] H. Zhao, R. Mayzus, S. Sun, M. Samimi, J. K. Schulz, Y. Azar, K. Wang,
G. N. Wong, F. Gutierrez, Jr., and S. T. Rappaport, ‘‘28 GHz millimeter
wave cellular communication measurements for reflection and penetration
loss in and around buildings in New York City,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun., Jun. 2013, pp. 1–6.
[29] G. Durgin, T. S. Rappaport, and H. Xu, ‘‘5.85-GHz radio path loss and
penetration loss measurements in and around homes and trees,’’ IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 70–72, Mar. 1998.
[30] K. L. Blackard, M. J. Feuerstein, T. S. Rappaport, S. Y. Seidel, and
H. H. Xia, ‘‘Path loss and delay spread models as functions of antenna
height for microcellular system design,’’ in Proc. IEEE 42nd Veh. Technol.
Conf., vol. 1. May 1992, pp. 333–337.
[31] Y. Azar, G. N. Wong, K. Wang, R. Mayzus, J. K. Schulz, H. Zhao,
F. Gutierrez, D. Hwang, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘28 GHz propagation
measurements for outdoor cellular communications using steerable beam
antennas in New York City,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2013,
pp. 1–6.
[32] M. Samimi, K. Wang, Y. Azar, G. N. Wong, R. Mayzus, H. Zhao, J. K.
Schulz, S. Sun, F. Gutierrez, and T. S. Rappaport, ‘‘28 GHz angle of arrival
and angle of departure analysis for outdoor cellular communications using
steerable-beam antennas in New York City,’’ in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol.
Conf., Jun. 2013, pp. 1–6.
[33] T. S. Rappaport, F. Gutierrez, E. Ben-Dor, J. N. Murdock, Y. Qiao, and
J. I. Tamir, ‘‘Broadband millimeter wave propagation measurements and
models using adaptive beam antennas for outdoor urban cellular commu-
nications,’’ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1850–1859,
Apr. 2013.
[34] J. N. Murdock, E. Ben-Dor, Y. Qiao, J. I. Tamir, and T. S. Rappa-
port, ‘‘A 38 GHz cellular outage study for an urban campus envi-
ronment,’’ in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., Apr. 2012,
pp. 3085–3090.
[35] T. S. Rappaport, Y. Qiao, J. I. Tamir, J. N. Murdock, and E. Ben-Dor,
‘‘Cellular broadband millimeter wave propagation and angle of arrival for
adaptive beam steering systems (invited paper),’’ in Proc. IEEE Radio
Wireless Symp., Jan. 2012, pp. 151–154.
[36] T. S. Rappaport. (2013). NYU WIRELESS [Online]. Available: http://
nyuwireless.com/
THEODORE S. RAPPAPORT (F’98) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engi-
neering from Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN, USA, in 1982, 1984, and 1987, respectively.
He is an Outstanding Electrical and Computer
Engineering Alumnus and Distinguished Engi-
neering Alumnus from his alma mater. He holds
the David Lee/Ernst Weber Chair in Electrical
and Computer Engineering at Polytechnic Insti-
tute, New York University (NYU-Poly), Brooklyn,
NY, USA, and is a Professor of computer science and Professor of radiology
at NYU. In 2012, he founded NYUWIRELESS, a multidisciplinary research
center involving NYU’s engineering, computer science, andmedical schools.
Earlier in his career, he founded the Wireless Networking and Communica-
tions Group (WNCG), University of Texas at Austin (UT), TX, USA. Prior
to UT, he was on the electrical and computer engineering faculty of Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA, where he
founded the Mobile and Portable Radio Research Group (MPRG), one of
the world’s first university research and teaching centers dedicated to the
wireless communications field. In 1989, he founded TSR Technologies, Inc.,
Blacksburg, VA, USA, a cellular-radio/personal-communications-services
software radiomanufacturer that pioneered cellular E-911 and test equipment
that he sold in 1993 to what is now CommScope, Inc. In 1995, he founded
Wireless Valley Communications Inc., Austin, TX, USA, and a site-specific
wireless network design and management firm that was sold in 2005 to
Motorola, Inc. He has testified before the U.S. Congress, has served as
an international consultant for the ITU, has consulted for more than 30
major telecommunications firms, and works on many national committees
pertaining to communications research and technology policy. He is a highly
sought-after consultant and technical expert, and serves on the Board of
Directors of the Marconi Society. He has authored or co-authored more than
200 technical papers, over 100 U.S. and international patents, and several
best-selling technical books.
Dr. Rappaport was elected to the Board of Governors of the IEEE Com-
munications Society (ComSoc) in 2006, and was elected to the Board of
Governors of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society (VTS) in 2008 and
2011.
SHU SUN (S’13) received the B.S. degree in
applied physics from Shanghai Jiao Tong Univer-
sity, Shanghai, China, in 2012. She is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
with the Polytechnic Institute, New York Univer-
sity (NYU-Poly), Brooklyn, NY, USA.
She joined NYU WIRELESS Research Cen-
ter in August 2012. She has co-authored two
conference publications, and is now working on
millimeter-wave propagation measurements cam-
paign for 5G cellular mm-wave communication systems.
RIMMA MAYZUS (S’13) is a sophomore in
electrical engineering with Polytechnic Institute,
New York University (NYU-Poly), Brooklyn, NY,
USA.
She has participated in the 28 GHz mm-wave
propagation measurements campaign in 2012, and
has co-authored three conference publications.
HANG ZHAO (S’13) is a second year undergrad-
uate student in electrical engineering BS/MS pro-
gram at Polytechnic Institute of New York Uni-
versity (NYU-Poly), Brooklyn, NY, USA. She is
currently an Undergraduate Researcher at NYU
WIRELESS, and has a first-author conference
publication and co-authored two conference pub-
lications. Her current research interests include
millimeter-wave propagation and semiconductor
circuits.
348 VOLUME 1, 2013
T. S. Rappaport et al.: Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications
YANIV AZAR (S’12) is currently pursuing both
the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering
with the Polytechnic Institute of NewYork Univer-
sity (NYU-Poly), Brooklyn, NY, USA.
He has previously worked on 28 GHz
millimeter-wave propagation measurement cam-
paign, and has a first-author conference publica-
tion and co-authored two conference publications.
He currently works on his thesis in the biomedical
area.
KEVIN WANG (S’13) is a second year undergrad-
uate student in an accelerated Master’s program,
pursuing an undergraduate degree in computer
engineering and a graduate degree in mathematics
at Polytechnic Institute of New York University
(NYU-Poly), Brooklyn, NY, USA. In 2012, he
helped complete the world’s first measurements
of millimeter-wave propagation. Currently, he is
an undergraduate Researcher for NYU WIRE-
LESS building a raytracer for millimeter-wave
propagation.
GEORGE N. WONG (S’13) is currently pursu-
ing the Bachelors degrees in physics and mathe-
matics at New York University (NYU), Brooklyn,
NY, USA. He works with NYU WIRELESS as
a Student Researcher. His current research inter-
ests include statistical processing and development
of channel models for millimeter-wave and sub-
terahertz propagation characteristics, especially
the development of ray tracing technologies.
JOCELYN K. SCHULZ (S’13) is currently pursu-
ing the Bachelors degree in electrical engineering
and computer science with New York University
(NYU), Brooklyn, NY, USA. She is a student
Researcher at NYU WIRELESS, working on the
development of statistical models and ray tracing
software for millimeter-wave frequencies. She was
a Software Engineer intern at Google and remains
a Google Student Ambassador for NYU in 2012.
She was recently accepted into the NYC Turing
Fellows Program and will be exploring the exciting startup-life at Knewton
this coming summer.
MATHEW SAMIMI (S’13) received the B.S.
degree from the Fu Foundation School of Engi-
neering and Applied Sciences of Columbia Uni-
versity in Applied Physics, New York, NY, USA,
in 2012. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering at NYU-Poly, Brooklyn,
NY, USA.
He has a first-author conference publication and
co-authored another conference publication. He is
currently working with Prof. Rappaport on build-
ing the next 5G millimeter-wave statistical spatial channel models.
FELIX GUTIERREZ, JR. (S’08) received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin (UT), TX, USA, in 2006, the
M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA, in
2008. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering at UT.
He completed an internship with ETS-Lindgren,
Cedar Park, TX, USA, in 2010. He is currently
a Visiting Research Scholar with the Polytechnic
Institute of New York University (NYU-Poly), Brooklyn, NY, USA. He has
worked on millimeter-wave and sub-terahertz semiconductor circuits and
antennas for next-generation wireless communications.
VOLUME 1, 2013 349

