IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010 1
Multi-Cell MIMO Cooperative Networks: A New
Look at Interference
David Gesbert, Stephen Hanly, Howard Huang, Shlomo Shamai, Osvaldo Simeone, and Wei Yu
Abstract—This paper presents an overview of the theory
and currently known techniques for multi-cell MIMO (multiple
input multiple output) cooperation in wireless networks. In
dense networks where interference emerges as the key capacity-
limiting factor, multi-cell cooperation can dramatically improve
the system performance. Remarkably, such techniques literally
exploit inter-cell interference by allowing the user data to
be jointly processed by several interfering base stations, thus
mimicking the benefits of a large virtual MIMO array. Multi-
cell MIMO cooperation concepts are examined from differ-
ent perspectives, including an examination of the fundamental
information-theoretic limits, a review of the coding and signal
processing algorithmic developments, and, going beyond that,
consideration of very practical issues related to scalability and
system-level integration. A few promising and quite fundamental
research avenues are also suggested.
Index Terms—Cooperation, MIMO, cellular networks, relays,
interference, beamforming, coordination, multi-cell, distributed.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Dealing with interference: conventional and novel ap-
proaches
FADING and interference are the two key challenges facedby designers of mobile communication systems. While
fading puts limits on the coverage and reliability of any
point-to-point wireless connection, e.g., between a base station
and a mobile terminal, interference restricts the reusability of
the spectral resource (time, frequency slots, codes, etc.) in
space, thus limiting the overall spectral efficiency expressed in
bits/sec/Hz/base station. At least, so has been the conventional
view until recent findings in the area of cooperative transmis-
sion. Two basic scenarios are envisioned for cooperation in
wireless networks. The first one assumes a (virtual) MIMO
model for cooperative transmission over otherwise interfering
links and will be the focus of this paper, while in the second
relays are exploited. There exist interesting conceptual bridges
between the two setups however, as will be made clearer in
Section III and beyond.
Manuscript received ; revised . The review of this tutorial article was
coordinated by Senior Editor Pamela Cosman.
D. Gesbert is with EURECOM, 06904 Sophia Antipolis, France (e-mail:
gesbert@eurecom.fr).
S. Hanly is with the National University of Singapore Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering.
H. Huang is with Bell Labs, Alcatel-Lucent.
S. Shamai is with Technion, Israel.
O. Simeone is with the Center for Wireless Communication and Signal
Processing Research (CWCSPR) New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT).
Wei Yu is with The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Toronto.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2010.1012xx.
Relay-based cooperative techniques try to mitigate detri-
mental propagation conditions from a transmitter to a receiver
by allowing communication to take place via a third party
device (mobile or base) acting as a relay. Initially developed
relay-based cooperative transmission protocols have proved to
be instrumental in mitigating fading effects (both path loss and
multipath related) in point-to-point and point-to-multipoint
communications. So-called amplify-forward, decode-forward,
compress-forward cooperation schemes exploit available relay
nodes to offer a powerful extra diversity dimension [1].
While conventional diversity and relaying schemes greatly
improve the link-level performance and reliability, they do
little to increase the quality of service to users placed in
severe inter-cell interference-dominated areas, such as the
cell boundary areas of current cellular networks. Instead,
interference should be dealt with using specific tools such as
"virtual" or "network" MIMO, so as to maximize the number
of co-channel links that can coexist with acceptable quality of
service. In the high SNR regime (achieved in, say, a small cell
scenario), this figure of merit corresponds to the maximum
number of concurrent interference-free transmissions and is
referred to as the multiplexing gain of the network, or the
number of degrees of freedom in the information-theoretic
terminology.
The conventional non-cooperative approach to interference,
via spatial reuse partitioning, prevents the reuse of any spec-
tral resource within a certain cluster of cells. Typically, the
frequency re-use factor is much less than unity, so that the
level of co-channel interference is low. Thus, interference
is controlled by fixing the frequency reuse pattern and the
maximum power spectral density levels of each base station.
Current designs do allow for full frequency re-use in each
cell (typically for Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) or
frequency hopping spread spectrum systems) but this results
in very severe interference conditions at the cell edge, causing
a significant data rate drop at the terminals and a strong lack
of fairness across cell users. Some interference mitigation is
offered by limited inter-cell coordination, which is convention-
ally restricted to scheduling or user assignment mechanisms
(e.g. cell breathing) or soft handover techniques. Inter-cell
interference is treated as noise at the receiver side and is han-
dled by resorting to improved point-to-point communications
between the base station (BS) and the mobile station (MS),
using efficient coding and/or single-link multiple-antenna tech-
niques [2]. This approach to dealing with interference may be
characterized as passive.
In contrast, the emerging view on network design advo-
cates a more proactive treatment of interference, which can
0733-8716/10/$25.00 c© 2010 IEEE
2 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
be accomplished through some form of interference-aware
multi-cell coordination, at the base station side. Although
the complexity associated with the coordination protocols
can vary greatly, the underlying principle is the same: Base
stations no longer tune separately their physical and link/MAC
layer parameters (power level, time slot, subcarrier usage,
beamforming coefficients etc.) or decode independently of
one another, but instead coordinate their coding or decoding
operations on the basis of global channel state and user data in-
formation exchanged over backhaul links among several cells.
Coordination protocols can exploit pre-existing finite capacity
backhaul links (e.g., 802.16 WiMax, 4G LTE) or may require a
design upgrade to accommodate the extra information sharing
overhead. There are several possible degrees of cooperation,
offering a trade-off between performance gains and the amount
of overhead placed on the backhaul and over-the-air feedback
channels. The different possible levels of cooperation are
illustrated in detail in Section II.
B. From multi-user to multi-cell MIMO
The history of base station cooperation can be traced back to
previous decades, with the concept of macroscopic diversity
whereby one or more mobiles communicate their messages
through multiple surrounding base stations to provide diver-
sity against long-term and short-term fading. In conventional
CDMA networks, soft-handoff allows a mobile to communi-
cate simultaneously with several base stations, and selection
diversity is used to select the best of these connections at any
given time. Such selection diversity increases both coverage
and capacity [3], and combined with power control, it allows
full frequency re-use in each cell. However, full frequency
re-use comes at a price: CDMA capacity is then critically
constrained by inter-cell interference, and the per-cell capacity
in a network of interfering cells is much less than that of a
single isolated cell. This reduction in capacity is measured by
the so-called “f-factor” [4]. We will see that full base station
cooperation essentially removes this interference penalty.
By “full base station cooperation” we mean that all base
stations are effectively connected to a central processing
site, as depicted in Figure 1 for the downlink scenario. On
the downlink, the network is effectively a MIMO broadcast
channel with distributed antennas. First steps toward full
base station cooperation were taken in [5], [6], [7] for the
uplink, which is effectively a MIMO multiple access channel.
In these works, the base stations cooperate to decode each
user. In [6], the model is a CDMA network, with single-user
matched filter (SUMF) decoding, but the received signals from
a mobile, at each base station, are maximal ratio combined
before decoding. With such a global receiver there are no
wasted signals causing pure interference: All received signals
carry useful information for the global decoder, and hence
interference is exploited. In [6], it is shown that with the
optimal power control, such base station cooperation elim-
inates the inter-cell interference penalty. In other words, a
network of interfering cells has the same per-cell capacity
(in numbers of users) as a single, isolated cell. This result
was extended to CDMA networks with more sophisticated
multi-user receivers (decorrelator and MMSE receivers) in [7].
… …
cell number
mobile
m - 1
base station
m m + 1
1,1 mmh
1,mmh
mm,h 1,1 mmh
mm ,1h mm ,1h 1,mmh
Fig. 1. A linear Wyner-type model with inter-cell interference spans L =
Lr = 1 and K = 3 MSs per cell.
Again, the interference is fully eliminated and the achievable
number of simultaneous users is same as if the cells were
isolated from each other, although in this case the per-cell
capacity benefits further from the more sophisticated multi-
user detection.
The story is not so clear-cut if we consider more fundamen-
tal, information-theoretic models, where particular physical
layers (e.g., CDMA) or receiver structures, are not assumed
a priori. Such information-theoretic results will be surveyed
in Section III. However, similar conclusions do hold at high
SNR, in terms of the degrees of freedom, as will be seen.
Pioneering work on the information-theoretic capacity of the
uplink of cellular networks with full base station cooperation
was done in the early 90s [8], [9]. In these works, it was shown
that with full base station cooperation, the traditional approach
of frequency re-use partitioning is inherently suboptimal.
Wyner [9] introduced a linear array model, and a hexagonal
cell model, which have become known as Wyner models of
cellular systems, and these are very tractable for information-
theoretic analysis. In [8], it was shown that at high SNR, the
capacity of a cellular system with fractional frequency re-use
is less than a system with full frequency re-use, by exactly
the re-use factor. This is equivalent to saying that full base
station cooperation reduces the inter-cell interference penalty
(or “f-factor”) to zero.
Although rich in content and ideas, [8], [9] stopped just
short of spelling out the connections between the multi-user
multi-cell channel and the MIMO channel. Communication
over the spatial modes of the point-to-point MIMO channel
(so-called spatial multiplexing) was formalized later in the mid
90s in [10], [11], then gradually extended to multi-user (MU-)
MIMO channels. It was at that stage only that the downlink
of the multi-cell cooperative channel, first investigated for the
downlink in 2001 [12], was recognized to be almost identical
to the so-called broadcast MIMO channel, if one ignores
the power constraint at the individual base stations. On the
uplink, there is no difference between ideal1 multi-cell MIMO
decoding and decoding over a multi-user MIMO channel.
Thus, a network of M ideally connected J-antenna base
stations can serve a total of MJ terminals in an interference-
1An ideal multi-cell MIMO channel is one where all base stations are
connected via infinite capacity backhaul links.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 3
free manner simultaneously, regardless of how strong the
interference is. To achieve this remarkable result, multi-user
spatial precoding and decoding is involved on the downlink
and uplink respectively, much akin to techniques used over
the MU-MIMO channel [13]. To date, progress in the area
of multi-cell MIMO cooperation continues to parallel that
realized in the more general MU-MIMO area. Nevertheless,
this domain of communications provides specific and tough
scientific challenges to communication theorists, although,
remarkably, it is already being considered within industry and
standardization fora.
C. Challenges of multi-cell MIMO
Despite their promise, multi-cell MIMO systems still pose
a number of challenges both theoretical and practical, sev-
eral of which are described in this paper. First, a thorough
understanding of the information-theoretic capacity of multi-
cell MIMO system accounting for fading and path loss effects,
even with an ideal backhaul, is yet to be obtained. As reviewed
in this paper, capacity results exist for simplified interference
models. Such results provide intuition for the general perfor-
mance behavior but are difficult to extend to general channel
models. Second, as multi-cell channels may involve a large
number of antennas and users, algorithm development work
is required to reduce the complexity of currently proposed
precoding and decoding schemes. Optimal precoding over the
broadcast (downlink) MIMO channel as well as optimal joint
decoding over the uplink involve non-linear computationally
intensive operations [14], [15] which scale poorly with the
size of the network. Third, the equivalence between multi-
cell systems and MIMO systems only holds in the case of
ideal backhaul conditions. Practical cooperation schemes must
operate within the constraints of finite capacity, finite latency,
communications links between base stations.
Deriving good theoretic performance bounds for MIMO
cooperation over a channel with limited information exchange
capability between the cooperating transceivers is a difficult
task. As shown in this paper some results are available for
a few simplified network models. From a practical point-of-
view, a major research goal is to find good signal processing
and coding techniques that approach ideal cooperative gains
while relying on mostly local channel state information and
local user data. This problem, referred to here as distributed
cooperation, is as challenging as it is important. Efficient
partial feedback representation methods building on classical
MIMO research [16] are also desirable. From a system-
level perspective, simulations indicate that substantial gains
in capacity and increased fairness across cell locations will
be accrued from the adoption of multi-cell MIMO techniques.
Yet, a number of important practical issues must be addressed
before a very realistic assessment of system gains can be made,
such as the impact of imperfect synchronization between base
stations, imperfect channel estimation at the receiver side, and
network latency. Such aspects are addressed at the end of the
paper along with a review of current field experiments.
D. Scope and organization of paper
The theoretical treatments of interference-limited channels
on the one hand, and of cooperation protocols on the other
hand, are still maturing, mostly due to the inherent complexity
of the problem. Nevertheless, the literature in these areas has
grown to be extremely rich. For this reason, we do not attempt
complete coverage of those domains of research. Instead, we
focus on the adaptation of multi-antenna processing principles
to the context of multi-cell cooperation. We refer to the
obtained framework as multi-cell processing (MCP).
In Section II, we begin with the mathematical models for
the network and signals, and the way that information is
exchanged between the cells. Basic notations for multi-cell
cooperation are given. Next, in Section III, key information-
theoretic results are surveyed that establish closed-form ex-
pressions for sum rate bounds for several important interfer-
ence and backhaul models. In Sec. IV, the focus is the design
of practical MCP techniques, assuming an ideal backhaul. Sec.
V deals with the problem of finite capacity backhaul and
considers the feasibility of scalable and distributed MIMO
cooperation, using such concepts as partial feedback, dis-
tributed optimization, Turbo base stations, and clustering.
Sec. VI addresses system-level implementation issues due to
expected imperfections at the physical layer. Initial tests with
prototypes are reported. Finally, Sec. VII provides perspectives
and suggestions for promising research avenues in this area.
Throughout this paper we adopt the following notations:
[x]k represents the kth element of vector k; 1N , and 0N are
N × 1 vectors of all ones and all zeros, respectively; [a, b],
where a ≤ b are integer, is the interval [a, ..., b]; (·)† represent
the conjugate transpose of its argument. I denotes the identity
matrix.
II. MODELLING MULTI-CELL COOPERATION
A. System model
We consider a multi-cell network comprising M cooperat-
ing base stations assigned with the same carrier frequency.
Each cell serves K users. The base stations are equipped
with J antennas each. Due to lack of space, we mostly
focus on base station-side interference control: The users have
single-antenna terminals, unless otherwise specified. Multiple
antenna terminals can be considered to allow for the spatial
multiplexing of mutiple data streams per user, or to give user-
side multi-cell interference cancellation capability. The latter
turns out to be useful especially in the context of interference
coordination. This scenario is addressed in Section IV, but
is otherwise excluded. The base stations can assume any
geometry, however, strongly structured cell models can help
the theoretical analysis of cooperation, as is discussed in
Section III.
In the uplink, the received signal at the mth BS, m ∈ [1, M ]
can be written as
ym =
M∑
l=1
K∑
k=1
hm,l,kxl,k + zm, (1)
where xl,k is the symbol transmitted by the k-th MS in the
lth cell, hm,l,k denotes the J element channel vector from the
k-th user of cell l towards the mth BS, z is the noise vector
containing additive noise and any inter-cell interference not
accounted for by the M cooperating cells alone, for instance
if the networks features more than M BSs.
4 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
The model for the downlink can be easily obtained from the
one above. We will reuse some symbols, but their meaning will
be clear from the context. The signal received at the k-th user
in the m-th cell is written as:
ym,k =
M∑
l=1
h†l,m,kxl + zm, (2)
where xl is the transmitter signal vector with J elements
transmitted from the l-th BS containing possibly precoded
(beamformed) information symbols for several users. Note
that, as a convention, the downlink channel vector from the
l-th BS towards the k-th user in the m-th cell is denoted
by the complex conjugated form of the corresponding uplink
channel hl,m,k. This is done to allow the exploration of
interesting duality results between uplink and downlink, as
seen in Sections III and IV. Note that this represents a con-
venient writing convention rather than an actual assumption
on physical reciprocity of the uplink and downlink channels.
Where/if such an assumption of reciprocity (e.g., TDD system)
is actually needed will be made clear in the paper.
B. The different levels of multi-cell cooperation
In this paper we distinguish simpler forms of multi-cell co-
ordination from those requiring a greater level of information
sharing between cells.
1) Interference coordination: The performance of current
cellular networks can already be improved if the BSs share the
channel state information of both the direct and interfering
links, obtained from the users via feedback channels (see
Fig 2). The availability of channel state information allows
BSs to coordinate in their signaling strategies, such as power
allocation and beamforming directions, in addition to user
scheduling in time and frequency. This basic level of co-
ordination requires a relatively modest amount of backhaul
communication and can be quite powerful if enough users
co-exist in the system (multi-user diversity) [17]. No sharing
of transmission data, or signal-level synchronization between
the base stations is necessary. We refer to such schemes as
interference-coordination. In this case, the downlink signal at
the l-th base, xl, is a combination of symbols intended for its
K users alone.
2) MIMO cooperation: On the other hand, when base
stations are linked by high-capacity delay-free links, they can
share not only channel state information, but also the full data
signals of their respective users (see Fig. 3). A more powerful
form of cooperation can be achieved. In this scenario, the con-
cept of an individual serving base for one terminal disappears
since the network as a whole, or at least a group of cells, is
serving the user. The combined use of several BS antennas
belonging to different cells to send or receive multiple user
data streams mimicks transmission over a MIMO channel and
is referred to here as MIMO cooperation. In principle, MIMO
cooperation transforms the multi-cell network into a multi-
user MIMO (MU-MIMO) channel for which all propagation
links (including interfering ones) are exploited to carry useful
data, upon appropriate precoding/decoding. In this case, the
downlink signal, xl, is a combination of symbols intended for
all MK users. In contrast, interference-coordination schemes
mobiles
base stations
Data 
router
1s 2s 3s
data symbols
321 ,, sss
1,1h 1,2h
2,1h
3,1h
1,3h
3,3h3,2h
2,3h
Fig. 2. Illustration of interference coordination for the downlink. The BSs
acquire and exchange channel state information (but not the data symbols)
pertaining to all relevant direct and interfering links, so as to optimize
jointly their transmission parameters (time-frequency scheduling, power level,
beamforming
try to mitigate the generated interference, but they cannot
really exploit it. For instance, beamforming may be used
in each cell if the base stations are equipped with multiple
antennas. In this case the beams typically try to strike a
compromise between eliminating the inter-cell interference
and maximizing the received energy to/from the user within
the cell of interest. Ideally the choice of such beams across
multiple cells is coordinated.
Although some interference-coordination ideas are promis-
ing, they are touched upon rather briefly in this paper, mainly
in Section IV. MIMO cooperation schemes are the main focus
of our attention.
3) Rate-limited MIMO cooperation: In the intermediate
case, the base stations are linked by limited-capacity backhaul
links. Typically, channel state information is shared first, then
only a substream of user data or a quantized version of the
antenna signals are shared among the base stations, which
allows partial interference cancellation. Such hybrid scenarios
are investigated from an information-theoretic point of view in
Section III, then from an algorithmic perspective in Sections
IV and V.
4) Relay-assisted cooperation: Instead of cooperating
through backhaul links, it is also possible to consider channel
models in which a separate relay node is available to assist the
direct communication within each cell. Relay communication
is relevant to the multi-cell MIMO network because it can
be beneficial not only in strengthening the effective direct
channel gain between the BS and the remote users, but also in
helping with intercell interference mitigation. Relay enabled
cooperation is studied in Sec. III-E.
III. CAPACITY RESULTS FOR MULTI-CELL MIMO
COOPERATION
In this section, we address the impact of cooperation on
cellular systems from an information-theoretic standpoint. We
mostly focus on the performance of MCP but we also consider
the interplay of such techniques with cooperation in the form
of relaying at the Mobile Stations (MSs) level.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 5
mobiles
base stations
Data 
router
data symbols
321 ,, sss
1,1h 1,2h
2,1h
3,1h
1,3h
3,3h3,2h
2,3h
321 ,, sss
321 ,, sss321 ,, sss
Fig. 3. Illustration of multi-cell MIMO for the downlink. The BSs, each
equipped with J antennas, acquire and share channel state information and
user data, so as to mimic the behavior of a large MIMO array with MJ
antennas
A. Introduction
The analysis of MCP was started in the early works [8][9]
for the uplink and [12] for the downlink. The analysis in
these works is based on the assumption that the BSs are
connected via unrestricted backhaul links (error-free and un-
limited capacity) to a Central Processor (CP) and focuses on
models that, in information theoretic terms, can be seen as
symmetric Gaussian multiple-access or broadcast interference
channels. In these models, typically referred to as Wyner-type
models, a number of users per cell is served by a single-
antenna BS, as in a multiple access or broadcast channel,
and interference takes place only between adjacent cells, as in
partially connected interference networks [18]. Both models
where cells are arranged on a line or in a more conventional
bidimensional geometry can be considered, where the first
class may model systems deployed along a highway or long
corridor (see [19] for an implementation-based study), while
the second applies to more general scenarios.
In this section, we consider the multi-cell MIMO scenario of
Fig. 3 (i.e. with backhaul links allowing for some exchange of
CSI and data symbols information), however we will focus on
simplified cellular models that extend the Wyner-type models
considered in the initial works [8], [9], [12]. Specifically,
we consider the presence of limited-capacity and limited-
connectivity backhaul links, fading channels and the interplay
of MCP with relaying. We will focus on the per-cell sum-
rate as the criterion of interest. It should be noted that, while
the considered models capture some of the main features
and practical constraints of real cellular systems, such as the
locality of interference and constrained backhaul links, other
features such as user-dependent path loss are not accounted
for (see, e.g., [20]). Therefore, the models at hand can be seen
as useful simplifications of real cellular settings, that enable
insights and intuition to be obtained via analysis. It should be
also noted that the use of sum rate as a system metric may
mask other interesting features of multi-cell cooperation such
as improving the balancing of user’s quality of service from
cell center to cell edge.
B. The Linear Wyner Model
In this section, we review a basic system model for multiple
cell networks introduced in [8], [9]. We focus the attention
on linear Wyner-type models, as done in the original works.
Extension of the given results to planar models is possible,
though not always straightforward and we refer to [21] for
further discussion on this point. An extension of the model
to include relays is discussed in Section III-E of the present
paper. A linear Wyner-type model is sketched in Fig. 1. We
now present the corresponding signal models for uplink and
downlink.
1) Uplink: A general linear Wyner-type model is charac-
terized by M cells arranged on a line (as for a highway
or corridor), each equipped with a single-antenna (J = 1)
base station (BS) and K single-antenna MSs. In this class of
models, inter-cell interference at a given BS is limited to L
BSs on the left and Lr on the right. Considering the uplink,
the received signal (1) at the mth BS, m ∈ [1, M ], at a given
time instant t ∈ [1, n] (n is the size of the transmitted block)
can then be specialized as
ym(t) =
L∑
l=−Lr
hTm,m−l(t)xm−l(t) + zm(t), (3)
where xm(t) is the K × 1 (complex) vector of signals
transmitted by the K MSs in the mth cell, the K × 1 vector
hm,l(t) contains the channel gains {hm,l,k} towards the mth
BS from mobiles in the lth cell (see Fig. 1 for an illustration)
and zm(t) is complex symmetric Gaussian noise with unit
power and uncorrelated over m and time. We assume equal
per-user power constraints
1
n
n∑
t=1
|[xm(t)]k|2 ≤ P
K
, (4)
for all m ∈ [1, M ] and k ∈ [1, K], so that the per-cell
power constraint is given by P . Notice that model (3) assumes
full frame and symbol-level synchronization among cells and
users, even though extensions of the available results to the
asynchronous case may be possible following, e.g., [22].
The model (3) discussed above reduces to the following
special cases that will be referred to throughout this section:
• Gaussian Wyner model: This corresponds to a static
scenario with symmetric inter-cell interference and cell-
homogeneous channel gains, i.e., we have L = Lr = L
and hm,m−k(t) = αk1K with αk = α−k and α0 = 1.
By cell-homogeneous, we mean that the channel gains do
not depend on the cell index m, but only on the distance
between interfering cells (see also discussion below on
edge effects). Parameter L can be referred to as the inter-
cell interference span. Moreover, inter-cell gains αk ≥ 0,
k ∈ [1, L], are deterministic (no fading) and generally
known to all terminals. It is remarked that in this class
of models, all users in the same cell share the same path
loss. We also emphasize that the original model in [8],
[9] had L = 1, so that the system referred to here as
Gaussian Wyner model is to be seen as an extension of
[8], [9];
• Gaussian soft-handoff model: This corresponds to a
static cell-homogeneous system like the Gaussian Wyner
6 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
model, in which, however, there is no symmetry in the
inter-cell channel gains. Specifically, we have inter-cell
interference only from the left cells as L = L, Lr = 0
and hm,m−k(t) = αk1, with α0 = 1, where, as above,
αk ≥ 0 are deterministic quantities. This model accounts
for a scenario in which users are placed at the border
of the cell so that inter-cell interference is relevant only
on one side of the given cell. In a number of works,
including [23], [24], the Gaussian soft-handoff model is
studied with L = 1, which can be seen as describing a
soft-handoff situation between two adjacent cells;
• Fading Wyner model: This model incorporates fading,
accounted for by random channel gains hm,k(t), in the
Gaussian Wyner model. In particular, we have L =
Lr = L and hm,m−k(t) = αkh̃m,m−k(t) where vectors
h̃m,m−k(t), t ∈ [1, n], are independent over m and k and
distributed according to a joint distribution πk with the
power of each entry of h̃m,m−k(t) normalized to one.
For simplicity, similar to the Gaussian Wyner model,
statistical symmetric inter-cell interference is assumed,
i.e., αk = α−k (and α0 = 1) and πk = π−k. As for
temporal variations, two scenarios are typical: (i) Quasi-
static fading: Channels h̃m,m−k(t) are constant over the
transmission of a given codeword (i.e., for t ∈ [1, n]); (ii)
Ergodic fading: Channels h̃m,m−k(t) vary in an ergodic
fashion along the symbols of the codeword. The ergodic
model was studied in [25] with L = 1;
• Fading soft-handoff model: This model is the fading
counterpart of the Gaussian soft-handoff model, and has
L1 = L, L2 = 0, and hm,m−k(t) = αkh̃m,m−k(t)
where h̃m,m−k(t) are independent and modelled as for
the fading Wyner model. This scenario was considered
in [26], [27] (under more general conditions on the joint
distribution of vectors h̃m,m−k(t)).
In order to remove edge effects, we will focus on the regime of
a large number of cells, i.e., M → ∞. This way, all cells see
exactly the same inter-cell interference scenario, possibly in a
statistical sense, as discussed above. An alternative approach,
considered, e.g., in [8], [23], would be to consider a system
in which cells are placed on a circle, which would exhibit
homogeneous inter-cell interference for any finite M. It is
noted that, however, the two models coincide in the limit of
large M and, in practice, results for the two models are very
close for relatively small values of M [21].
We now rewrite model (3) in a more compact matricial
form. We drop dependence on time t for simplicity. To
proceed, construct a M × MK channel matrix H such that
mth row collects all channel gains to mth BS, i.e., [hTm,1,
hTm,2, ...,h
T
m,m, h
T
m,m+1, ..., h
T
m,M ], where h
T
m,m−k with
k /∈ [−Lr, L] are to be considered as zero. We can then
write the M × 1 vector of received signals y = [y1, ..., yM ]T
as
y = Hx + z, (5)
where x = [xT1 · · ·xTM ]T is the vector of transmitted signals
and z the uncorrelated vector of unit-power Gaussian noises.
From the definition above, it is clear that, in general, H is a
finite-band matrix (in the sense that only a finite number of
diagonals have non-zero entries). Moreover, it is not difficult
cell number m - 1
base station
m m + 1
base station
(a)
(b)
CP
C C C
CC
Fig. 4. Backhaul models for MCP: (a) Central processor (CP) with finite-
capacity backhaul links (of capacity C); (b) Local finite-capacity backhaul
between adjacent BSs (of capacity C, uni- or bi-directional). Dashed lines
represent backhaul links.
to see that for Gaussian Wyner and Gaussian soft-handoff
models, matrix H has a block-Toeplitz structure, which will
be useful in the following.
2) Downlink: Define as ym the K × 1 vector of signals
received by the K MSs in the mth cell, y = [yT1 · · ·yTM ]T ,
and x as the M × 1 transmitted signal by the BSs. We then
have from (2)
y = H†x + z, (6)
where z is the vector of unit-power uncorrelated complex
Gaussian noise and channel matrix H is defined as above.
We assume a per-BS (and thus per-cell) power constraint
1
n
∑n
t=1 |[x(t)]m|2 ≤ P for all m ∈ [1, M ].
3) Multi-Cell Processing: For both uplink and downlink,
we will consider the two following models for the backhaul
links that enable MCP, see Fig. 4.
• Central processor (CP) with finite-capacity backhaul
(Fig. 4-(a)): In this case, all BSs are connected to a CP for
joint decoding (for uplink) or encoding (for downlink) via
finite-capacity backhaul links of capacity C [bits/channel
use]. Recall that the original works [8], [9], [12] assume
unlimited backhaul capacity, i.e., C → ∞;
• Local finite-capacity backhaul between adjacent BSs
(Fig. 4-(b)): Here BSs are connected to their neigh-
boring BSs only via finite-capacity links of capacity C
[bits/channel use], that may be uni- or bi-directional.
It is noted that two models coincide in the case of unlimited
backhaul capacity C → ∞. Also, we remark that another
popular model assumes that only BSs within a certain cluster
of cells are connected to a CP for decoding. This model will
be considered as well, albeit briefly, below.
C. Capacity Results for the Wyner Uplink Model
In the rest of this section, we elaborate on the per-cell
sum-rate achievable for the uplink of the Wyner-type models
without relays reviewed above. When not stated otherwise, we
will focus on the Gaussian Wyner model. Fading models are
discussed in Sec. III-C5. Throughout, we assume that channel
state information (CSI) on gains {αk} is available at all nodes.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 7
RSCP (P, F ) =
⎧⎨
⎩
1
F log2
(
1 + FP
1+2FP
PL/F
k=1 α
2
kF
)
if F ≤ L
1
F log2 (1 + FP ) if F > L
, (7)
1) Single-Cell Processing (SCP) and Spatial Reuse: Con-
sider at first a baseline scheme, where Single-Cell Processing
(SCP) is performed, so that each BS decodes individually its
own K users by treating users in other cells as Gaussian noise.
A standard technique to cope with inter-cell interference is
spatial reuse, that consists in activating at a given time (or
equivalently in a given subband) only one cell every F ≥ 1
cells. Parameter F is referred to as the spatial reuse factor.
SCP with special reuse is easily seen to achieve the per-cell
sum-rate in Eq. 7 where L is the inter-cell interference span.
Rate (7) is obtained by either letting all users in a given cell
transmit at the same time with power FP/K , which we refer
to as Wide-Band (WB) transmission, or by intra-cell TDMA,
whereby each user in a cell transmits with power FP for
a fraction of time 1/K. Notice that such power allocations
satisfy the per-block power constraint (4), due to the fact that
each cell transmits for a fraction 1/F of the time.
A few remarks are in order. First, as seen in (7), if the reuse
factor F is larger than the inter-cell interference span L, SCP
with spatial reuse completely eliminates inter-cell interference
and provides a non-interference-limited behavior with per-cell
multiplexing gain2 equal to 1/F , whereas otherwise the sys-
tem operates in the interference-limited regime [8], [9]. From
this, we conclude that the presence of inter-cell interference,
if handled via SCP, leads to a rate degradation with respect to
an interference-free system at high SNR given by a factor of
L [8]. In the low SNR regime, instead, where noise dominates
inter-cell interference, using the formalism of [28]3, it can be
seen that inter-cell interference does not cause any increase in
the minimum (transmit) energy-per-bit necessary for reliable
communications Eb/N0min, which equals ln 2 = −1.59dB, as
for interference-free channels. However, if one observes also
the slope of the spectral efficiency S0 [bits/s/Hz/(3dB)], which
accounts for a higher-order expansion of the spectral efficiency
as the SNR P → 0, the loss due to inter-cell interference is
seen also in the low-SNR regime. In fact, we have for rate
(7):
Eb
N0 min
= ln 2 and S0 =
{ 2
F
“
1+4
PL/F
k=1 α
2
kF
” if F ≤ L
2
F if F > L
,
(8)
where we recall that interference-free channels have S0 = 2.
The conclusions here are related to the analysis in [29] on the
suboptimality of TDMA for multiuser channels. As shown
2The per-cell multiplexing gain is defined as the limit
limP→∞ R(P )/ log P, where R(P ) is the given achievable per-cell
sum-rate. A system is said to be interference-limited if the multiplexing gain
is zero, and non-interference-limited otherwise.
3Reference [28] proposes to expand an achievable rate R as a function
of the energy-per-bit Eb = P/R as R  S03dB
“
Eb
N0 dB
− Eb
N0 min,dB
”
,
where N0 is the noise spectral density (normalized to 1 here) and
Eb
N0 min
=
1
Ṙ(0)
and S0 = (2 ln 2)
(Ṙ(0))2
(−R(0))̈ , where R(P ) is the considered rate (in
bits/channel use) as a function of the power P .
below, MCP allows to overcome the limitations of SCP and
spatial reuse discussed here.
2) Unlimited Backhaul: Assume at first unlimited backhaul
links to a CP, i.e., C → ∞. The per-cell sum-capacity
RMCP (P ) with MCP in this scenario (for any M ) is given
by [9]:
RMCP (P ) =
1
M
log2 det
(
IM +
P
K
HH†
)
(9a)
=
1
M
M∑
m=1
log2
(
1+
P
K
λi(HH†)
)
(9b)
=
∫ ∞
0
log2
(
1+
P
K
x
)
dFHH†(x), (9c)
where λi(HH†) denotes eigenvalues of the argument matrix
and FHH†(x) is the empirical distribution of such eigenvalues:
FHH†(x) =
1
M
M∑
m=1
1(λi(HH†) ≤ x). (10)
The per-cell capacity (9) is achieved by performing ideal
multi-user detection at the CP (which can in practice be
realized by following approaches such as [30]). Moreover, it
can be attained via both an intra-cell TDMA scheme where
users transmit with power P for a fraction of time 1/K
and by the WB scheme (whereby all users transmit with full
power P/K at all times). It is noted that the optimality of
TDMA is strictly dependent on the per-block power constraint
(4), and would not hold under more restrictive conditions,
such as peak or per-symbol power constraints. More general
conditions under which TDMA is optimal, under per-block
power constraints, can be found in [8]. For instance, from
[8], it is found that TDMA would generally not be optimal
in scenarios where users had different intra- and inter-cell
channel gains, such as in fading scenarios (see Sec. III-C5).
For the Gaussian Wyner model of interest here, using Szego’s
theorem, we get that for M → ∞ rate (9) can be written in a
simple integral form as [9]. Expression (11) can be interpreted
by considering the case K = 1 (without loss of generality,
given the optimality of intra-cell TDMA) and identifying the
signal received at the CP as the output (for each time instant)
of a Linear Time Invariant (LTI) filter, whose input is given
by the signals transmitted by the MSs and whose impulse
response is δm +
∑L
k=1 αkδm−k +
∑L
k=1 αkδm+k (δm is the
Kronecker delta). This integral cannot be evaluated in closed
form in general. It should be noted that in other scenarios,
such as the Gaussian soft-handoff model with L = 1, the
corresponding integral can be instead calculated in closed form
[23][24]. Notice that multiplexing gain of the MCP capacity
(11) is one, as for an interference-free scenario. Moreover, the
minimum energy-per-bit is given by
Eb
N0 min
=
ln 2
(1 + 2
∑L
k=1 α
2
k)
, (12)
8 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
RMCP (P ) =
∫ 1
0
log2
⎛
⎝1 + P
(
1 + 2
L∑
k=1
αk cos(2πkθ)
)2⎞⎠ dθ (11)
showing an energy gain due to MCP with respect to SCP
and to an interference-free system given by (1 + 2
∑L
k=1 α
2
k)
(parameter S0 is not reported here for lack of space but can
be obtained from [21]).
3) Limited Backhaul to the CP: Consider now the scenario
in Fig. 4-(a), where the BSs are connected to a CP via finite-
capacity links. At first, we remark that the achievable per-cell
sum-rate is limited by the cut-set upper bound
RUB(P, C) = min{C, RMCP (P )}. (13)
Moreover, here, the performance depends on the knowledge
of codebooks used by the MSs at the BSs. Assume at first
that the BSs are unaware of the codebooks used by the MSs
(oblivious BSs). In [31], this scenario is considered, and a
per-cell achievable sum-rate is derived for a strategy whereby
the BSs simply compress (to C bits/channel use) and forward
the received signals to the CP. Compression is followed by
(random) binning, exploiting the fact that the other BSs have
correlated information, according to standard techniques in
distributed source coding (see, e.g., [32]). Decoding at the
CP is done by jointly4 decompressing the signals forwarded
by the BSs and decoding the codewords transmitted by the
users. A simple expression is found for this achievable rate in
[31]:
ROBL(P, C) = RMCP (P (1 − 2−r)), (14)
where RMCP is defined in (11) and r is the solution of the
fixed-point equation:
ROBL(P (1 − 2−r)) = C − r. (15)
In other words, the finite-capacity links entail a SNR loss of
(1 − 2−r) with respect to the unlimited backhaul capacity
(11). It is noted that parameter r has the interpretation of
the amount of capacity C that is wasted to forward channel
noise to the CP [31], [32]. Also, we remark that rate (14)
does not match the upper bound (13) in general. However,
this is not always the case, and thus optimality of (14) is
proved, in the regimes with C → ∞ (in which compression
noise becomes negligible), on the one hand, and P → ∞
(in which the performance limited by C), on the other. It
is also interesting to point out that for low-SNR, the power
loss of the oblivious scheme at hand with respect to (11) is
quantified by calculating parameter Eb/N0min as Eb/N0min =
ln 2(1 + 2
∑L
k=1 α
2
k)
−1(1 − 2−C). Comparing this with (12),
one sees that in the low-SNR regime, the loss of (14) with
respect to (11) is neatly quantified by 1 − 2−C . As a final
remark, the optimal multiplexing gain of one is achieved if
the backhaul capacity C scales as log P, which coincides with
the optimal behavior predicted by the upper bound (13).
We now consider a different scenario where BSs are in-
formed about the codebooks used by the MSs both in the
4It is interesting to notice that while joint decompression/ decoding yields
no performance benefits for regular interference-free systems [33], this is not
the case in the presence of interference (see also [34], [35]).
same cell and in the interfering cells. In [31], a scheme is
considered where partial decoding is carried out at the BSs.
According to this approach, each MS splits its message and
transmitted power into two parts: The first is intended to be
decoded locally by the in-cell BS (with possible joint decoding
also of the signals from the interfering BSs) and transmitted
over the limited link to the CP, while the second part is
processed according to the oblivious scheme and is decoded by
the CP as discussed above. This scheme is shown to provide
advantages over the oblivious rate (14) when the inter-cell
interference is low (it is easy to see that it is optimal for
αk = 0, k > 0) and for small C. Another strategy that
exploits codebook knowledge at the BSs is the structured
coding scheme proposed in [36] and reviewed below.
In [36], it is proposed that the BSs, rather than decoding
the individual messages (or parts thereof) of the MSs as in
[31], decode instead a function of such messages or, more
precisely, of the corresponding transmitted codewords. The
key idea that enables this operation is the use of structured,
rather than randomly constructed, codes. Each MS employs
the same nested lattice code and the signal received at any mth
BS can be written from (11) as ym =
∑L
k=−L αkxm−k + zm.
Recalling that a lattice code is a discrete group, the (modulo5)
sum of the lattice codewords xm−k, weighted by integer
coefficients, is still a codeword in the same lattice code and
can thus be decoded by the mth BS. The problem is that
the channel coefficients αk are generally not integers. The
mth BS can however decode an arbitrary linear combination∑L
k=−L bkxm−k with bk ∈ Z (and by symmetry bk = b−k)
and b0 = 0 and treat the remaining part of the signal as
Gaussian noise. The index of the decoded codeword can
then be sent to the CP, that decodes based on all received
linear combinations. This leads to the achievable rate [36]
shown in (16) where B ={(b0, .., bL) ∈ Z : b0 = 0 and
b20 + 2
∑L
k=1 b
2
k ≤ 1 + P (1 + 2
∑L
k=1 α
2
k)}. As shown in
[36], this rate may outperform (14) for low and high inter-
cell interference ([36] considers the case L = 1). Moreover,
[36] proves that rate (16) can be improved by superimposing
additional messages to the lattice codewords.
4) Local BS backhaul: In this section, we turn to the
model in Fig. 4-(b), where BSs are connected only to their
neighboring BS via finite-capacity links. At first, for reference,
we consider the related cluster-decoding setting of [37], where
each BS, say the mth, can decode based not only on the locally
received signal ym and also on the received signals from i
BSs on the left (ym−k with k ∈ [1, i]) and ir BSs on the
right (ym+k with k ∈ [1, ir]). Notice that this accounts for
a situation where unlimited capacity backhaul links connect
BSs, but only within a certain range of cells. Reference [37]
obtains the maximum multiplexing gain of this setting for
a Gaussian soft-handoff model with L = 1 with intra-cell
5The modulo operation is taken with respect to the coarse lattice forming
the nested lattice code.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 9
RLAT = min
{
C, max
(b0,..,bL)∈B
− log
(
b20 + 2
L∑
k=1
b2k −
P (b0 + 2
∑L
k=1 αkbk)
2
1 + P (1 + 2
∑L
k=1 α
2
k)
)}
, (16)
TDMA (or equivalently K = 1). The model of [37] also
assumes that MSs are aware, before choosing the transmitted
codewords, of the messages of the MSs in J cells on the left
and Jr cells on the right. This is a simple way to account for
cooperation at the MS level, and will be further discussed in
Sec. III-E. The maximum multiplexing gain is given by
J + Jr + i + ir + 1
J + Jr + i + ir + 2
, (17)
showing that with clustered decoding the multiplexing gain
is generally less than one, but larger than 1/2, as achievable
with SCP and spatial reuse (see Sec. III-C1). Moreover, this
shows that (for the soft-handoff model), left and right side
informations have the same impact on the multiplexing gain,
and the same applies to cooperation at the MSs or cluster
decoding. Multiplexing gain (17) is achieved by successive
interference cancellation at the BSs, where BSs exchange
information about the decoded signals (see also below), and
Dirty Paper Coding (DPC)-based cooperation at the users. It
is noted that this scheme requires knowledge of the codebooks
used in adjacent cells by both BSs and MSs. A model with
cluster decoding at the BSs, but no cooperation amongst the
mobiles, is considered in [38, Section IV], where similar
general conclusions about the multiplexing gain are obtained.
In the presence of finite-capacity backhaul, the inter-BS
links can be used to provide limited-rate information about
the received signal or a processed version thereof to adjacent
BSs. Such "relaying" has in general the double purpose of
providing information about the useful signal of the recipient
but also of the interference. This observation has also been
made in the context of interference relay channels (see review
in [39]). Along these lines, it is noted that the model and
techniques at hand are very related to interference channels
with "conferencing" decoders studied in [34], [40]. Consider,
as in [41], a soft-handoff model with L = 1 and unidirectional
backhaul links allowing information to be passed to the right.
Assuming knowledge of only the local codebook, a successive
decoding scheme can be devised in which each BS decodes
the local message and sends the quantized decoded codeword
to the neighboring (right) BS for interference mitigation. It is
not difficult to see that such scheme has zero multiplexing
gain since it is not able to fully mitigate the interference.
This is in contrast with the case where BSs have information
about the codebooks used in adjacent cells. In this case, as in
[37] (see discussion above), it becomes possible to perform
joint decoding of the local message and of (possibly part
of) the interfering message, and to use the backhaul link
to convey directly hard information (messages) rather than
soft information about the decoded codewords. This allows a
non-interference limited behavior to be attained: Specifically,
assuming that C grows like β log P, the multiplexing gain
min(1, 0.5 + β) can be attained [41].
5) Fading Channels: In this section, we discuss available
results on the sum-rate of fading Wyner and soft-handoff
models. We consider both quasi-static and ergodic fading
below.
a) Quasi-static Fading: With quasi-static fading, the
outage capacity is typically used as a performance criterion
[42]. This is, generally speaking, the maximum rate that guar-
antees reliable transmission for a given percentage of channel
realizations (the measure of whose complement is referred to
as outage probability). This setting implies either lack of CSI
at the users (so that rate adaptation is not possible) or inelastic
constant-rate applications. Using such a criterion in a large-
scale cellular system with MCP proves to be challenging: In
fact, on the one hand, defining outage as the event where
any of the users’ messages are not correctly decoded leads to
uninteresting results as the number of cells M grows large; On
the other hand, defining individual outage events, as studied in
[43] for a two-user MAC, appears to be analytically intractable
for large systems (see [44] for related work).
A tractable performance criterion is instead obtained by
considering the achievable per-cell sum-rate (9) for given
channel realizations in the limit as the number of users per
cell K and/or the number of cells M grow large, where
the limit is defined in an almost sure sense. It is noted that
such per-cell sum-rate is achievable by appropriate choice
of distinct rates by the MSs, and such choice depends on
the current realization of the channel matrices. The practical
significance of this criterion is thus limited to instances in
which, thanks to appropriate signaling, such rate adaptation is
possible. Therefore, we review these results below as they are
practically more relevant in the context of ergodic channels.
b) Ergodic Fading: With ergodic fading, the per-cell
sum-capacity is given by the expectation of (9c) with respect
to the distribution of H, i.e., RergMCP (P ) = E[RMCP (P )]. It
is noted that such rate can be attained, due to the (stochastic)
symmetry of the considered model (neglecting edge effects by
taking the limit M → ∞) by equal rate allocation to all users.
Moreover, it is achieved by a WB scheme (all users transmit
at the same time), the rate of intra-cell TDMA being generally
smaller. This is in contrast with Gaussian (unfaded) models, as
discussed in Sec. III-C1, and is in line with standard results
for standard multiple access channels [45], [46]. It is also
noted that with SCP, when treating interference as noise as in
(7), intra-cell TDMA may instead be advantageous over WB
when intercell interference takes place and exceeds a given
threshold [46]. Some performance comparison between intra-
cell TDMA and spatial reuse in the presence of MCP for the
soft-handoff model with L = 1 and Rayleigh fading can be
found in [47].
To evaluate RergMCP (P ), one can either use approximations
based on bounding techniques as in [25] or the fact that, if
FHH†(x) converges almost surely in some asymptotic regime
of interest to some limiting distribution (spectrum) F (x), then
RergMCP (P ) converges to (9c) with FHH†(x) = F (x) (see, e.g.,
[48]). We discuss below two such regimes.
Consider first the asymptotics with respect to K and M
10 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
RergMCP (P ) =
∫ 1
0
log2
⎛
⎝ 1 + P (1 − μ2)
(
1 + 2
∑L
k=1 α
2
k
)
+Pμ2
(
1 + 2
∑L
k=1 αk cos(2πkθ)
)2
⎞
⎠ dθ (18)
(with the inter-cell interference span L kept fixed). Let us
assume that the distribution πk of vectors h̃m,k (recall Sec.
III-B) is such that each channel vector can be seen as a
realization of a stationary and ergodic process with unit power
and mean 0 ≤ μ ≤ 1 (and thus variance 1−μ2). In this case,
it can be verified that matrix HH† converges almost surely to
a deterministic Toeplitz matrix due to the strong law of large
numbers [8]. Now, using Szego’s theorem, similarly to (11),
we have that for K → ∞ and M → ∞ (taken in this order)
Eq. 18 [25].
Notice that we recover (11) for μ = 1, which corresponds
to an unfaded scenario. It can be proved, similarly to [25], that
(18) is decreasing in μ2, which implies that fading is beneficial
in the limit of a large number of users. It is remarked that this
may not be the case for a finite number of users K, as can
easily be seen by noticing that for K = 1 and no inter-cell
interference, one obtains a point-to-point link for which fading
is known not to increase the rate [25], [26]. It is noted that
the potential benefits of fading are related to the independence
of the fading gains towards different BSs and thus cannot be
mimicked by the MSs [25][23] (see also [8, Section 5.1.2]
for a discussion on the effect of fading on the multiplexing
gain, and on the power offset term). Moreover, from Jensen’s
inequality, it can be seen that (18) is an upper bound on the
ergodic per-cell capacity for any number of users K [25].
Finally, rate (18) does not depend on the actual (stationary and
ergodic) distribution πk but only on its first two moments.
Consider now a regime where K is fixed and M grows to
infinity. An approximation of the limiting spectrum F (x), and
thus of the per-cell rate RergMCP (P ), has been obtained in [49]
for the fading Wyner model with L = 1 and Rayleigh fading
using free probability tools. Such approximation is seen to
be accurate only for small values of the interference gain α1.
In [26], [27], exact results on the convergence of per-cell rate
(9a) are studied for the fading soft-handoff model. Almost sure
convergence to a limit that depends on the Lyapunov exponent
of a certain product of matrices is shown (see also [50] for
related work). A central limit theorem is also proven in [27]
along with a corresponding large deviation result, providing
evidence to the fact that, given the limited randomness present
in matrix H (due to the banded structure), convergence is
slower than in classical random matrix theory (see, e.g., [51]).
Finally, [52] characterizes the high-SNR behavior (in the sense
of [53]) of (9a) as M grows large and K = 1 user and L = 1.
Performance bounds are also provided for K > 1. The result
shows that such behavior depends on the specific distribution
πk, lending evidence to the conclusion that, in the case of
finite-band matrices, the limit spectrum depends on the entries’
distribution, unlike standard random matrix theory [25], [48].
We also remark that in the fading soft-handoff model with
Rayleigh fading, L = 1, and intra-cell TDMA (or equivalently
K = 1), the ergodic rate RergMCP (P ) can be found in a compact
integral form as shown in [54], [23]. Reference [47] obtains
related bounds for K > 1.
Finally, we point to [46], where the effect of fading on a
Wyner model with ideal cooperation only between adjacent
cell sites is studied.
c) MIMO Fading Models: Another extension is to con-
sider multiple antennas at the BS, with fading from each
antenna to each user. Uplink models comparing SCP to
MCP in this context are considered in [55], [56]. In [55]
an asymptotic regime is considered in which the number of
antennas at the base station, and the number of mobiles, grow
large together, in a circular Wyner model. It is shown that the
degrees of freedom depend on the system loading (number of
users per base station antenna), but, if SCP and MCP are both
optimally loaded (respectively), then MCP gains over SCP by
a factor of three, but the gap can be reduced to a factor of
two via the use of a re-use factor of two, with even and odd
cells in separate bands.
d) Channel uncertainty: Channel uncertainty has not
been adequately treated in the network MIMO literature to
date. Its importance can be seen from the point to point
MIMO channel where it is known that the number of transmit
antennas should not exceed the number of symbols in the
coherence block [57]. The reason is that part of the block of
symbols must be used for training so that the MIMO channels
can be measured at the receiver. If the coherence time is long
relative to the symbol period then the number of antennas
can be large, but if the coherence time is one symbol duration
then one antenna is optimal. Note that the limiting asymptotics
discussed in c) implicitly assume that the coherence time is
growing with the number of users. Thus, channel uncertainty
has implications for MIMO scalability, and we will discuss
this issue further in Section V.
6) Numerical Results: We now focus on a numerical ex-
ample for a Gaussian Wyner model with L = 1. Fig. 5 shows
the per-cell sum-rate achievable by the techniques discussed
above, namely SCP with spatial reuse F = 1 and F = 2
(7), ideal MCP (11), oblivious processing at the BSs (14)
with backhaul capacity C = 5 and lattice coding (16) with
C = 5. We have P = 15dB and the inter-cell interference
power gain α21 is varied. It can be seen that SCP with spatial
reuse F = 1 provides interference-limited performance, while
with F = 2 inter-cell interference is eliminated, but at the
cost of possibly reducing the achievable rate. MCP provides
remarkable performance gains, and can potentially benefit
from larger inter-cell power gains α21. When the backhaul
capacity is restricted to C = 5 (which is of the order of the
per-cell achievable rates at hand), it is seen that by choosing
the best between the oblivious BS scheme and the lattice-
based scheme, one performs fairly close to the bound of
ideal MCP. Moreover, lattice-based coding has performance
advantages over oblivious processing for sufficiently large or
small interference, large P (not shown here) and moderate C.
Increasing the capacity C to say C = 8, leads to an almost
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 11
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
2
1
2, FRSCP
, 1SCPR F
,  5,8LATR C
,  5OBLR C
MCPR ,  8OBLR C
[b
its
/ s
ec
/ H
z]
Fig. 5. Uplink of a Gaussian Wyner model with L = 1: Per-cell sum-rate
achievable by SCP with spatial reuse F = 1 and F = 2 (7), ideal MCP
(11), oblivious processing at the BSs (14) with backhaul capacity C = 5 and
lattice coding (16) with C = 5 versus the inter-cell interference power gain
α21 (P = 15dB).
ideal rate with the oblivious strategy (consistently with its
asymptotic optimality for P → ∞), while lattice coding does
not improve its performance.
D. Capacity Results for the Wyner Downlink Model
In this section, we review corresponding results for the
downlink. Reference results using SCP and frequency reuse
are similar to Sec. III-C1 and need not be discussed here.
We focus, as for the uplink, on Gaussian models and briefly
discuss the impact of fading in Sec. III-D3.
1) Unlimited Backhaul: Consider first the case of unlimited
backhaul. Reference [12] derives achievable rates based on the
linear precoding dirty paper coding strategy of [58]. The per-
cell sum-capacity is instead derived in [23] using the uplink-
downlink duality results of [59] as
RMCP (P ) =
1
M
min
Λ
max
D
log2
det
(
Λ + PK HDH
†
)
det (Λ)
, (19)
with Λ and D being diagonal MK ×MK matrices with the
constraints tr(Λ) ≤ M and tr(D) ≤ M. This rate is known to
be achieved by dirty paper coding at the CP. For the Gaussian
Wyner (circulant) model, it can be shown that the per-cell sum-
capacity (11) is exactly equal to the corresponding capacity for
the uplink (11) for M → ∞. It follows that, as for the uplink,
intra-cell TDMA, where only one user is served per-cell, is
optimal with Gaussian (unfaded) channels.
2) Limited Backhaul to a CP: Similarly to the uplink,
strategies to be used in the presence of limited backhaul to a
CP depend on the level of codebook information available at
the BSs. For oblivious BSs, reference [60] proposes to perform
joint DPC under individual power constraint at the CP and then
send the obtained codewords to the corresponding BSs via the
backhaul links. The BSs simply transmit the compressed DPC-
codewords. Since the transmitted quantization noise decreases
the overall SNR seen by the MSs, joint DPC at the CP is
designed to meet lower SNR values and tighter power con-
straints than those of the unlimited setup [23]. The resulting
per-cell rate is shown to be equal to (11) but with a degraded
SNR
P̄ =
P
1 +
1+P(1+2 PLk=1 α2k)
2C−1
(20)
due to quantization noise. Similarly to the corresponding result
(14) for the uplink, this rate is generally suboptimal but it
achieves cut-set bound (13) (which is still a valid bound
also for the downlink) for C → ∞ (where the compression
noise is dominant). However, unlike for the uplink, this rate
is not optimal for P → ∞: This fact can be understood
by noticing that in the high-SNR regime, the compression
noise dominates the performance, and, in the downlink, the
compression noise is dealt with independently by each MS,
unlike in the uplink, where decompression is performed jointly
at the CP. Interestingly, for low-SNR the power loss in terms
of Eb/N0min turns out to be exactly the same as for the uplink,
being given by (1 − 2−C). Moreover, as for the uplink rate
(14), optimal multiplexing gain of 1 per-cell is achieved if
C ∼ log P.
Reference [60] also considers the case where the BSs
possess codebook information about adjacent BSs belonging
to a given cluster and proposes to perform DPC within the
given cluster. The main conclusion of [60] is that the oblivious
scheme is the preferred choice for small-to-moderate SNRs or
when the backhaul capacity C is allowed to increase with
the SNR. On the other hand, for high SNR values and fixed
capacity C, a system with oblivious BSs is limited by the
quantization noise, and knowledge of the codebooks at the
BSs becomes the factor dominating the performance.
3) Fading Channels: Following the discussion in Sec.
III-C5, here we focus on the ergodic fading scenario. For this
setting, the per-cell sum-capacity is given by RergMCP (P ) =
E[RMCP (P )] with (19). Evaluating this quantity is not an
easy task due to the min-max operation involved. In [23],
upper and lower bounds on RergMCP (P ) are derived for the
fading soft-handoff model with L = 1 and Rayleigh fading,
along with asymptotic SNR characterizations. An important
finding from such analysis is that, for large number K of users
per cell, the per-cell sum-rate capacity scales as log log K ,
which is the same type of scaling as for interference-free
systems. A suboptimal scheme is then proposed in [61] based
on zero-forcing (ZF) beamforming and a simple user selection
(scheduling) rule whereby one user is served in each cell at
any given time in an intra-cell TDMA fashion. It is found
that, even this suboptimal scheme is able to achieve the same
optimal scaling law of log log K with Rayleigh fading.
An illustration of the achievable per-cell rates in a fading
Wyner model with L = 1 and α21 = 0.4 is shown in Fig.
6. Specifically, the per-cell achievable rates with SCP and
spectral reuse F = 1 and F = 2 (obtained similarly to Sec.
III-C1), with ideal MCP (shown is the upper bound of [23])
and with the ZF beamforming and scheduling scheme of [61]
are plotted versus the power P and for K = 50 users per
cell. The interference-limited behavior of SCP with F = 1
is apparent and so is the performance gain achievable via
12 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
-5 0 5 10 15 20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
[b
its
/ s
ec
/ H
z]
][dBP
,  upper boundMCPR
ZFR
,  1SCPR F
,  2SCPR F
Fig. 6. Downlink of a fading Wyner model with L = 1: Per-cell sum-rates
achievable with SCP and spectral reuse F = 1 and F = 2, ideal MCP, and
with the ZF beamforming and scheduling scheme of [61] are plotted versus
the power P (K = 50, α21 = 0.4).
MCP. It is also interesting to notice that the suboptimal ZF
beamforming scheme performs relatively close to the upper
bound set by ideal MCP.
E. Relay-aided Models
In modern cellular systems, the presence of dedicated
relays is considered to be instrumental in extending coverage
by enabling multi-hop communications or, more generally,
cooperation at the MS level [62]. Here, we briefly review a
model that accounts for the presence of dedicated relays, one
per cell, in a Wyner-type setting (first considered in [63]). We
focus on the uplink for simplicity and assume that the users
are sufficiently far from the BSs so that the direct link from
MS to BS can be neglected. We thus end up with two Wyner-
type models, one from the users to the relays and one from the
relays to the BSs (see Fig. 7). We will refer to these as first
and second hop, respectively. We assume that the relays are
full-duplex so that they can transmit and receive at the same
time. The protocols we consider, except when stated otherwise,
work by pipelining transmission on the two hops: The mobiles
send a new message to the relays in every block, while the
relays transmit to the BSs a signal obtained by processing the
samples received in the previous block. Given the assumption
of no direct link between mobiles and BSs, it is easy to see
that results with half-duplex relays are immediately derived
by halving the spectral efficiencies obtained for the full-duplex
case (a new message can only be sent once every two blocks).
Denoting as L and Lr the maximum inter-cell interference
spans on the left and right, respectively, for the two hops, we
can write the signal model, similar to (5), as follows. The
M × 1 signal received at the relays can be written as
yR= Hx + TxR + zR, (21)
where H is defined as in (5), and contains the channel gains
for the first hop (MSs-relays), x is as in (5) and zR is the
Gaussian noise. The new element here is the M ×1 signal xR
transmitted by the relays. The possible interference among
relays in different cells is accounted for by matrix T. Here,
we assume that there is interference only between relays in
adjacent cells, and that such interference is symmetric, so that
T is a symmetric Toeplitz matrix with first row equal to [0
μ 0TM−2], where μ represent the inter-relay gains. Finally, the
signal received at the BSs is given by
y = HRxR+z, (22)
where now HR is the matrix containing the channel gains
from relays to BSs and is defined similarly to H (see also Fig.
7). We assume per-relay (and thus per-cell) power constraint
1
n
∑n
t=1 |[xR(t)]m|2 ≤ Q, for m ∈ [1, M ].
Consider now the performance of cooperation in cellular
networks in the presence of dedicated relay stations, following
the uplink model discussed above. Depending on whether
one assumes SCP or MCP, the system can be seen as an
interference network with relays or as a multiple access
channel with multiple relays and a multiple-antenna receiver,
respectively. We remark that, in both cases, general conclusive
results are unavailable even in the simple two-user cases con-
sidered in [39], [64]. Analysis, in terms of achievable per-cell
sum-rate and corresponding upper bounds, has been pursued
by assuming different transmission strategies and intra-cell
TDMA (or equivalently K = 1). Specifically, reference [63]
considers half-duplex amplify-and-forward (AF) processing at
the relays, [65] studies half-duplex decode-and-forward (DF)
relays, [66] full-duplex AF operation, [67] full-duplex DF and
[68] full-duplex compress-and-forward, CF. In the following,
we briefly review some results for the full duplex case.
In [66], the performance of AF with both SCP and MCP
is studied. Relays simply delay the received symbol by at
least one time unit, amplify and forward it, sample by sample.
Closed-form analytical expressions are obtained for the per-
cell sum-rate based on the observation that the received signal
can be seen as the output of a two-dimensional LTI channel
via Szego’s theorem. The performance of both SCP and MCP
is shown to be independent of the time-delay applied by
the relays. It is observed that the rates of both schemes
are decreasing with the intra-relay interference factor μ. It
is also shown that using the full power Q of the relays is
unconditionally optimal only for the MCP scheme, while this
is not the case with SCP.
In [68], CF relaying with SCP and MCP is studied. Here,
the relays operate in blocks, as explained in Sec. III-B, by
collecting a number of received samples and compressing
the received signal using a vector quantizer. Each BS for
SCP, or the CP for MCP, decodes based on the quantized
signals received from either the local relay (for SCP) or all
the relays (for MCP). For MCP, due to the correlation among
the received signals at the relays, distributed compression
techniques are applied similarly to [31]. Moreover, the CF
scheme with MCP exploits side information available at the
CP regarding the signals transmitted by the relays (which are
in fact decoded at the CP). It is proved that the scheme can
completely remove the effect of the inter-relay interference. It
is noted that, in the nomenclature of the standard IEEE 802.16j
[62], both CF and AF, which are non-regenerative relaying
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 13
…
m-1 m m+1
mobile
relay station
cell number
base station
…
Fig. 7. Relay-aided linear Wyner models with inter-cell interference spans
L = Lr = 1 and K = 3 MSs per cell.
schemes, classify as transparent relaying strategies in that no
knowledge of their presence is required at the mobiles. Also,
the relays do not require information regarding the codebooks
used by the terminals.
Finally, in [67], a regenerative relaying scheme based on
DF is considered. Here, codebook information is required
at the relays and generally the proposed schemes are non-
transparent. The idea is to use rate splitting at the mobile
in a similar manner to the standard technique for interference
channels [69] so that each relay decodes not only the message
of the local mobile (recall that we are assuming intra-cell
TDMA), but also part of the message of the adjacent mobiles.
This way, the relays can cooperate while transmitting towards
the BSs by beamforming the common information.
A comparison among the performance of the schemes
described above is shown in Fig. 8 versus the ratio Q/P
between the power constraint at the relays (Q) and that at
the MSs (P ). A first observation is the interplay between SCP
or MCP (i.e., cooperation at the BSs) and cooperation via
dedicated relays through different strategies. Specifically, it
can be seen that if SCP is deployed, DF is advantageous with
respect to CF, and also with respect to AF, if the power of
the sources is sufficiently larger than that of the relays. It
is noted that CF performs very poorly due to its inability to
beamform the users’ signals towards the BSs, unlike DF and
AF. However, if MCP is in place, the situation is remarkably
different in that DF is outperformed by both CF and AF unless
the sources’ power is sufficiently larger than that of the relays.
This is because DF is limited by the performance bottleneck
due to the need to decode at the relay stations, which prevents
the system from benefiting from MCP. Finally, it is seen that
the proposed CF scheme performs close to optimal if the relay
power is sufficiently large.
We finally recall a different model for cooperation at
the mobile level that does not involve dedicated relays but
inter-mobile transmission. Namely, [70] models the inter-user
-20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
power relay/ power mobile [dB]
Pe
r-c
el
l U
pl
in
k 
th
ro
ug
hp
ut
 [b
its
/c
ha
nn
el
 u
se
]
AF-MCP
CF-SCP
DF-SCP
AF-SCP
cut-set upper bound
DF-MCP CF-MCP
Fig. 8. Per-cell sum-rates achieved by different relaying schemes with SCP
or MCP versus the ratio Q/P between the power constraint at the relays (Q)
and that at the MSs (P ).
links as orthogonal to the main uplink channel, whereas a
generalized feedback model (in the sense of [71]) is considered
in [67].
F. Conclusions from the Information-Theoretic Models
This section has illustrated, via information-theoretic ar-
guments, the advantages of cooperation in cellular systems.
Cooperation among the BSs (or MCP) has been shown to be
able to potentially increase the sum-capacity of the network
by an amount proportional to the inter-cell interference span
(i.e., number of BSs interfered by a local transmission) with
respect to standard single-cell strategies with spatial reuse.
While initial work demonstrated such benefits under idealistic
conditions, in terms of, e.g., absence of fading and perfect
backhaul, more recent research has confirmed the promises of
MCP under more practical conditions.
In this section, we have reviewed more recent research
that includes practical constraints such as limited backhaul
bandwidth, localized base station clustering, and the effect
of fading. We conclude that with oblivious BSs there is an
Eb/N0min penalty incurred by limited backhaul, but the capac-
ity is unaffected provided that the backhaul bandwidth scales
as log SNR. Not surprisingly, the impact of BS clustering is
not significant provided that the clusters are sufficiently large,
see equation (17). On the other hand, the effect of fading is
somewhat surprising. As well known for general MIMO links,
fading provides the degrees of freedom. But with MCP, it turns
out that with a large number of users and BSs, the capacity
is increasing in the variance of the fading.
The performance benefits of cooperation at the MS level
have been reviewed as well, along with considerations re-
garding the strong interplay between the design of relaying
strategies and MCP techniques. Here, there is much scope
for further research, and most of the results reported are of
a preliminary nature: Even the simple relay channel is an
14 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
open problem in information theory. But achieveable rates can
easily be calculated for particular schemes such as AF, CF, and
DF. We conclude that for sufficiently powerful relays, CF is
the best technique under MCP. These results show that the
MCP model with relays is stimulating new efforts in network
information theory.
The presentation has also briefly touched upon the potential
gains achievable by exploiting novel transmission strategies
such as structured codes. Other advanced techniques, not dis-
cussed here, such as interference alignment are also expected
to have an important role to play in cooperative cellular
systems (see, e.g., [72]). Other related issues of interest are
the impact of imperfect channel state information and robust
coding strategies [73]. This area remains an active and fertile
field for research and is briefly addressed in the next sections.
IV. TRANSMISSION AND CODING TECHNIQUES
This section provides an overview of transmission and
signaling strategies for practical multi-cell MIMO networks,
in which the base-stations cooperate. The nature of coop-
eration (interference coordination or MCP) determines the
suitable strategies in various cases. Some of these strategies
are straightforward extensions of traditional MIMO signaling
techniques, while many others require novel and nontrivial
ideas. This section also reviews the possible optimization
methods. The optimization space involves scheduling, power
allocation, transmit and receive beamforming, as well as
choices of transmission strategies. One of the objectives of
this section is to highlight the difference between single-cell
MIMO techniques and multi-cell techniques. When appropri-
ate, the possible distributed implementation of an algorithm is
mentioned, since distributed processing is a primary challenge
for the design of multi-cell MIMO networks. However this
issue is visited in greater detail in Section V. Below we
distinguish between the techniques involving CSI exchange
only (interference coordination) and the MCP schemes which
require both CSI and user data exchange, and provide an
overview of coding, precoding and optimization strategies in
each of these cases.
A. Interference coordination strategies
Consider first a basic level of coordination where only the
channel state information of the direct and interfering channels
are shared among the BSs, a setup illustrated earlier in Fig.
2. The availability of channel state information allows the
transmission strategies across the different cells to adapt to
the channel state jointly. Transmission strategies can include
scheduling, power control, beamforming, as well as advanced
coding methods specifically designed for interference mitiga-
tion.
1) Coordinated power control: In an interference-limited
cellular network, joint power control and scheduling across
the multiple BSs that adapts to the channel condition of the
entire network can bring improvement over traditional per-
cell power control. This is especially evident when cellular
topology is such that cells significantly overlap.
The resource allocation problem in the multi-cell setting
has been studied extensively in the literature [74], [75], [76],
[77], [78], [79], [80]. In the following, we consider a simple
scenario where both the BS and the remote users are equipped
with a single antenna to illustrate the main challenge in multi-
cell power control. In this setting, there is a surprising result
for the special case of an arbitrary two-cell set-up where the
optimum sum-rate maximizing power allocation policy is in
fact binary, i.e. the optimum strategy involves either both
cells operating at maximum allowed power or one cell being
completely shut down [74]. This result does not extend to
more than two cells however.
In a more general setting, consider an orthogonal frequency-
division multiple-access (OFDMA) system in which multiple
users within each cell are separated in the frequency domain.
Note that the multiple access across the multiple cells is not
orthogonal since we allow for full reuse of the frequency
tones from a cell to the next. The joint power control and
scheduling problem is that of deciding which user should be
served and how much power should be used on each frequency
tone. Mathematically, in a multi-cell network with M cells,
K users per cell, and N OFDM tones, let hnl,m,k denote the
channel response between the lth BS and the kth user in the
mth cell in tone n. Let Pnl denote the power allocation at the
lth BS and nth tone. The multi-cell downlink weighted rate
maximization problem is
max
M∑
l=l
K∑
k=1
αlkRlk (23)
s.t. Rlk =
∑
n∈Nlk
log
(
1 +
Pnl |hnl,l,k|2∑
j =l P
n
j |hnj,l,k|2 + 1
)
where Nlk denotes the set of frequency tones in which the kth
user in the lth cell is scheduled. Here, αlk signals the priority
of each user, whose value is typically determined by higher-
level protocols, and the background noise variance is assumed
to be one without loss of generality. Further, either peak or
total power constraints are typically imposed in addition.
Numerically finding the global optimal solution to the above
optimization problem is known to be a difficult problem [81].
No convex reformulation of the above problem is known,
even in the simpler case of fixed scheduling. In [82], [78],
[79], [83], an approach which iterates between scheduling and
power allocation has been proposed, but the core difficulty,
namely the nonconvexity of the signal-to-interference-and-
noise (SINR) expression remains.
One approach for solving the power allocation problem is
to let each cell independently optimize its own transmission
power in a game theoretical model, where the multiple cells
eventually converge to a competitive optimum (e.g., [84], [85],
[86]). However, further performance gain can be obtained if
cells cooperate.
One idea is to encourage an interfering transmitter to lower
its transmit power whenever it causes too much interference
to neighboring transmitter-receiver pairs. Toward this end, a
promising approach is to devise a mechanism to measure the
impact of each transmitter’s interference on its neighbors’
transmissions, then to coordinate BSs based on the exchange
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 15
of these measures. This idea is called interference pricing,
which has been proposed for the power spectrum adaptation
problem for the wireless ad-hoc network [87], [88], [89],
[90], the digital subscriber line network [91], and is also
applicable to wireless multi-cell networks [79], [83]. As shown
in these studies, coordinating power control can already yield
appreciable improvement in the overall sum rate as compared
to a non-coordinated system.
2) Coordinated beamforming: When the BSs are equipped
with multiple antennas, the availability of additional spatial
dimensions allows the possibility of coordinating beamform-
ing vectors across the BSs, further improving the overall
performance. This idea has been explored in [92], [77], [93],
[94], [95].
The optimization problem associated with multi-cell joint
scheduling, beamforming and power allocation inherits the
nonconvex structure of the multi-cell power control problem
discussed above. However, there is a particular formulation
that enjoys efficient and global optimal solution — this is
when the problem is formulated as the minimization of the
transmit power across the BSs subject to SINR constraints in
a frequency flat channel for the case where the remote users
are equipped with a single antenna only. This formulation is
most applicable to constant bit-rate applications with fixed
quality-of-service constraints.
Let wl,k be the downlink transmit beamforming vector for
the kth user in the lth cell, the downlink SINR for the kth
user in the lth cell can be expressed as:
Γl,k =
|h†l,l,kwl,k|2∑
n=k |h†l,l,kwl,n|2 +
∑
j =l,n |h†j,l,kwj,n|2 + 1
(24)
where hj,l,k is now the vector channel from the jth BS to the
kth user in the lth cell. Let γl,k be the SINR target for the
kth user in the lth cell. We can formulate, for example, a total
downlink transmit power minimization problem as follows:
minimize
M∑
l=1
K∑
k=1
||wl,k||2 (25)
subject to Γl,k ≥ γl,k, ∀l = 1 · · ·M, k = 1 · · ·K
where the minimization is over the wl,k’s, which implicitly
include both transmit direction and transmit power optimiza-
tion. For simplicity, we assume that the set of SINR targets
are feasible.
Intuitively, coordinating beamforming vectors across the
BSs are beneficial when the number of BS antennas exceeds
the number of simultaneous users in each cell, in which
case the BS has spare spatial dimensions for interference
mitigation. In the case where the number of spare dimensions
exceeds the number of dominant interferers in every cell, a
complete nulling of interference within each cell is possible
using a per-cell zero-forcing solution. Insight into the optimal
cell loading under coordinated beamforming has been obtained
in [96] using large systems analysis.
The key challenge to coordinated beamforming is to co-
ordinate the BSs in such a way as to enable them to find an
optimal solution jointly without excessive exchange of channel
state information. This turns out to be possible using a tool
known as uplink-downlink duality.
The transmit downlink beamforming problem for the multi-
cell system is first considered in the classic work of [97],
where an algorithm for iteratively optimizing the beamforming
vectors and power allocations is proposed. The key idea is to
consider a virtual dual uplink network with transmitters and re-
ceivers reversed (so that the uplink channels are the Hermitian
transpose of the original downlink channels). The algorithm of
[97] proposes to use the optimal uplink receiver beamformers
(which are easy to find using the minimum mean-squared error
(MMSE) criterion) as the downlink transmit beamformer, then
to iterate between the beamformer update step and the power
update step to satisfy the target SINRs. The optimality of this
algorithm can be established for the single-cell network using
several different techniques based on convex optimization
methods [98], [99], [100], [101], [102]. In particular, the
semidefinite relaxation approach of [99] and the second-order
cone programming reformulation of [102] also lead to new and
more efficient numerical algorithms for finding the optimal
beamformers and powers. Further, it is possible to show that
uplink-downlink duality is an example of Lagrangian duality
in optimization [59].
The use of convex optimization ideas for establishing dual-
ity and for optimal beamforming can be extended to the multi-
cell setting [103], [93]. One consequence of the duality result
is that it suggests a way of implementing optimal multi-cell
beamforming and power control in a distributed fashion for a
time-division duplex (TDD) system, where channel reciprocity
guarantees that the actual uplink channels are identical to the
virtual dual uplink channels. In this case, the optimal transmit
beamformers for the downlink can just simply be set as the
MMSE receive beamformers for the uplink. Together with
a distributed downlink power control step, this provides a
distributed and optimal solution to the problem (25) [93].
The duality result can be further extended to account for the
optimization objective of minimizing per-BS or per-antenna
powers. The idea is to set up the optimization problem as that
of minimizing the weighted sum power, where the weights can
be adjusted to tradeoff powers among different BS antennas,
and where the weights enter the dual channel as scaling
factors for the dual virtual noise variances [59], [93]. In
addition, duality also holds for the case where the remote
users are equipped with multiple receive antennas as well
[104]. However, the iterative updating of transmit beamformer,
receive beamformer and the power is no longer guaranteed to
converge to the global optimal solution; only a local optimal
solution is guaranteed in this case.
Finally, duality holds not only for the power minimization
problem formulated in (25), but also for the complementary
problem of rate region maximization subject to power con-
straints (e.g., [105], [106]). This latter problem is of interest
in variable rate-adaptive applications. However, as both uplink
and downlink networks are MIMO multi-cell interference
networks, finding the optimal solution to either problem is
a challenging task. In this realm, [107] used an approach
based on the first-order condition of the optimization problem,
and [108] used a rate profile approach to reach the boundary
points of the rate region. In addition, much work has also
been done to identify solutions from a competitive (e.g., [109])
or egotistic vs. altruistic points of view [110], [94], [111].
16 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
Although competitive optimal solutions are not global optimal
solutions for the entire network, they nevertheless can offer
improvement over existing static networks.
3) Coding for interference mitigation: So far, we have
focused on transmission strategies which treat intercell in-
terference as noise. For interference-limited networks, it is
possible to further improve these strategies by considering
the possibility of detecting then subtracting the interference.
In currently deployed cellular networks, interference signals
are typically too weak to be detected by out-of-cell users.
The key to make interference decoding work is to specifically
design transmit signals to facilitate detection at neighboring
cells — as suggested by information theoretical results on the
interference channel.
The largest known achievable rate region for the two-user
interference channel is the celebrated Han-Kobayashi region
[69] derived based on the idea of splitting each user’s transmit
signal into a common message, which is decodable by all
receivers, and a private message, which is decodable by the
intended receiver only. In other words, by lowering the rate
of part of the transmitted message to allow it to be decoded
by out-of-cell users, the overall interference level would be re-
duced, enabling a higher overall rate. The recent work of [112]
provides further insights into this scheme by showing that a
particular common-private splitting can get within one bit to
an outer bound of the two-user interference channel. The key
insight is to set the private message power seen at the opposite
receiver to be at the background noise level, whereas anything
above that should be decoded. Although the outer bound of
[112] applies only to the two-user single-antenna case, in a
multi-cell MIMO network, adjacent cells can be paired and
the optimal beamforming and power splitting problem can be
solved together to produce significant performance gain for
the overall network [113].
Finally, for an interference channel with more than two
transmitters, it is also possible to specifically design transmit
signals so that the interferences are always constrained at
confined subspaces at each receiver. This allows the receiver
to efficiently reject the interference. This idea, known as inter-
ference alignment, has been shown to achieve significantly im-
proved multiplexing gain for the MIMO interference network,
where both the transmitters and the receivers are equipped
with multiple antennas [72]. Practical implementation of these
ideas for wireless networks is an active area that is currently
attracting much research.
B. Coding strategies for MCP networks
The coding and optimization strategies considered in the
previous sections require the sharing of the channel state
information only. Significant further improvement in data rates
is possible, if, in addition, the BSs are synchronized and the
data streams for all the active users or the received signals
at all antennas are shared between the BSs via high-capacity
backhaul links [114], [115], [116], [117], [118], [119]. This
setup is illustrated in Fig. 3. Many coding strategies have been
proposed in the literature for this setting (e.g., [120], [121],
[122], [123], [124].) The antennas from all the BSs are in this
case effectively pooled together to form a giant antenna array.
The uplink channel can then be modeled as a multiple access
channel with multiple transmitters and a single multi-antenna
receiver. The downlink channel can be modeled as a broadcast
channel with a single multi-antenna transmitter and multiple
receivers.
1) Uplink: The capacity region of the uplink multiple-
access channel is achieved with superposition coding and
successive decoding [15]. The idea is to decode each user’s
codeword based on the observation sequence of the entire
antenna array (using a linear beamformer across the BSs), then
to subtract the decoded codewords in a successive fashion.
To achieve this multiple-access channel capacity region, the
cooperating BSs theoretically need to share their observation
sequence, which requires infinite backhaul capacity.
There is an important special case where the multiple-
access channel capacity can be approximately achieved by just
the linear detection of each user’s individual message using
a receive beamformer across all BSs, without the nonlinear
successive decoding step. This happens when the interfering
links are much weaker than the direct links (but the interfer-
ence level is still much stronger than the background noise).
Consider the following example where the channel matrix H
between the K single-antenna BSs and K remote users is near
diagonal:
y = Hx + z. (26)
The capacity region of this multiple-access channel is almost
a rectangle with each user achieving close to its interference-
free capacity. This is because a joint receiver across the
BSs can simply employ a zero-forcing receiver with rows
of H−1 as the beamformers. As H−1 is nearly diagonal, it
produces minimal noise enhancement. Thus, the single-user
interference-free capacity can be nearly achieved for all users
with just linear decoding, without the successive decoding
step.
Note that for the diagonally dominant network, the above
network-wide zero-forcing strategy is superior to an alternative
strategy where each BS performs detection based on the
received signal at its own antennas only, but BSs share the
decoded bits for interference subtraction. In this case, the
BSs must follow a particular decoding order with intercell
interference subtracted successively. This alternative strategy
is clearly suboptimal, because it achieves the single-user
interference-free bound only for the last user in any partic-
ular decoding order, but not for earlier users. In contrast,
the linear strategy mentioned earlier achieves the single-user
bound simultaneously for every user in a diagonally dominant
interference network.
2) Downlink: The capacity region of the downlink broad-
cast channel is achieved with a dirty-paper coding strategy at
the encoder [14]. The idea is to fix an encoding order, then
transmit each user’s codeword using a transmit beamformer
across all the antennas at all cooperating BSs, and successively
encode each user’s codeword while treating the messages
already encoded as known interference. From an information
theoretical point of view, the known interference can be
completely pre-subtracted without using extra power at the
transmitter. This is called dirty-paper coding [125]. Dirty-
paper coding can be approximately implemented in practice
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 17
using Tomlinson-Harashima precoding or lattice precoding
strategies (see e.g., [126], [127]).
When the channel matrix associated with the interference
network is diagonally dominant, the zero-forcing strategy is
again near optimal. Consider again the single-antenna case:
y = H†x + z. (27)
The zero-forcing strategy precodes x = (H†)−1u, where
u is the information symbol. When H† is near diagonal,
it produces minimal power enhancement at the transmitter,
resulting in a near rectangular achievable rate region. Note that
this network-wide zero-forcing strategy requires joint transmit
beamforming across the BSs, but no dirty-paper coding. This
is again superior to the alternative strategy of dirty-paper
coding without joint beamforming for the diagonally dominant
interference network, analogous to the uplink case discussed
earlier.
3) Optimization: For a cellular network with an arbitrary
topology and a general channel matrix, the optimization of
a network-wide beamforming vector together with the suc-
cessive decoding or dirty-paper precoding orders becomes a
relevant question. Consider first the uplink channel:
y =
K∑
k=1
Hkxk + z (28)
where y is the network-wide receive signal, and xk is the
transmit signal for user k, who may be equipped with multiple
antennas as well, and the noise vector z has a normalized unit
variance. Let the optimization problem be formulated as that of
maximizing the weighted sum rate
∑
k αkRk. Because of the
polymatroid structure of the multiple-access channel capacity
region, the optimal decoding order is completely determined
by the relative values of αk [128]. The user with the smallest
αk should be decoded first; the user with the largest αk last.
Without loss of generality, let α1 ≤ α2 · · · ≤ αK . The
resulting weighted sum rate can be expressed as
K∑
k=1
αkRk =
K∑
k=1
αk log
det
(∑K
j=k HjSjH
†
j + I
)
det
(∑K
j=k+1 HjSjH
†
j + I
) (29)
where Sk is the transmit covariance matrix of user k. The
above rate expression is a convex function of Sk. Thus, the
weighted sum rate optimization problem for the uplink can be
solved efficiently. The eigenvectors of the resulting optimal
Sk give the optimal transmit beamformers. The network-wide
receive beamformers for user k are the MMSE beamformers
with interference from the first k − 1 users subtracted.
For the downlink channel
yk = H
†
kx + z, (30)
(where again the noise variance is normalized to one), al-
though a straightforward formulation of the achievable rate
region does not result in a convex formulation, a key result
known as uplink-downlink duality [129] enables the downlink
transmit covariance optimization problem to be translated
to the uplink. Uplink-downlink duality guarantees that the
capacity region of the downlink channel is identical to the
capacity region of the dual uplink, where the transmitters and
the receivers are interchanged, and the channel matrices are
Hermitian transpose of each other, and where the same sum-
power constraint is applied to both. Thus, to find the optimal
downlink beamformer, one only needs to solve the optimal
uplink problem with a sum power constraint, then use the
covariance transformation technique of [129] to translate the
optimal uplink solution to the downlink.
The duality result established in [129] solves the optimal
downlink beamforming problem with a sum power constraint
across all the antennas. In a multi-cell network, the power
usages across the BSs cannot easily be traded with each
other. In addition, each antenna is typically constrained by
the linearity of its power amplifier, and hence is peak power
constrained. Thus, a more sensible approach is to apply a per-
BS or per-antenna power constraint at each cell.
The uplink-downlink duality result can be generalized to
accommodate the per-antenna power constraint [59] as men-
tioned in Section III. The additional ingredient is to recognize
that transmit power constraints for the downlink are reflected
in the dual uplink as the noise covariances. In particular, for
the weighted per-antenna power minimization problem for the
downlink, its dual uplink would have its noise variances scaled
by the same weights. Further, to enforce per-antenna power
constraints, one would need to search over all such weights
in the downlink. This amounts to searching over all possible
noise variances.
More precisely, for a downlink broadcast channel with per-
antenna power constraint Pi in each of its antennas, the dual
uplink is a multiple-access channel with the same sum power
constraint
∑
i Pi, but whose noise covariance matrix is a
diagonal matrix with qii on its diagonal and constrained by∑
i
qiiPi ≤
∑
i
Pi. (31)
Numerically, the weighted rate sum maximization problem
for the downlink becomes a minimax problem in the uplink
with maximization over uplink transmit covariances and mini-
mization over uplink receiver noise covariances. This minimax
problem is concave in transmit covariance and convex in noise
covariance, so it can be solved using convex optimization
techniques.
The discussion so far focuses on capacity maximization.
When practical coding and modulation schemes are used, an
SNR gap needs to be included in the achievable rate com-
putation. Unfortunately, accurate expressions of the SNR gap
in the multiuser setting are not easy to obtain. Furthermore,
although duality still holds with the inclusion of gap, the dual
uplink problem is no longer tractable. The issue is that with an
additional gap term, (29) is no longer a concave function of the
transmit covariance matrices. Work on finding the approximate
optimal ordering and beamformers for the single-receive-
antenna case includes [130], but the optimization problem in
its full generality remains open.
C. Coding Strategies with Rate-Limited Cooperation
In this section, we focus on channel models where the BSs
cooperate via rate-limited backhaul links as in Fig. 4-(b), or
via independent relay nodes with rate-limited connections to
the BSs. These channel models are practically relevant, but the
18 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
information theoretical capacities of these channels are often
unknown, except for certain simplified models as mentioned in
Section III. This situation is not really surprising considering
the fact that the capacity of even the simplest single-transmitter
single-receiver and single-relay channel is still open. Thus,
instead of capacity analysis, this section focuses on effective
interference mitigation techniques in these settings.
1) Receiver Cooperation: In the uplink direction, receiver
cooperation can be realized either with a dedicated relay
node with fixed-capacity links to the BSs, or with rate-
limited conferencing links between BSs which act as relays
for each other. In these so-called relay-interference channels,
the objective of the relay strategy is typically to mitigate
interference, rather than to enhance direct transmission. Well-
known strategies such as decode-and-forward and compress-
and-forward can both be employed toward this goal.
Consider first a two-user interference channel employing
Han-Kobayashi style common-private information splitting.
Consider a practical regime of interest where the interfering
links are “weak”, but where interference is still stronger than
background noise. In this case, the rates of the common
messages are typically constrained by the interfering links.
Thus, when the receivers are equipped with conferencing links,
the common message rates can be effectively increased if each
receiver decodes the common message from its own transmit-
ter, then forwards a bin index of the common message to
the other receiver. Such a decode-and-forward strategy allows
each conferencing bit to increase the common information rate
(and hence the overall achievable rate) by one bit, up to a limit.
This strategy can be shown to be sum capacity achieving in
the asymptotic high SNR regime for a simpler Z-interference
channel [40]. A more sophisticated coding strategy, which
consists of a two-round conferencing with quantization as the
first step and binning as the second step, can in fact be proved
to be within 2 bits to the capacity region of this channel model
for all interference regimes [34].
The decode-and-forward strategy discussed above can be
thought of as an interference-forwarding strategy, as the relay
decodes and then forwards part of the signal that would have
caused interference. The knowledge of the interference can
either help the interfered transmit-receive pair subtract the
interference, hereby increasing its direct transmission rate, or
help the interfering transmitter-receiver pair increase its com-
mon message rate. This interference-forwarding strategy has
been used in various studies, including interference channel
models with a dedicated relay node [131], [132], [133], [134],
[135].
In existing multi-cell networks where the Han-Kobayashi
style common-private information splitting is not deployed,
interference mitigation can be effectively carried out using
compress-and-forward or amplify-and-forward strategies. An
interesting result in this area is due to the works [136], [137],
[138] that show that when a relay observes the precise inter-
ference sequence of a transmitter-receiver pair, every relaying
bit to the receiver can increase the direct transmission rate
by one bit in the noiseless limit. This can be achieved using
a compress-and-forward strategy where the relay quantizes
its observation of the interference with Wyner-Ziv coding
[139], and the receiver first decodes the quantized version
of the interference, then subtracts part of the interference
before decoding the direct transmission. In fact, the asymptotic
optimality of compress-and-forward in the noiseless limit
continues to hold when the relay observes a linear combination
of the transmitted signal and the interference. This idea can
be further extended to show that a single relay can help both
transmitter-receiver pairs of an interference channel using a
universal strategy called generalized hash-and-forward [140].
Interestingly, although amplify-and-forward is typically not
optimal in these settings, the amplify-and-forward strategy can
be significantly improved with nonlinear amplification [141].
2) Transmitter Cooperation: In the downlink direction,
when the BSs are equipped with rate-limited backhaul links
at the transmitter, the BSs can still cooperate using a variety
of techniques. One idea is to share part of the common in-
formation among the transmitters (assuming a Han-Kobayashi
coding strategy is deployed), which allows the transmitters
to cooperatively send shared common messages; this idea
has been pursued in [142], [143]. Another idea is to share
part of the private message, which allows the possibility of
partial zero-forcing or dirty-paper coding at the transmitter;
these possibilities have been explored in [144], [106], [145],
[143]. In certain high SNR and interference-limited asymptotic
regimes, it is possible to show that each cooperation bit
can improve the direct transmission rate sum by one bit
[145]. However, in general, the question of which transmission
strategies should be adopted in specific cases remains very
much open.
V. SCALABLE COOPERATIVE SCHEMES
The potential benefits associated with exploiting or elim-
inating interference in cellular networks are huge. However,
there are several practical hurdles which need to be overcome,
over which we now draw the interested reader’s attention.
In this section, we address the important issue of scalability.
The first models of base station cooperation were centralized
in nature, and a natural implementation would consist of a
central processing unit, or controller, to which all the base
stations are directly connected. The downside to this is that
it has a single point of failure and would be an expensive
infrastructure to build. Such an architecture would place
enormous demands on the back-haul network, as all traffic
would have to be routed to and from the central node, causing
excessive delays. Besides the problem of user data sharing,
there is also the issue of channel state information at the
transmitter (CSIT) which also must be shared amongst base
stations, and between mobiles and base stations. This is an
additional signaling burden associated with MCP. Thus, when
it comes to an assessment of the real advantages of MCP in
realistic networks, a fundamental question arises: Might it be
that the capacity increase due to MCP is outweighed by the
signaling overhead it implies?
The information theoretic picture, examined in Section III,
reveals that the capacity of the backhaul should grow in pro-
portion to the capacity targeted on the over-the-air section of
the network, to avoid being a bottleneck for traffic. Neverthe-
less, the complete answer to our question seems highly system
and scenario dependent and is the focus of ongoing research. A
simpler yet related problem would be: how to design practical
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 19
MCP schemes whose overhead scales favorably when the size
of the network grows large? This section considers research
that has attempted to reduce the overhead required to achieve
most of the benefits of cooperation.
One can distinguish two lines of research devoted to over-
head reduction. The first deals with deriving efficient repre-
sentations of the channel state information, which is conveyed
to precoding and decoding algorithms. In the second, (perfect
or possibly partial) CSI is assumed and attention is focused
instead on implementing scalable cooperation schemes via
distributed precoding and decoding algorithms. There is not
a great deal of difference between trying to obtain efficient
channel representations in multi-cell MIMO or in MU-MIMO
setups. Since a rich body of literature already exists for this
problem, we simply refer the reader to past special journal
issues on this topic such as [16], [146]. As a note of caution we
point out that existing work on limited CSIT representation for
MU-MIMO systems does not take into account the specifics of
the multi-cell MIMO channel, such as the different channels
from each base station to each user, whose path loss coefficient
depends on the user’s location in the network. In what follows,
we assume that a CSI model already exists at the base stations
through feedback channels. We present some concepts related
to distributed precoding and decoding and clustering.
A. Impact of channel uncertainty
1) Network capacity: As discussed in Section III-C5, chan-
nel uncertainty affects the scalability of point to point MIMO
channels. The number of transmit antennas that can effectively
be used is limited by the coherence duration in symbol times.
What are the implications for network MIMO? Recently, this
issue has been explored in [147], where random matrix theory
is exploited to obtain tractable formulas for per-cell rates,
involving parameters such as the number of base stations and
the coherence duration in symbol times. It is claimed that the
per-cell rate can in some cases decrease with the number of
base stations, due to the cost of measuring the extra channel
parameters. This conclusion may impact the optimal cluster
size to use in network MIMO (see Section V-C for a discussion
of clustering in the context of MCP). On the other hand, this
analysis does not take into account the impact of intercluster
interference, leaving open further research on this issue.
2) Downlink: Distributed precoding with partial informa-
tion sharing: The general problem of distributed multi-cell
precoding, whereby the l-th base station must design op-
timally its transmit beamforming vectors on the basis of
partially shared CSIT and partially shared user data is largely
open. Interestingly, in the case of fully shared user data
(MIMO cooperation), this problem can be shown to fall
within the framework of team decision theory, which reviews
optimization problems in which different agents (here, the
base stations) must act cooperatively despite not sharing the
same view of the system state [148]. In our context, the
problem can be formalized as follows: the users are assumed
to feedback their channel state information to all base stations,
in a broadcast fashion. As the distance between the user
and surrounding bases differ, the quality of feedback for a
given channel coefficient is unequal at different base stations.
An optimization problem, by which the beamforming vectors
are designed taking into account the locally received CSIT
feedback as well as the expected quality level for the feedback
received at other bases, is formulated [148]. The obtained
beamformers can range smoothly from fully distributed to
fully centralized, depending on the feedback model.
Rather than a partial sharing of CSIT along with fully
shared user data, another particular framework for distributed
precoding assumes a partial sharing of the user data, but under
perfect CSIT sharing. A possible practical model for this is
as follows: the finite backhaul links are used to convey two
types of traffic. The first type is routed in the interference-
coordination mode, i.e. a message to user k in cell m is
routed to base station m alone, while the second type of
traffic is duplicated to all cooperating bases, in the MIMO
fashion. The first and second types are referred to as private
and common, respectively. An optimization problem can be
formulated by which the total user rate is optimally split
across private and common information, as a function of the
finite backhaul capacity and of the channel state information
[149]. By comparing private and common information rates,
one can assess the value of MIMO cooperation depending on
the interference strength model.
B. Distributed processing using Turbo Base Stations
1) Uplink: distributed decoding: We now consider the
problem of uplink decoding of multiple base station signals
jointly. The fact that the complexity of the general multi-user
detection problem grows exponentially with the number of
users [150] raises a question of scalability: A priori, it looks as
though the multiuser decoding of all users might be intractable
as the size of the network grows large. On the other hand,
the very localized structure of the interference offers hope of
salvation from the apparent intractability, and it motivates the
search for decentralized algorithms.
An interesting question to ask is whether the global uplink
task of demodulating all the users’ data symbols can be
distributed across a network of interacting base stations. In
this context, each base station is individually performing
local computations, and then passing the results to immediate
neighbors for further processing. It is very natural to try and
apply well known message passing techniques from coding
theory, such as the iterative method of Turbo decoding.
A first step in this direction is taken in [151], which
considers an uplink multi-user detection (MUD) problem.
Each base station first does an independent MUD to try
and separate the desired same-cell user from the co-channel
interferers in other cells. However, the desired user is also
heard at the neighboring base stations, and to gain the benefits
of macrodiversity, the base stations share their log-likelihood
ratios. The base station controller computes an a posteriori
log-likelihood ratio using the log-likelihoods from the local
base stations, which is in essence the first step of the Turbo-
decoder. Later works, such as [152], provided an explicit
connection to Turbo-decoding, and propose iterative, message
passing algorithms.
A related problem is to find the most likely sequence of
bits transmitted in the network. This problem has a simplified
20 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
Markov Chain
Z4
C3
C4
C3
C4
C5
C4
C5
C6
C1
C2
C3
Y2Y1 Y3 Y4
S1 S2 S3 S4
Z1 Z2 Z3
C2
Fig. 9. Hidden Markov model of linear cellular array
structure due to the local interference coupling, which may
make it amenable to a solution via dynamic programming
[153].
Turbo decoding is an example of belief propagation on a
graph. Communication on the uplink of a one dimensional, lin-
ear cellular array model, with one user per cell (as considered
in [8], [9]), can be modeled by a Markov chain moving to the
right along the circular array, see Figure 9. Each state of the
Markov chain corresponds to the choice of code words in three
consecutive cells. For example, state S1 in Figure 9 consists of
the codewords chosen by users 1,2, and 3, respectively. Each
base station observes a noisy version of the superposition of
the three signals, so it is a hidden Markov model, and a one-
dimensional probabilistic graph can be associated with this
model. The (forward-backward) BCJR algorithm [154] can be
applied to compute the MAP estimates of the codewords [155].
This is a one dimensional graphical model, with clustering to
provide the Markov structure. Although simple, this model
allows an exploration of issues such as distributed computa-
tion, parallelism, complexity, and accuracy [155], [156], [157],
[158], [159], [30], [160].
Since the complexity of the BCJR grows exponentially with
the size of the state space, Gaussian models are considered in
[156], [157], where linear estimation techniques are optimal.
The analogous problem is Kalman smoothing, and a forward-
back Kalman smoother is proposed. Note that the delay and
complexity are linear in the network size, but the local nature
of the interference can be exploited. In [158] a parallelized
version of the forward-backward algorithm is proposed, which
allows base stations to make estimates at any time. If the
coupling between base stations is weak, or the noise is strong,
then accurate estimates are obtained after a small number of
message passings. Thus, the complexity and delay, per base
station, need not grow with the array size in practice.
More realistic two dimensional cellular array models are
more problematic. Forward-backward methods no longer ap-
ply, and the associated probabilistic graph models now have
loops. The uplink decoding problem is considered in [30], and
two graphical models are investigated. The belief propagation
algorithm is applied, and it is found that in spite of the loops,
error rates near the single user lower bound are obtained, for
fading channels. The numerical complexity per base station is
a constant, independent of the network size.
Since the complexity of the sum-product algorithm (i.e.
belief propagation) grows exponentially with the number of
variable nodes connected to a function node, it is of interest
to look for suboptimal approaches that reduce the complexity,
especially when there are many interfering users per cell.
In this case, the computation of the log-likelihood messages
sent from a variable node to a function node is in essence
an MUD computation. In [161], symbols are grouped, and a
posteriori probabilities are computed within a group, treating
the interference from the other groups as Gaussian noise,
with the mean and variance determined from the a priori
probabilities. Thus, a reduced complexity group-wise MUD
scheme is proposed. This paper also incorporates an LDPC
(Low Density Parity Check) code, so that the graph is in time
as well as space.
2) Downlink: Distributed beamforming: The downlink is
a broadcast channel in which all base station antennas are
pooled. If attention is restricted to linear techniques, then the
problem to be solved is that of macroscopic beamforming. As
was exposed earlier in Section IV, duality between the uplink
and downlink allows some of the above methods to be used on
the downlink, also. The downlink beamforming problem can
be recast as an equivalent, virtual, uplink estimation problem,
in which the downlink data symbols to be transmitted become
observables in the uplink problem, and belief propagation on
the virtual uplink graph finds the samples to be transmitted by
each base station, i.e. the outputs of the global precoder. These
samples are obtained by the sum-product message passing
algorithm [160].
C. Limited cooperation via clustering
Current cellular networks typically connect base transceiver
stations (BTS’s) to base station controllers (BSC’s), and in
some implementations the BSC handles the base-band signal
processing and encoding/decoding [151]. It is therefore very
natural to consider clustered models, in which the processing
is done locally at the BSC, which is connected to the adjacent
base stations. The collection of base stations served by a
BSC forms a cluster, each cluster behaving as a network
MIMO system, but now there is interference between adjacent
clusters. In this case, there is not a single, centralized node,
but many nodes, each independently encoding and decoding
signals for the mobiles in the local cluster. The advantages of
the clustered model are 1) relevance to currently implemented
systems 2) reduced computational complexity 3) reduced
demands on the back-haul network since only neighboring
base stations (i.e. those which are mutually interfering the
most) are engaged in cooperation, and 4) increased robustness
to node failures (a base station can be served by more than
one system controller). The disadvantages when compared
with full network-wide cooperation are 1) increased levels of
intercell interference in some areas (since adjacent clusters
will interfere), 2) reduced diversity, and 3) lower capacity.
Tradeoffs between these factors have been considered in a
number of research papers.
It is well known that network MIMO has the capability
to eliminate intercell interference. In models in which inter-
ference is treated as noise, a notion of effective bandwidths
can be developed, which allows a definition of user capacity
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 21
(2,3)
BS1 BS2 BS3
cluster receiver
(1,2)
cluster receiver
Fig. 10. Cluster decoding using pairs of base stations
region [6], [162], [7]. It can be shown that in these models,
base station cooperation and optimal power control effectively
eliminate inter-cell interference [163], [5], [6], [7]. In other
words, the user capacity region of a network of K cooperating
base stations is the same as that of K non-interfering (isolated)
cells, as was pointed out in Section III. However, this relies
on global cooperation. Consider instead a very simple model
consisting of three base stations labelled 1, 2, and 3, as
depicted in Figure 10. Suppose base stations 1 and 2 cooperate
to decode the users between them (cluster 1, 2), and base
stations 2 and 3 cooperate to decode the users between them
(cluster 2, 3). With full cooperation, there is a capacity limit on
the sum of the effective bandwidths in the two cells. With the
limited cooperation described here, the user capacity region is
reduced, with additional constraints imposed by each cluster.
It is shown in Theorem 9.6 in [5] that the user capacity region
is the intersection of three regions: one corresponding to each
of the two-receiver clusters, and one corresponding to the
three-receiver system (the user capacity region under global
processing).
Extensions of the above simple three antenna model to more
complex networks, including linear and planar models, are
considered in [164]. In these models, MCP "receivers" are
associated with clusters of antennas, and adjacent receivers
share common antennas, as in the simple three antenna model
above. In [164] the focus is the information-theoretic capacity,
and since the transmitters interfere at nearby receivers, the
techniques used come from the theory of interference chan-
nels. Upper and lower bounds on achievable rates are derived.
The impact of clustering on the information-theoretic ca-
pacity of multi-cell processing (MCP) has been considered
more recently in [38], [23], [165], and in other works surveyed
in Section III-C4 (i.e. capacity results for the uplink, with
local base station backhaul). In [23], the degrees of freedom
are shown to be reduced by a factor of N/(N + 1) or
(N −1)/(N +1), when N is even or odd, respectively, where
N is the number of base stations in each cluster. In [38]
a similar result is obtained for a limiting regime in which
the number of antennas at each base station grows large, in
proportion to the number of users in each cell. In this case, the
corresponding result is (N − 2)/N , for N ≥ 3: The limiting
asymptotics wash out the effect of even or odd parity. Recently,
[165] has undertaken a large system analysis of MCP, with
clustered decoding, fair user scheduling, and a realistic path
loss model.
A practical way to reduce inter-cluster interference is to
use frequency planning. For example, one can employ two
frequency bands, and by employing appropriate power control
in each band, and alternating the roles of each band in
adjacent clusters, the impact of inter-cluster interference can
be mitigated, whilst maintaining full frequency re-use in each
cell [166], [167]. Another approach to clustering is to limit
the base station cooperation to the users that really need it
i.e. those users near the cell boundaries. The problem then
becomes that of grouping users into appropriate clusters for
joint MUD. These ideas related to dynamic clustering have
started to be investigated in [168], [169] among others.
Clustering reduces the information available to encoders
and decoders alike. Information-theoretic approaches in which
encoders and decoders are limited to knowledge of the code-
books of users in adjacent cells only are to be found in [155],
[41], [37]. Clustering can also create unfairness for mobiles
that happen to lie near the boundary of a cluster. A way to
treat this problem is to introduce a family of clusters, so that
every cell gets a turn at being on a cluster boundary. A round
robin across the clusters provides fairness to all the users [38],
[166], [167]. Dynamic clustering based on channel strength
information also helps to mitigate the unfairness effects in the
long run. Clustering has also recently been considered in the
context of linear precoding. In [170] mobiles are classified as
cluster interior or cluster edge users. Within a cluster, block
diagonalization subject to per base station power constraints
is performed, but, as in coordinated beamforming, nulls are
also steered to neighboring edge users.
VI. REAL-WORLD IMPLEMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE
The previous sections have addressed the theoretical per-
formance of cooperative networks, including some non-ideal
assumptions such as limited backhaul bandwidth and channel
uncertainty. In this section, we discuss these and other topics
related to the real-world implementation of cooperative tech-
niques in cellular networks. We discuss the practical aspects of
system implementation and present system-level simulations
and prototypes which hint at the potential and problems of
real-world cooperative cellular networks.
A. System implementation
In the practical implementation of any coherent wireless
communication system, issues including synchronization and
channel estimation need to be addressed. In addition, downlink
MU-MIMO transmission requires channel state information at
the base station transmitters, and cooperative networks require
an enhanced backhaul network connecting base stations with
each other or with a central processor.
1) Synchronization: Downlink MIMO cooperation across
multiple base stations requires tight synchronization so that
there is ideally no carrier frequency offset (CFO) between the
local oscillators at the base stations. Sufficient synchronization
could be achieved using commercial GPS (global positioning
system) satellite signals for outdoor base stations [171]. For
indoor base stations, the timing signal could be sent from an
outdoor GPS receiver using a precisely timed network proto-
col. In the absence of a GPS signal, each base could correct
its offset based on CFO estimatation and feedback from the
mobiles [172]. On the uplink, CFO results in interference
between subcarriers of an OFDM transmission. Techniques for
joint detection and CFO compensation in uplink coordinated
22 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
multi-cell MIMO OFDM systems have been proposed in
[173].
2) Channel estimation: Coherent combining at the receiver
or coherent pre-combining at the transmitter provides SNR
gain when the channel state is known. Sufficient resources
must be allocated to pilot signals to ensure reliable estimation
of the channel state, accounting for the fact that the estimation
is performed on each transmit/receive antenna pair with no
combining benefit. In the context of network coordination with
spatially distributed bases, the extent of the coordination could
depend on the range of reliable channel estimation, and there
is a tradeoff between increasing the coordination network size
at the expense of increased pilot overhead.
For estimation of channels at the transmitter in time-division
duplex (TDD) networks, one can rely on the reciprocity of
the uplink and downlink channels so that channel estimation
on the uplink can be used for downlink transmission. In this
sense, channel estimation at the receiver and at the TDD
transmitter face similar challenges. However, the TDD system
faces additional challenges if the number of users is much
larger than the total spatial degrees of freedom, and if the users
transmitting uplink data are not the same as those receiving
downlink data. Pilot signals and protocols should be designed
to address these issues without resulting in excessive training
overhead. For example, these issues could be addressed by
allowing only high priority users receiving downlink data to
transmit uplink pilots, regardless of whether they have uplink
data to send.
Estimation of channels at the base station transmitters in
frequency-division duplex (FDD) networks face much greater
challenges, as mentioned in Section V. In FDD networks, the
channel estimates obtained at the mobile receiver must be
conveyed to the transmitter, typically over a limited-bandwidth
uplink feedback channel. While quantized channel estimates
could be fed back, current cellular standards such as LTE
[174] implement transmitter “codebooks" consisting of fixed
precoding (i.e., beamforming) vectors. Under these standards,
the mobile estimates the downlink channel and feeds back an
index to its desired precoding vector. In cooperative networks,
these codebooks would be designed to contain codeword
vectors up to size MJ , where M is the number of bases and
J is the number antennas per base. Because the codebooks for
cooperative networks contain more codewords than for con-
ventional networks, additional feedback bits will be required
to index the codebooks, most likely leading to an increase in
the uplink feedback rate.
Note that the problems for obtaining channel estimates
at the transmitter are encountered in single-cell MU-MIMO
downlink transmission, but they are more complicated in
multi-cell coordinated networks due to the size of the net-
works and the potential latency introduced in distributing the
estimates across the bases.
3) Backhaul issues: Strategies for rate-limited cooperation
described in Sections III and V require a high-bandwidth,
low-latency backhaul network for connecting the base sta-
tions with each other or with a central processor [175][144].
Compared to a conventional network with no coordination,
interference coordination techniques shown in Figure 2 require
the sharing of channel state information among cooperating
bases. MIMO cooperation requires the sharing of both channel
state information and user data. As shown in Figure 3, the
data symbols of all users must be known at all cooperating
bases. With coordination among a cluster of L base stations,
the data is sent to these base stations results in a factor
of L increase in the backhaul bandwidth. Compared to the
exchange of data, the bandwidth required for exchanging
channel state information are minimal for the case of moderate
mobile speeds [176]. Of course the bandwidth requirements
for exchanging channel information increase for higher mobile
speeds and more frequency selective channels.
As an alternative to sending the data signals and beamform-
ing weights separately to the bases, one could send a quantized
baseband signal. A linearly quantized signal was shown to
achieve a significant fraction of the ideal unquantized sum-
rate performance in an uplink coordinated network [176].
In the context of the 3GPP LTE-Advanced standard [177],
network coordination techniques are known as coordinated
multi-point (CoMP) transmission or reception. Downlink
CoMP transmission requires standardization of signaling and
will be addressed as a study item starting in September of 2010
for possible consideration in Release 11 of LTE-Advanced. On
the other hand, uplink CoMP reception can be implemented
in a proprietary fashion, and could be introduced earlier as a
vendor-specific feature.
B. Simulated System Performance
Network coordination was studied for an indoor network
with eight access points arranged in a line and using a
TDD framing structure based on WiMAX [178]. Detailed
simulations that model the physical layer of the network
employed joint zero-forcing precoding and MMSE detection
across all access points for the downlink and uplink, respec-
tively. Results confirm that a multiple-fold increase in spectral
efficiency is achievable for both the uplink and downlink with
conventional channel estimation based on linear interpolation.
Interpolation based on minimum mean squared error (MMSE)
was also considered but was shown to have nearly identical
performance. It is potentially more accurate, but because
it requires the estimation of the channel’s time-frequency
covariance, it is also potentially less robust for higher-speed
mobiles.
The downlink cooperative performance of a large multi-
cell FDD network was evaluated in the context of 3GPP
LTE parameters [179]. Using pilot signals with powers set
according to LTE simulation assumptions, mobiles could not
reliably acquire the pilots from multiple base stations, and
as a result, cooperation could occur among only a limited
set of bases. This was a major limiting factor, reducing the
throughput gain by 50% compared to the ideal theoretical
performance. Limited uplink feedback for conveying channel
estimates to the base was another important limiting factor,
reducing throughput by about 30%. Overall, the performance
gains of network coordination in terms of mean throughput
were about 20%. These relatively pessimistic results highlight
the importance of designing efficient pilot signaling to en-
able effective channel acquisition and estimation for larger
networks and higher mobility users.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 23
C. Prototypes and testbeds
The feasibility of cooperative techniques have been demon-
strated in “over-the-air" networks of limited size. A downlink
cooperative network with four distributed base antennas serv-
ing two users was implemented using zero-forcing precoding
[180] as described in Section IV. The proposed system showed
significant gains in mean sum-rate capacity (as a function of
measured SINR) compared to a conventional time-multiplexed
baseline.
Two outdoor testbeds for implementing network coordina-
tion have been developed under the EASY-C project (Enablers
for Ambient Services and Systems Part C- Cellular networks),
a collaboration between academia and industry for the research
and development of LTE-Advanced technologies. One testbed
in Berlin, Germany, consists of four base station sites (seven
sectors) connected through a high-speed optical fiber network
[181]. An even larger testbed consists of ten base station sites
(28 sectors) distributed in downtown Dresden, Germany [182].
Network coordination has been recently demonstrated over
limited portions of each testbed.
Using two distributed base antennas and two users, the
Berlin testbed demonstrated downlink network coordination
for an FDD LTE trial system [183]. It accounted for many
practical implementation aspects including synchronization,
CSI uplink feedback, limited modulation and coding schemes,
and a finite-bandwidth backhaul connection between the bases.
Zero-forcing precoding based on limited CSI feedback was
implemented jointly across the two bases. The Dresden testbed
demonstrated a similarly detailed field trial for an LTE uplink
system, also consisting of two bases and two users [184].
MMSE detection was performed jointly across the bases. In
both systems, the users had low mobility (or were stationary),
and the systems were isolated so there was no intercell
interference. In these relatively benign environments, network
coordination was shown to provide significant performance
gains over the conventional interference-limited strategy. In
particular, it is claimed that MCP can provide median rate
gains on the order of at least 50 percent, as well as increased
fairness, and improved diversity, taking into account the prac-
tical constraints of their system.
Some testbeds are currently testing MCP principles together
with the use of relays, in the scenario of so-called mesh
networks [185] . Recently a large integrated research project
called ARTIST4G funded by the EU and comprising over
20 academic and industrial partners throughout Europe was
launched and is fully dedicated to the development of multi-
cell cooperation techniques in future cellular networks. These
testbeds and projects allow the exploration of system-level
issues discussed in this section as well as broader issues that
include hybrid ARQ, resource allocation, and user scheduling.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although the underlying MIMO theoretic concepts are well
understood, cooperative systems are still in their infancy and
much further research is required in order to fully understand
these systems and to practically achieve the full benefits of
multi-base cooperation. Unlike standard MIMO systems where
the cost of multi-antenna processing lies in the extra hard-
ware and software at individual devices, cooperative MIMO
techniques do not necessarily require extra antennas. Rather,
the cost lies in the additional exchange of information (user
data and channel state) between the devices engaged in the
cooperation, or between the devices and the central controller
in a centralized architecture. Furthermore, the information
exchange is subject to tight delay constraints which are diffi-
cult to meet over a large network. MIMO-cooperation offers
additional benefits over simpler beamforming coordination
schemes, but it requires user data sharing among several BSs
and more complex precoding and decoding.
This tutorial began, in Section III, with an extensive re-
view of capacity results for the classical Wyner model and
its variants, including limited backhaul bandwidth, localized
clustered MCP, and relay assisted MCP. The main conclusions
are summarized in Section III-F. Although the Wyner model
is mathematically tractable, attention must now steer to more
realistic models of cellular communication.
Fading is included in the Wyner model, but the fading
parameters are always assumed to be known perfectly at the
mobiles and/or base stations. Future work must consider the
impact of channel uncertainty, and the cost of measuring the
channels in the network. Channel measurement issues may
impact the optimal size of clusters in clustered MCP. Bounds
on capacity under channel uncertainty are needed, and the cou-
pling of channel uncertainty with limited backhaul bandwidth
is an important area yet to be explored. Information-theoretic
models provide tractable, elegant capacity formulas that are
amenable to optimization, and performance bounds against
which practical schemes can be compared. More importantly,
however, they provide insights into the key performance
bottlenecks, which can then be addressed in more practically
oriented research.
Section IV reviewed the transmission and coding techniques
required to approach the information-theoretic limits. This
included a review of the celebrated uplink-downlink duality
theory for the MIMO broadcast channel, which in a rough
sense is the model for MCP on the downlink. However,
network MIMO has additional constraints, such as limited
backhaul bandwidth, the need for decentralized processing,
and per base station power constraints. Recent research has
included per base station power constraints, and introduced
notions such as coordinated beamforming, along with the
development of the associated Lagrangian optimization the-
ory. Coordinated beamforming is intermediate between SCP,
where only local information is used, and MCP, where global
information is available to a central processor. In coordinated
beamforming, the BS knows the data and channel state of the
users in its own cell, but it also knows the channel state of
users in adjacent cells, and this enables a joint optimization
problem to be solved.
One challenge for the future is to move these ideas from
theory to practice. Joint optimization across many cells may
be problematic when channels are changing due to mobility.
One approach may be to reformulate the problem in terms
of channel statistics, rather than require instantaneous channel
knowledge. Another approach may be to look for simplified,
suboptimal beamforming structures which nevertheless come
close to optimality in practical settings.
Other challenges addressed include coordinated power con-
24 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
trol, and the multi-cell joint problems of scheduling, power
control, and rate allocation across the frequency spectrum.
Many of these problems are computationally intractable, in
general, and the way forward may be to look for structure
in real-world networks that allows the problems to be solved
in polynomial time. Recent work on fractional frequency re-
use in OFDMA systems provides a new set of techniques
that could be applied to network MIMO in a joint multi-
cell optimization. Recent work at the cutting edge of network
information theory, including interference alignment, network
coding, and the recent progress on the interference channel,
all provide new ways to approach the fundamental problem:
how do we achieve maximum spectral efficiency in a multiple
cell network?
Sections V and VI address a few of the fundamental
and practical issues, such as scalability, synchronization, and
channel estimation. It is highly unlikely that a future net-
work MIMO system will be built according to a centralized
architecture. Recent research has considered the problem of
distributing the network-wide optimization problems, so that
much of the processing can be done locally, with limited
communication between nearby nodes. One option is clustered
MCP, in which small clusters of BSs collaborate together
on uplink decoding and downlink beamforming. Turbo base
stations provide another approach, in which soft information
is passed between adjacent BSs, allowing iterative, probabilis-
tic graph-based methods to provide decentralized solutions
to similar problems. Other interesting approaches lending
themselves to distributed implementations are game and team
decision theoretic approches.
Behind such problems, a recurrent and quite fundamental
issue is associated with the aquisition of channel state infor-
mation. An important open question is to determine just how
much channel state information is needed at each particular
node in the network, including information that has been
measured at other nodes in the network. This question gives
rise to a fundamental feedback resource allocation problem.
Cooperation gains go at the expense of feedback resource,
hence such a cost is justified when interference is strong
enough. More generally, a fundamental trade-off between
cooperation and information exchange exists which remains
to be explored theoretically.
Another important problem in practice is that of synchro-
nizing the BSs so that there is no carrier frequency offset. GPS
offers one approach, but future work may consider methods
of distributed clock synchronization. From a practical point
of view, distributed precoding and decoding at multiple bases,
which are designed to offer cooperation gains while exploiting
primarily local channel state and user data information are of
high interest and will attract significant research efforts in the
years to come.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gracefully acknowledge the many constructive
comments made by the anonymous reviewers on this paper.
David Gesbert acknowledges the partial support of the Euro-
pean Commission seventh framework programme (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreements no 247223 (ARTIST4G). Wei
Yu acknowledges the support of Natural Science and Engi-
neering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada through the
Canada Research Chairs Program. Stephen Hanly acknowl-
edges support from a National University of Singapore startup
grant.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Kramer, I. Marić, and R. D. Yates, “Cooperative communications,”
Found. Trends Netw., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 271–425, 2006.
[2] D. Gesbert, M. Shafi, P. Smith, D. Shiu, and A. Naguib, “From theory
to practice: An overview of MIMO space-time coded wireless systems,”
IEEE J Sel. Areas Commun.. Special Issue on MIMO systems, guest
edited by the authors, April 2003.
[3] A. J. Viterbi, A. M. Viterbi, K. S. Gilhousen, and E. Zehavi, “Soft
handoff extends CDMA cell coverage and increases reverse link
capacity,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1281–1288,
Oct. 1994.
[4] A. Viterbi, CDMA: Principles of Spread Spectrum Communication.
Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[5] S. V. Hanly, “Information capacity of radio networks,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Cambridge University, Aug. 1993.
[6] ——, “Capacity and power control in spread spectrum macrodiversity
radio networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 247–256,
Feb. 1996.
[7] S. V. Hanly and D. N. Tse, “Resource pooling and effective bandwidths
in cdma networks with multiuser receivers and spatial diversity,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 1328–1351, May 2001.
[8] S. V. Hanly and P. A. Whiting, “Information-theoretic capacity of
multi-receiver networks,” Telecommunications Systems, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 1–42, Mar. 1993.
[9] A. D. Wyner, “Shannon-theoretic approach to a Gaussian cellular
multiple-access channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 6, pp.
1713–1727, Nov 1994.
[10] I. E. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” AT & T
Bell Laboratories, Tech. Rep. #BL0112170-950615-07TM, 1995.
[11] G. J. Foschini, “Layered space-time architecture for wireless communi-
cation,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 41–59, Autumn.
1996.
[12] S. Shamai and B. Zaidel, “Enhancing the cellular downlink capacity
via co-processing at the transmitting end,” in Vehicular Technology
Conference, 2001. VTC 2001 Spring. IEEE VTS 53rd, vol. 3, 2001,
pp. 1745–1749 vol.3.
[13] D. Gesbert, M. Kountouris, R. Heath, C.-B. Chae, and T. Salzer,
“From Single User to Multiuser Communications: Shifting the MIMO
paradigm,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., Sept. 2007.
[14] H. Weingarten, Y. Steinberg, and S. Shamai, “The capacity region of
the Gaussian multiple-input multiple-output broadcast channel,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 3936–3964, Sept. 2006.
[15] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 1st ed.
Wiley, 1991.
[16] D. Love, R. Heath, V. Lau, D. Gesbert, B. Rao, and M. Andrews,
“An overview of limited feedback in wireless communication systems,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., Vol. 26, Oct. 2008.
[17] D. Gesbert, S. G. Kiani, A. Gjendemsj, and G. E.Oien, “Adaptation,
coordination, and distributed resource allocation in interference-limited
wireless networks,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 5, pp. 2393–2409,
Dec. 2007.
[18] A. Carleial, “Interference channels,” Information Theory, IEEE Trans-
actions on, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 60–70, Jan 1978.
[19] S. Venkatesan, A. Lozano, and R. Valenzuela, “Network mimo: Over-
coming intercell interference in indoor wireless systems,” in Signals,
Systems and Computers, 2007. ACSSC 2007. Conference Record of the
Forty-First Asilomar Conference on, Nov. 2007, pp. 83–87.
[20] G. Caire, S. Ramprashad, H. Papadopoulos, C. Pepin, and C.-E. Sund-
berg, “Multiuser mimo downlink with limited inter-cell cooperation:
Approximate interference alignment in time, frequency and space,” in
Communication, Control, and Computing, 2008 46th Annual Allerton
Conference on, Sept. 2008, pp. 730–737.
[21] O. Somekh, O. Simeone, Y. Bar-Ness, A. M. Haimovich, U. Spag-
nolini, and S. Shamai, “An information theoretic view of distributed
antenna processing in cellular systems,” in Distributed Antenna Sys-
tems: Open Architecture for Future Wireless Communications. Boston,
MA: Auerbach Publications, CRC Press, 2007.
[22] S. Verdu, “The capacity region of the symbol-asynchronous Gaussian
multiple-access channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
733–751, Jul 1989.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 25
[23] O. Somekh, B. Zaidel, and S. Shamai, “Sum rate characterization
of joint multiple cell-site processing,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4473–4497, Dec. 2007.
[24] S. Jing, D. N. C. Tse, J. B. Soriaga, J. Hou, J. E. Smee, and
R. Padovani, “Downlink macro-diversity in cellular networks,” in
Information Theory, 2007. ISIT 2007. IEEE International Symposium
on, June 2007, pp. 1–5.
[25] O. Somekh and S. Shamai, “Shannon-theoretic approach to a Gaussian
cellular multiple-access channel with fading,” Information Theory,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1401–1425, Jul 2000.
[26] N. Levy, O. Zeitouni, and S. Shamai, “On information rates of the
fading Wyner cellular model via the thouless formula for the strip,”
submitted [arXiv:0806.2991v1].
[27] ——, “Central limit theorem and large deviations of the fading Wyner
cellular model via product of random matrices theory,” Problems of
Information Transmission, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–22, 2009.
[28] S. Verdu, “Spectral efficiency in the wideband regime,” Information
Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1319–1343, Jun
2002.
[29] G. Caire, D. Tuninetti, and S. Verdu, “Suboptimality of TDMA in
the low-power regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 4, pp.
608–620, April 2004.
[30] E. Aktas, J. S. Evans, and S. V. Hanly, “Distributed decoding in
a cellular multiple access channel,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 241–250, Jan. 2008.
[31] A. Sanderovich, O. Somekh, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai, “Uplink
macro diversity of limited backhaul cellular network,” submitted
[arXiv:0805.4620].
[32] V. Prabhakaran, D. Tse, and K. Ramachandran, “Rate region of the
quadratic Gaussian CEO problem,” in Information Theory, 2004. ISIT
2004. Proceedings. International Symposium on, June-2 July 2004, pp.
119–.
[33] A. E. Gamal, “Achievability for discrete memoryless systems,” lecture
notes, School of Information Theory, Evanston, IL, Aug. 2009.
[34] I.-H. Wang and D. N. C. Tse, “Interference mitigation through limited
receiver cooperation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2009, submitted.
[35] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, E. Erkip, S. Shamai, and H. V. Poor,
“Multirelay channel with non-ergodic link failures,” in Proc. IEEE
Workshop on Networking and Information Theory (ITW 2009), June
10-12 2009.
[36] B. Nazer, A. Sanderovich, M. Gastpar, and S. Shamai, “Structured
superposition for backhaul constrained cellular uplink,” in Proc. IEEE
Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2009), June 28 - July 3 2009.
[37] A. Lapidoth, N. Levy, S. Shamai, and M. A. Wigger, “A cognitive
network with clustered decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Symposium on
Information Theory (ISIT 2009), June 28 - July 3 2009, pp. 596–600.
[38] N. Bacha, J. S. Evans, and S. V. Hanly, “On the capacity of MIMO
cellular networks with macrodiversity,” in Proc. Australian Communi-
cation Theory Workshop, Feb. 2006, pp. 105–109.
[39] O. Sahin, E. Erkip, and O. Simeone, “Interference channel with a relay:
Models, relaying strategies, bounds,” in Proc. Information Theory and
Applications Workshop (ITA 2009), Feb. 8 - 13 2009.
[40] L. Zhou and W. Yu, “Gaussian Z-interference channel with a relay
link: Achievability region and asymptotic sum capacity,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory, 2010, submitted.
[41] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai, “Local base station
cooperation via finite-capacity links for the uplink of linear cellular
networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 190–204, Jan.
2009.
[42] L. Ozarow, S. Shamai, and A. Wyner, “Information theoretic consid-
erations for cellular mobile radio,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 43,
no. 2, pp. 359–378, May 1994.
[43] R. Narasimhan, “Individual outage rate regions for fading multiple
access channels,” in Information Theory, 2007. ISIT 2007. IEEE
International Symposium on, June 2007, pp. 1571–1575.
[44] N. Levy, O. Zeitouni, and S. Shamai, “Information theoretic aspects
of users’ activity in a Wyner-like cellular model,” submitted.
[45] R. G. Gallager, “An inequality on the capacity region of multi-
access multi-path channels,” in Communications and Cryptography—
Two Sides of One Tapestry. Norwell, MA: Kluver Academic, 1994,
pp. 129–139.
[46] S. Shamai and A. Wyner, “nformation-theoretic considerations for
symmetric, cellular, multiple-access fading channels. I,” Information
Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1877–1894, Nov
1997.
[47] Y. Liang and A. Goldsmith, “Symmetric rate capacity of cellular
systems with cooperative base stations,” in Global Telecommunications
Conference, 2006. GLOBECOM ’06. IEEE, 27 2006-Dec. 1 2006, pp.
1–5.
[48] O. Somekh, O. Simeone, B. M. Zaidel, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai,
“On the spectrum of large random hermitian finite-band matrices,” in
Proc. Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA 2008), Jan.
27- Feb. 1 2008.
[49] A. Narula, “Gaussian cellular multiple access channel,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Univ. South Australia, 2006.
[50] T. Holliday, A. Goldsmith, and P. Glynn, “Capacity of finite state
channels based on Lyapunov exponents of random matrices,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3509–3532, Aug. 2006.
[51] A. M. Tulino and S. Verdú, “Random matrix theory and wireless
communications,” Now Publishers, 2004.
[52] N. Levy, O. Somekh, S. Shamai, and O. Zeitouni, “On certain large
random hermitian jacobi matrices with applications to wireless com-
munications,” submitted [arXiv:0806.2674].
[53] A. Lozano, A. Tulino, and S. Verdu, “High-snr power offset in
multiantenna communication,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12,
pp. 4134–4151, Dec. 2005.
[54] A. Narula, “Information theoretic analysis of multiple-antenna trans-
mission diversity,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 1997.
[55] M. Bacha, J. Evans, and S. Hanly, “On the capacity of cellular networks
with mimo links,” in ICC ’06. IEEE International Conference on
Communications, vol. 3, June 2006, pp. 1337–1342.
[56] D. Aktas, M. Bacha, J. Evans, and S. Hanly, “Scaling results on the
sum capacity of cellular networks with mimo links,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 3264–3274, July 2006.
[57] B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, “How much training is needed in
multiple-antenna wireless links,” IEEE Trans. on Information, vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 951–963, Apr 2003.
[58] G. Caire and S. Shamai, “On the achievable throughput of a multi-
antenna Gaussian broadcast channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49,
no. 7, pp. 1691–1706, July 2003.
[59] W. Yu and T. Lan, “Transmitter optimization for the multi-antenna
downlink with per-antenna power constraints,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2646–2660, June 2007.
[60] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai, “Downlink
multicell processing with limited backhaul capacity,” EURASIP Journal
on Advances in Signal Processing, Jan. 27- Feb. 1 2009.
[61] O. Somekh, O. Simeone, Y. Bar-Ness, A. Haimovich, and S. Shamai,
“Cooperative multicell zero-forcing beamforming in cellular downlink
channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3206–3219, July
2009.
[62] “http://wirelessman.org/relay/index.html.”
[63] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, Y. Bar-Ness, and U. Spagnolini, “Uplink
throughput of TDMA cellular systems with multicell processing and
amplify-and-forward cooperation between mobiles,” IEEE Trans. Wire-
less Commun., vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 2942–2951, August 2007.
[64] G. Kramer and A. van Wijngaarden, “On the white Gaussian multiple-
access relay channel,” in Information Theory, 2000. Proc. IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on, 2000, pp. 40–.
[65] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, Y. Bar-Ness, and U. Spagnolini, “Throughput
of low-power cellular systems with collaborative base stations and
relaying,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 459–467, Jan.
2008.
[66] O. Somekh, O. Simeone, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai, “Cellular systems
with full-duplex amplify-and-forward relaying and cooperative base-
stations,” in Information Theory, 2007. ISIT 2007. IEEE International
Symposium on, June 2007, pp. 16–20.
[67] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, G. Kramer, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai,
“Uplink sum-rate analysis of a multi-cell system with feedback,”
in Proc. Forty-Fifth Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,
Control, and Computing, Sept. 23 - 26 2008.
[68] O. Somekh, O. Simeone, H. Poor, and S. Shamai, “Cellular systems
with full-duplex compress-and-forward relaying and cooperative base
stations,” in Information Theory, 2008. ISIT 2008. IEEE International
Symposium on, July 2008, pp. 2086–2090.
[69] T. S. Han and K. Kobayashi, “A new achievable rate region for the
interference channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 49–
60, Jan. 1981.
[70] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, G. Kramer, H. V. Poor, and S. Shamai,
“Throughput of cellular systems with conferencing mobiles and co-
operative base-stations,” Eurasip Journal on Wireless Communications
and Networking, 2008.
[71] A. Carleial, “Multiple-access channels with different generalized feed-
back signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 841–850,
Nov 1982.
26 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
[72] V. R. Cadambe and S. A. Jafar, “Interference alignment and degrees of
freedom of the K-user interference channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3425–3441, Aug. 2008.
[73] C. W. T. Gou, S. A. Jafar, “On the degrees of freedom of finite state
compound wireless networks - settling a conjecture by weingarten et.
al,” submitted.
[74] A. Gjendemsjoe, D. Gesbert, G. Oien, and S. Kiani, “Binary power
control for sum rate maximization over multiple interfering links,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., Aug. 2008.
[75] D. Gesbert, S. G. Kiani, A. Gjendemsjø, and G. E. Øien, “Adaptation,
coordination, and distributed resource allocation in interference-limited
wireless networks,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 12, pp. 2393–2409, Dec.
2007.
[76] S. G. Kiani and D. Gesbert, “Optimal and distributed scheduling
for multicell capacity maximization,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 288–297, Jan. 2008.
[77] M. Vemula, D. Avidor, J. Ling, and C. Papadias, “Inter-cell coordina-
tion, opportunistic beamforming and scheduling,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 12, Istanbul, Turkey, June 2006, pp. 5319–
5324.
[78] A. L. Stolyar and H. Viswanathan, “Self-organizing dynamic fractional
frequency reuse in OFDMA systems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. (INFOCOM), Phoenix, AZ, U.S.A., April 2008, pp. 691–
699.
[79] ——, “Self-organizing dynamic fractional frequency reuse for best-
effort traffic through distributed inter-cell coordination,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, April
2009, pp. 1287–1295.
[80] V. Tralli, R. Veronesi, and M. Zorzi, “Power-shaped advanced resource
assignment (PSARA) for fixed broadband wireless access systems,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 2207–2220, Nov.
2004.
[81] Z. Q. Luo and S. Zhang, “Dynamic spectrum management: complexity
and duality,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 57–
73, Feb. 2008.
[82] L. Venturino, N. Prasad, and X. Wang, “Coordinated scheduling and
power allocation in downlink multicell OFDMA networks,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 2835–2848, July 2009.
[83] W. Yu, T. Kwon, and C. Shin, “Joint scheduling and dynamic power
spectrum optimization for wireless multicell networks,” in Proc. 44th
Conf. Info. Science Sys. (CISS), Princeton, NJ, March 2010.
[84] Z. Han, Z. Ji, and K. J. R. Liu, “Non-cooperative resource competition
game by virtual referee in multi-cell OFDMA networks,” IEEE J.
Select. Areas Commun., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1079–1090, Aug. 2007.
[85] T. Alpcan, T. Basar, and S. Dey, “A power control game based on
outage probabilities for multicell wireless data networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 890–899, April 2006.
[86] A. Leshem and E. Zehavi, “Cooperative game theory and the Gaussian
interference channel,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 7,
pp. 1078–1088, Sept. 2008.
[87] J. Huang, R. A. Berry, and M. L. Honig, “Distributed interference
compensation for wireless networks,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.,
vol. 24, no. 5, May 2006.
[88] J. Yuan and W. Yu, “Distributed cross-layer optimization of wireless
sensor networks: A game theoretic approach,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, U.S.A., 2006.
[89] C. Shi, R. A. Berry, and M. L. Honig, “Distributed interference pricing
for OFDM wireless networks with non-separable utilities,” in Proc.
Conf. Info. Science Sys. (CISS), March 2008, pp. 755–760.
[90] F. Wang, M. Krunz, and S. Cui, “Price-based spectrum management in
cognitive radio networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 74–87, Feb. 2008.
[91] W. Yu, “Multiuser water-filling in the presence of crosstalk,” in
Information Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, U.S.A.,
Jan. 2007.
[92] R. Veronesi, V. Tralli, J. Zander, and M. Zorzi, “Distributed dynamic
resource allocation for multicell SDMA packet access net,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 2772–2783, Oct. 2006.
[93] H. Dahrouj and W. Yu, “Coordinated beamforming for the multicell
multi-antenna wireless system,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 9,
no. 5, pp. 1748–1759, May 2010.
[94] R. Zakhour, Z. K. M. Ho, and D. Gesbert, “Distributed beamforming
coordination in multicell MIMO channels,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Tech.
Conf. (VTC), Barcelona, Spain, April 2009.
[95] H. Huh, H. C. Papadopoulos, and G. Caire, “Multiuser MIMO transmit-
ter optimization for inter-cell interference mitigation,” 2009, preprint:
arXiv:0909.1344v1.
[96] R. Zakhour and S. Hanly, “Base station cooperation on the downlink:
Large systems analysis,” 2010, preprint: arXiv:1006.3360v1.pdf.
[97] F. Rashid-Farrokhi, K. J. R. Liu, and L. Tassiulas, “Transmit beam-
forming and power control for cellular wireless systems,” IEEE J.
Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1437–1450, Oct. 1998.
[98] E. Visotsky and U. Madhow, “Optimal beamforming using transmit
antenna arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC), vol. 1, July
1999, pp. 851–856.
[99] M. Bengtsson and B. Ottersten, “Optimal and suboptimal transmit
beamforming,” in Handbook of Antennas in Wireless Communications,
L. C. Godara, Ed. CRC Press, 2002.
[100] M. Schubert and H. Boche, “Solution of the multiuser downlink
beamforming problem with individual SINR constraints,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 53, pp. 18–28, Jan. 2004.
[101] ——, “Iterative multiuser uplink and downlink beamforming under
SINR contraints,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, pp. 2324–
2334, July 2005.
[102] A. Wiesel, Y. C. Eldar, and S. Shamai, “Linear precoding via conic
optimization for fixed MIMO receivers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 161–176, Jan. 2006.
[103] R. Stridh, M. Bengtsson, and B. Ottersten, “System evaluation of
optimal downlink beamforming with congestion control in wireless
communication,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 5, pp. 743–751,
April 2006.
[104] B. Song, R. Cruz, and B. Rao, “Network duality for multiuser MIMO
beamforming networks and applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 618–630, March 2007.
[105] J. Yang and D. K. Kim, “Multi-cell uplink-downlink beamforming
throughput duality based on lagrangian duality with per-base station
power constraints,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 277–279,
April 2008.
[106] P. Marsch and G. Fettweis, “On downlink network MIMO under a
constrained backhaul and imperfect channel knowledge,” in Proc. IEEE
Global Telecommun. Conf. (Globecom), 2009.
[107] L. Venturino, N. Prasad, and X. Wang, “Coordinated linear beamform-
ing in downlink multi-cell wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1451–1461, April 2010.
[108] R. Zhang and S. Cui, “Cooperative interference management with
MISO beamforming,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, 2010, to appear.
[109] G. Scutari, D. Palomar, and S. Barbarossa, “Competitive design of
multiuser MIMO systems based on game theory: A unified view,” IEEE
J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1089–1103, Sept. 2008.
[110] E. Larsson and E. Jorswieck, “Competition versus cooperation on the
MISO interference channel,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 26,
no. 9, pp. 1059–1069, Sept. 2008.
[111] K. M. Ho and D. Gesbert, “Balancing egoism and altruism on the
interference channel: The mimo case,” in Proc. IEEE International
Conf. on Communications (ICC), 2010.
[112] R. H. Etkin, D. N. C. Tse, and H. Wang, “Gaussian interference channel
capacity to within one bit,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 5534–5562, Dec. 2008.
[113] H. Dahrouj and W. Yu, “Interference mitigation with joint beamforming
and common information decoding in multicell systems,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Sym. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Austin, TX, June 2010, pp. 2068–2072.
[114] H. Zhang and H. Dai, “Cochannel interference mitigation and coop-
erative processing in downlink multicell multiuser MIMO networks,”
EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Networking, vol. 2004, no. 2, pp. 222
– 235, Dec. 2004, article ID 202654.
[115] H. Zhang, H. Dai, and Q. Zhou, “Base station cooperation for multiuser
MIMO: Joint transmission and BS selection,” in Proc. Conf. Info.
Science Sys. (CISS), Princeton, NJ, March 2004.
[116] S. Jing, D. N. C. Tse, J. B. Soriaga, J. Hou, J. Smee, and R. Padovani,
“Multicell downlink capacity with coordinated processing,” EURASIP
J. Wireless Commun. Networking, vol. 2008, no. 5, Jan. 2008, article
ID 586878.
[117] O. Simeone, O. Somekh, G. Kramer, S. Shamai, and H. V. Poor,
“Throughput of cellular systems with conferencing mobiles and co-
operative base stations,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Networking,
2008, article ID 652325, 14 pages.
[118] M. Karakayali, G. Foschini, and R. Valenzuela, “Network coordination
for spectrally efficient communications in cellular systems,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 56–61, Aug. 2006.
[119] G. Foschini, M. Karakayali, and R. Valenzuela, “Coordinating multiple
antenna cellular networks to achieve enormous spectral efficiency,” IEE
Proc. Commun., vol. 153, no. 4, pp. 548–555, Aug. 2006.
[120] F. Boccardi and H. Huang, “Limited downlink network coordination
in cellular networks,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Sept. 2007, pp. 1–5.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 27
[121] S. Venkatesan, “Coordinating base stations for greater uplink spectral
efficiency in a cellular network,” in IEEE Int. Symp. on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Athens, Greece, Sept.
2007, pp. 1–5.
[122] J. Zhang, R. Chen, J. G. Andrews, and R. W. Heath, “Coordinated
multi-cell MIMO systems with cellular block diagonalization,” in Conf.
Record of the Forty-First Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems and
Computers, Nov. 2007, pp. 1669–1673.
[123] C. Botella, G. Pinero, A. Gonzalez, and M. de Diego, “Coordination in
a multi-cell multi-antenna multi-user W-CDMA system: A beamform-
ing approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7, pp. 4479–4485,
Nov. 2008.
[124] H. Huang and M. Trivellato, “Performance of multiuser MIMO and
network coordination in downlink cellular networks,” in Int. Symp. on
Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks
(WiOPT), Berlin, April 2008, pp. 85–90.
[125] M. Costa, “Writing on dirty paper,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 29,
no. 3, pp. 439–441, May 1983.
[126] U. Erez, S. Shamai, and R. Zamir, “Capacity and lattice strategies for
canceling known interference,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1,
pp. 3820–3833, Nov. 2005.
[127] W. Yu, D. P. Varodayan, and J. M. Cioffi, “Trellis and convolutional
precoding for transmitter-based interference presubtraction,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 1220–1230, July 2005.
[128] D. N. C. Tse and S. V. Hanly, “Multiaccess fading channels. Part
I: Polymatroid structure, optimal resource allocation and throughput
capacities,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 2796–2815,
Nov. 1998.
[129] N. Jindal, S. Vishwanath, and A. Goldsmith, “On the duality of
Gaussian multiple-access and broadcast channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 768–783, May 2004.
[130] C.-H. F. Fung, W. Yu, and T. J. Lim, “Precoding for the multiantenna
downlink: Multiuser SNR gap and optimal user ordering,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 188–197, Jan. 2007.
[131] O. Sahin and E. Erkip, “Achievable rates for the Gaussian interference
relay channel,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf. (Globecom), Nov.
2007, pp. 1627–1631.
[132] ——, “On achievable rates for interference relay channel with interfer-
ence cancelation,” in Conf. Record Forty-First Asilomar Conf. Signals,
Systems and Computers, Nov. 2007, pp. 805–809.
[133] O. Sahin, O. Simeone, and E. Erkip, “Interference channel with an
out-of-band relay,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2009, submitted.
[134] I. Marić, R. Dabora, and A. Goldsmith, “On the capacity of the
interference channel with a relay,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory
(ISIT), July 2008.
[135] R. Dabora, I. Marić, and A. Goldsmith, “Relay strategies for
interference-forwarding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW),
Porto, Portugal, May 2008, pp. 46–50.
[136] Y.-H. Kim and T. M. Cover, “Capacity of a class of deterministic relay
channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), June 2007, pp.
591–595.
[137] Y.-H. Kim, “Capacity of a class of deterministic relay channels,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1328–1329, March 2008.
[138] ——, “Coding techniques for primitive relay channels,” in Allerton
Conf. Commun. Control and Computing, Sept. 2007.
[139] T. M. Cover and A. El Gamal, “Capacity theorems for the relay
channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 572–584, Sept.
1979.
[140] P. Razaghi and W. Yu, “Universal relaying for the interference chan-
nel,” in Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), San
Diego, U.S.A., Jan. 2010.
[141] M. N. Khormuji, A. Zaidi, and M. Skoglund, “Interference manage-
ment using nonlinear relays,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 7,
pp. 1924–1930, July 2010.
[142] I. Marić, R. D. Yates, and G. Kramer, “Capacity of interference
channels with partial transmitter cooperation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 3536–3548, Oct. 2007.
[143] H. Bagheri, A. S. Motahari, and A. K. Khandani, “Zero-forcing for
the symmetric interference channel with conferencing encoders,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Austin, TX, June 2010, pp.
370–374.
[144] P. Marsch and G. Fettweis, “On base station cooperation schemes for
downlink network MIMO under a constrained backhaul,” Proc. IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference (Globecom’08), 2008.
[145] S. Hari and W. Yu, “Partial zero-forcing precoding for the interference
channel with partially cooperating transmitters,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Austin, TX, June 2010, pp. 2283–2287.
[146] R. Heath, D. Love, V. Lau, D. Gesbert, B. Rao, and M. A. (Editors),
“Exploiting limited feedback in tomorrow’s communication networks,”
Special Issue of IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., Vol. 26, Oct. 2008.
[147] J. Hoydis, M. Kobayashi, and M. Debbah, “On the optimal number of
cooperative base stations in network MIMO systems,” 2010, preprint:
arXiv:1003.0332v1.
[148] R. Zakhour and D. Gesbert, “Team decision for the cooperative MIMO
channel with imperfect CSIT sharing,” in The Information Theory and
Applications (ITA) Workshop, San Diego CA., Feburary 2010.
[149] ——, “On the value of data sharing in constrained-backhaul network
MIMO,” in Proc. International Zurich Seminar on Communications,
March 2010.
[150] S. Verdú, Multiuser Detection. Norwell, MA: Cambridge University
Press, 1998.
[151] M. C. Valenti and B. D. Woerner, “Iterative multiuser detection, macro-
diversity combining, and decoding for the TDMA cellular uplink,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 1570–1583, Aug. 2001.
[152] T. Mayer, H. Jenkac, and J. Hagenauer, “Turbo base-station cooperation
for intercell interference cancellation,” in Proc. IEEE International
Conference on Communications, vol. 11, June 2006, pp. 4977 – 4982.
[153] L. R. Welburn, J. K. Cavers, and K. W. Sowerby, “A computational
paradigm for space-time multiuser detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 1595–1604, Sep. 2004.
[154] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear
codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[155] A. J. Grant, S. V. Hanly, J. S. Evans, and R. Müller, “Distributed
decoding for Wyner cellular systems,” in Proc. 5th Australian Com-
munications Theory Workshop, Newcastle, Australia, Feb. 2004, pp.
77–81.
[156] B. L. Ng, J. S. Evans, S. V. Hanly, and A. J. Grant, “Information
capacity of Wyner’s cellular network with LMMSE receivers,” in Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Communications, Paris, France,
vol. 1, June 2004, pp. 583 – 587.
[157] ——, “Distributed linear multiuser detection in cellular networks,” in
Proc. 5th Australian Communications Theory Workshop, Newcastle,
Australia, Feb. 2004, pp. 127–132.
[158] B. L. Ng, J. S. Evans, and S. V. Hanly, “Distributed linear multiuser
detection in cellular networks based on Kalman smoothing,” in Proc.
IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Dallas, USA, vol. 1,
Dec. 2004, pp. 134 – 138.
[159] ——, “Distributed downlink beamforming in cellular networks,” in
Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Jun.
2007, pp. 6–10.
[160] B. L. Ng, J. S. Evans, S. V. Hanly, and D. Aktas, “Distributed downlink
beamforming with cooperative base stations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5491–5499, Dec. 2008.
[161] S. Bavarian and J. K. Cavers, “Reduced-complexity belief propagation
for system-wide mud in the uplink of cellular networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 541–549, Apr. 2008.
[162] D. N. Tse and S. V. Hanly, “Linear multi-user receivers: Effective
interference, effective bandwidth, and user capacity,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 641–657, Mar. 1999.
[163] S. V. Hanly, “Macro-diversity for spread spectrum mobile radio:
Capacity and power control,” in Proc. IEEE Second International
Symposium on Spread Spectrum Techniques and Applications, Nov.
1992, pp. 349–352.
[164] N. Levy and S. S. (Shitz), “Clustered Local Decoding for Wyner-Type
Cellular Models,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4967–
4985, November 2009.
[165] H. Huh, S. H. Moon, Y. T. Kim, I. Lee, and G. Caire, “Multicell
MIMO downlink with cell cooperation and fair scheduling: A large
system analysis,” 2010, preprint: arXiv:1006.2162v1.pdf.
[166] G. Caire, S. Ramprashad, H. Papadopoulos, C. Pepin, and C.-E. W.
Sundberg, “Multiuser MIMO Downlink with Limited Inter-cell Coop-
eration: Approximate Interference Alignmnent in Time, Frequency and
Space,” in Proc. 46th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,
Control, and Computing, September 2008, pp. 730–737.
[167] E. Katranaras, M. Imran, and R. Hoshyar, “Sum-rate of linear cel-
lular systems with clustered joint processing,” Vehicular Technology
Conference-VTC 2009, Spring, 2009, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1910–1921.
[168] P. Marsch and G. Fettweis, “A framework for optimizing the uplink
performance of distributed antenna systems under a constrained back-
haul,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications,
June 2007, pp. 975–979.
[169] A. Papadogiannis, D. Gesbert, and E. Hardouin, “A dynamic clustering
approach in wireless networks with multi-cell cooperative processing,”
in Proc. IEEE Intern. Conf. on Comm. (ICC), 2008.
28 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 28, NO. 9, DECEMBER 2010
[170] J. Zhang, R. Chen, J. G. Andrews, A. Ghosh, and R. W. Heath, “Net-
worked mimo with clustered linear precoding,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., April 2009.
[171] V. Jungnickel, T. Wirth, M. Schellmann, T. Haustein, and W. Zirwas,
“Sychronization of cooperative base stations,” Proceedings of the Inter-
national Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS’08),
October 2008.
[172] B. Zarikoff and J. Cavers, “Multiple frequency offset estimation for
the downlink of coordinated MIMO systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 26, pp. 901–912, 2008.
[173] V. Kotzsch, J. Holfeld, and G. Fettweis, “Joint detection and CFO
compensation in asynchronous multi-user MIMO OFDM systems,”
Proc. 69th IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC’09), vol.
2009, April 2009.
[174] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, Eds., LTE: The UMTS Long Term
Evolution. John Wiley and Sons, 2009.
[175] P. Marsch and G. Fettweis, “On uplink network MIMO under a
constrained backhaul and imperfect channel knowledge,” Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC’09), 2009.
[176] D. Samardzija and H. Huang, “Determining backhaul bandwidth re-
quirements for network MIMO,” Proc. 17th European Signal Process-
ing Conference (EUSIPCO’09), 2009.
[177] B. Clerckx, A. Lozano, S. Sesia, C. van Rensburg, and C. B. Papadias,
“3GPP LTE and LTE Advanced,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless
Communications and Networking, 2009.
[178] S. Venkatesan, H. Huang, A. Lozano, and R. Valenzuela, “A WiMAX-
based implementation of network mimo for indoor wireless systems,”
Eurasip Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, special issue on
Multiuser MIMO transmission with limited feedback, cooperation and
coordination, no. Article ID 963547, 2009.
[179] S. Annapureddy, A. Barbieri, S. Geirhofer, S. Mallik, and A. Gorokhov,
“Coordinated joint transmission in WWAN,” IEEE Communication
Theory Workshop, 2010.
[180] D. Samardzija, H. Huang, T. Sizer, and R. Valenzuela, “Experimental
downlink multiuser MIMO system with distributed and coherently-
coordinated transmit antennas,” Proc. International Conference on
Communications (ICC’09), June 2007.
[181] V. Jungnickel, L. Thiele, M. Schellmann, T. Wirth, T. Haustein,
O. Koch, W. Zirwas, and E. Schulz, “Interference aware scheduling in
the multiuser MIMO-OFDM downlink,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47,
no. 6, pp. 56 – 66, June 2009.
[182] R. Irmer, H.-P. Mayer, A. Weber, V. Braun, M. Schmidt, M. Ohm,
N. Ahr, A. Zoch, C. Jandura, P. Marsch, and G. Fettweis, “Multisite
field trial for LTE and advanced concepts,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 92 – 98, February 2009.
[183] V. Jungnickel, A. Forck, S. Jaeckel, F. Bauermeister, S. Schiffermueller,
S. Schubert, S. Wahls, L. Thiele, T. Haustein, W. Kreher, J. Mueller,
H. Droste, and G. Kadel, “Field trials using coordinated multi-point
transmission in the downlink,” Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop on Wireless
Distributed Networks (WDN), held in conjunction with IEEE PIMRC,
2010.
[184] M. Grieger, P. Marsch, Z. Rong, and G. Fettweis, “Field trial results
for a coordinated mutli-point (CoMP) uplink in cellular systems,” Proc.
ITG/IEEE Workshop on Smart Antennas (WSA’10), 2010.
[185] “The openair wireless experimentation platform,” in Available under
http://www.openairinterface.org/.
David Gesbert (IEEE SM) is Professor in the Mo-
bile Communications Dept., EURECOM, France.
He obtained the Ph.D degree from Ecole Na-
tionale Superieure des Telecommunications, France,
in 1997. From 1997 to 1999 he has been with the
Information Systems Laboratory, Stanford Univer-
sity. In 1999, he was a founding engineer of Iospan
Wireless Inc, San Jose, Ca.,a startup company pio-
neering MIMO-OFDM (now Intel). Between 2001
and 2003 he has been with the Department of Infor-
matics, University of Oslo as an adjunct professor.
D. Gesbert has published about 170 papers and several patents all in the area
of signal processing, communications, and wireless networks.
D. Gesbert was a co-editor of several special issues on wireless networks
and communications theory, for JSAC (2003, 2007, 2010), EURASIP Journal
on Applied Signal Processing (2004, 2007), Wireless Communications Mag-
azine (2006). He served on the IEEE Signal Processing for Communications
Technical Committee, 2003-2008. He’s an associate editor for IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications and the EURASIP Journal on Wireless
Communications and Networking. He authored or co-authored papers winning
the 2004 IEEE Best Tutorial Paper Award (Communications Society) for a
2003 JSAC paper on MIMO systems, 2005 Best Paper (Young Author) Award
for Signal Proc. Society journals, and the Best Paper Award for the 2004
ACM MSWiM workshop. He co-authored the book "Space time wireless
communications: From parameter estimation to MIMO systems", Cambridge
Press, 2006.
Stephen Hanly (M’98) received a B.Sc. (Hons) and
M. Sc. from the University of Western Australia,
and the Ph.D. degree in mathematics in 1994 from
Cambridge University, UK. From 1993 to 1995,
he was a Post-doctoral member of technical staff
at AT&T Bell Laboratories. From 1996 to 2009
he was on the research and teaching staff at the
University of Melbourne. He is presently an Asso-
ciate Professor in the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at the National University of
Singapore. He was an Associate Editor for IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications from 2005-2009, and is guest
editor for the IEEE Journal on Selected Areas special issue on “Cooperative
Communications in MIMO Cellular Networks”. In 2005, he was the technical
co-chair for the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory held
in Adelaide, Australia. He was a co-recipient of the best paper award at the
Infocom 1998 conference, and the 2001 Joint IEEE Communications Society
and Information Theory Society best paper award, both for his work with
David Tse (Berkeley). His research interests are in the areas of information
theory, signal processing, and wireless networking.
Howard Huang received a BSEE degree from Rice
University in 1991 and a Ph.D. in electrical engi-
neering from Princeton University in 1995. Since
then, he has been a researcher at Bell Labs, in
Holmdel, New Jersey, currently as a Distinguished
Member of Technical Staff in the wireless access
domain of Alcatel-Lucent. His research interests
include wireless communication theory and cellular
system design. He has taught as an adjunct professor
at Columbia University and is a Senior Member of
the IEEE.
GESBERT et al.: MULTI-CELL MIMO COOPERATIVE NETWORKS: A NEW LOOK AT INTERFERENCE 29
Shlomo Shamai (Shitz) received the B.Sc., M.Sc.,
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, in 1975,
1981 and 1986 respectively.
During 1975-1985 he was with the Communi-
cations Research Labs in the capacity of a Se-
nior Research Engineer. Since 1986 he is with the
Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion—
Israel Institute of Technology, where he is now the
William Fondiller Professor of Telecommunications.
His research interests encompasses a wide spectrum
of topics in information theory and statistical communications.
Dr. Shamai (Shitz) is an IEEE Fellow, and the recipient of the 2011 Claude
E. Shannon Award. He is the recipient of the 1999 van der Pol Gold Medal of
the Union Radio Scientifique Internationale (URSI), and a co-recipient of the
2000 IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, the 2003, and the 2004 joint
IT/COM societies paper award, the 2007 IEEE Information Theory Society
Paper Award, the 2009 European Commission FP7, Network of Excellence in
Wireless COMmunications (NEWCOM++) Best Paper Award, and the 2010
Thomson Reuters Award for International Excellence in Scientific Research.
He is He is also the recipient of 1985 Alon Grant for distinguished young
scientists and the 2000 Technion Henry Taub Prize for Excellence in Research.
He has served as Associate Editor for the SHANNON THEORY OF THE IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, and has also served on the
Board of Governors of the Information Theory Society.
Osvaldo Simeone received the M.Sc. degree (with
honors) and the Ph.D. degree in Information En-
gineering from Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy,
in 2001 and 2005 respectively. He is currently with
the Center for Wireless Communications and Signal
Processing Research (CWCSPR), at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark, New Jersey,
where he is an Assistant Professor. His current
research interests concern the cross-layer analysis
and design of wireless networks with emphasis on
information-theoretic, signal processing and queuing
aspects. Specific topics of interest are: cognitive radio, cooperative commu-
nications, ad hoc, sensor, mesh and hybrid networks, distributed estimation
and synchronization. Dr. Simeone is the co-recipient of the best paper awards
of IEEE SPAWC 2007 and IEEE WRECOM 2007. He currently serves as an
Editor for IEEE Trans. Commun.
Wei Yu (S’97-M’02-SM’08) received the B.A.Sc.
degree in Computer Engineering and Mathematics
from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, On-
tario, Canada in 1997 and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, in 1998 and 2002, respectively. Since
2002, he has been with the Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering Department at the University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he is now
an Associate Professor and holds a Canada Research
Chair in Information Theory and Digital Commu-
nications. His main research interests include multiuser information theory,
optimization, wireless communications and broadband access networks.
Prof. Wei Yu is currently an Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COM-
MUNICATIONS. He was an Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS
COMMUNICATIONS from 2004 to 2007, and a Guest Editor for a number of
special issues for the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNI-
CATIONS and the EURASIP JOURNAL ON APPLIED SIGNAL PROCESSING.
He is member of the Signal Processing for Communications and Networking
Technical Committee of the IEEE Signal Processing Society. He received the
IEEE Signal Processing Society Best Paper Award in 2008, the McCharles
Prize for Early Career Research Distinction in 2008, the Early Career Teaching
Award from the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering, University of
Toronto in 2007, and the Early Researcher Award from Ontario in 2006.

