The Linux Operating System:
Debian GNU/Linux
James G. MacKinnon
Department of Economics
Queen’s University
Kingston, Ontario, Canada
K7L 3N6
E-mail: jgm@qed.econ.queensu.ca
Home page: http://www.econ.queensu.ca/pub/faculty/mackinnon/
Phone: 613 533-2293 Fax: 613 533-2257
I am grateful to Dirk Eddelbüttel, John Maheu, Bruce McCullough, Danny Quah, Colin
Telmer, and several Debian users and developers for comments on earlier drafts.
April, 1999
1. Introduction
The Linux operating system has become the leading alternative to the operating sys-
tems from Microsoft Corporation that are installed on almost all new personal computers
which use x86-compatible microprocessors. It provides an excellent environment for doing
econometric research. In this review, I will explain what Linux is, discuss its advantages
and disadvantages from the point of view of an econometrician, and provide a number of
references. Many of the references will take the form of “universal resource locators,” or
URLs, which can be accessed using a web browser. To save space, I will omit the prefix
http:// from these URLs.
Linux is probably the best-known example of “open-source” software, programs for
which the source code is freely available on the Internet. Open-source software is free in
the sense that it can be obtained without payment, and it is free in the sense that users
are allowed to modify it, but it is not free in the sense that anyone can do whatever they
want with it. Almost all open-source software is copyrighted by its authors. It is released
under a variety of different licenses. The most commonly used is the “GNU General Public
License,” or GPL, of the Free Software Foundation (www.fsf.org). The key feature of the
GPL is that software released under it must always remain open. Anyone is free to modify
GPL software, but if they distribute the modified software, they must make the source
code available under the terms of the GPL. The Linux kernel and other key components
of the operating system are released under the GPL, but many components are released
under other, generally similar, licenses.
Linux is named after Linus Torvalds, who started working on it in 1991 when he
was a graduate student in Helsinki. It has thousands of authors, who collaborate via
the Internet. Technically, Linux just refers to the core of the operating system, the so-
called “kernel,” which interacts directly with the hardware and supervises the operation
of other programs. However, a working Linux system includes many other components,
without which it would not be very useful. Many of these are GNU programs from
the Free Software Foundation, while others were developed from work originally done at
universities such as MIT and Berkeley. The GNU programs include the gcc compiler, for
C and C++ programs, the bash shell, the emacs editor, the gzip compression utility, and
the GNU versions of standard Unix utilities such as tar and make. In most cases, these
GNU programs have more features and better performance than commercial equivalents.
A working Linux system consists of a great deal of software, of which the Linux
kernel is only a small part. All of this software is normally packaged as what is called
a “distribution.” There are several popular distributions. This review concentrates on
Debian GNU/Linux (www.debian.org), the one with which I am most familiar. In part
because it comes with more useful packages than most other Linux distributions, this dis-
tribution is particularly suitable for econometricians. Debian is entirely non-commercial;
it is maintained by hundreds of volunteers from around the world. The current version
at the time this review was written is Version 2.1. Other popular distributions are com-
mercial. They include Red Hat (www.redhat.com), Caldera (www.caldera.com), Slackware
(www.slackware.com), and SuSE (www.suse.com); a more complete list may be found at
www.linux.org. Each of these distributions may be particularly suitable for some users.
The prices of commercial distributions vary greatly, from less than US $5 to more than
US $100. The money pays for one or more CD-ROMs, probably a book of some sort,
[ 2 ]
sometimes some commercial software, and, for the most expensive distributions, a modest
amount of technical support. It is not necessary to pay anything at all, since anyone with
a fast Internet connection can download Debian, and several other distributions, for free.
Most software for Linux runs on all modern distributions, and most of this review, with
some exceptions that are noted, applies to all of them.
As its name suggests, Linux is, for all practical purposes, a version of Unix, and
modern versions of Linux are designed to be POSIX compliant. From the point of view of
an experienced Unix user, therefore, it is no more different from most proprietary versions
of Unix, such as Sun’s Solaris and IBM’s AIX, than the various proprietary versions
are from each other. However, Linux is, in my experience, far easier to use “out of the
box” than any proprietary version of Unix, partly because it comes with so many useful
programs already installed. Most of these, including all the GNU tools, can be installed
on any version of Unix, but doing so generally takes time and effort.
For those who are only familiar with contemporary, commercial, desktop operating
systems, Linux may at first seem somewhat strange. The primary user interface for many
users is the command line of the bash shell, multiple copies of which may be running at once
in different virtual screens and different windows under the graphical X Window System,
or X for short. The bash shell is extremely powerful. It offers command completion,
filename completion, and numerous ways to recall and edit previous commands, along
with powerful programming capabilities.1 Several other shells, notably tcsh, zsh, and a
free version of ksh, are also available as part of Debian GNU/Linux.
Not all Linux users like to use the command line as their primary user interface.
Several “point and click” interfaces are also available. It appears that two of the most
sophisticated ones, which are under active development, are likely to become de facto
standards The first of these, KDE (www.kde.org), is starting to come into widespread use.
The second, Gnome (www.gnome.org), has recently been released in a first version that is
reputed to be quite buggy. It is possible to run many DOS programs using the dosemu
package (www.dosemu.org) and some, generally older, Windows programs using the wine
package (www.wine.org), and it is also possible to run many programs for the Macintosh
using the commercial package Executor (www.ardi.com). However, commercial software
for current Microsoft operating systems generally will not work on Linux. Therefore,
moving from another operating system to Linux normally requires installing new software
(much of it probably free) and learning new ways of doing things.
1 Command completion and filename completion are useful features of modern Unix
shells. The first word on a line is assumed to be a command, and subsequent words
are assumed to be filenames. For example, if one types “tex” and then hit the [TAB]
key once, bash beeps. If one hits [TAB] again, it lists the names of 11 commands that
start with “tex”. If one then types enough letters to uniquely identify any one of these
commands, hitting [TAB] will cause the remaining letters to be filled in. This is an
example of command completion. Filename completion works in roughly the same way.
It is particularly useful when moving around in the filesystem. For example, one can type
the command “cd /usr/lib/texmf/web2c/” by typing about nine characters and hitting
the tab key several times.
[ 3 ]
2. Hardware Requirements and Installation
Linux is most commonly run on personal computers with x86-compatible processors (i386
or later) from Intel Corp. and other manufacturers. Versions are also available for sev-
eral other instruction-set architectures, including Alpha, SPARC and UltraSPARC, later
versions of the Motorola 680x0 line, PowerPC, and StrongARM. Linux generally uses
available hardware more efficiently than modern, commercial operating systems. A 133
MHz. Pentium with 32 MB of RAM and a 1 GB hard disk should perform in a very
satisfactory manner when running Linux, provided that it has an accelerated video card
if it is running X. Even an old 486 with 16 MB of RAM can often run Linux well enough
to be useful. Of course, with faster processors and more memory, Linux performs even
better. In particular, adding more memory makes many disk-intensive operations much
faster. Linux may be expected to perform extremely well on any currently available per-
sonal computer with supported hardware. Current versions can even utilize two or more
processors, and the latest kernels (not yet the default in Debian) are reported to provide
excellent support for multiprocessor machines.
Linux supports most personal computer hardware, but there can be problems with
very recent hardware and with proprietary devices that use nonstandard protocols. Before
one attempts to install Debian GNU/Linux on a particular computer, it is important
to know what modem, network card, video card, sound card, and printer are part of
the system. Unfortunately, it can sometimes be difficult to know whether a particular
piece of hardware is supported by a particular version of Linux. One place to start is
the Hardware-HOWTO, which is included with many Linux systems and can be found
at www.metalab.unc.edu/mdw/HOWTO/.2 Any device with “win” in its name, such as
winmodems and winprinters, almost certainly will not work with Linux, because these
lobotomized devices depend on special software drivers using secret protocols that work
only with one popular operating system. Since it is sometimes hard to tell whether an
internal model is really a winmodem, the safest approach is to use an external modem.
In most cases, if a printer or other device is advertised as working with several operating
systems, it will work with Linux.
A free version of the X Window System, which displays graphics on the screen, is
included with all major Linux distributions. The program that actually interacts with the
video card is called an “X server.” There are several of these and, collectively, they support
most, but not all, popular video cards. Most of the free X servers come directly or indi-
rectly from the XFree86 project (www.xfree86.org), which frequently issues new releases
that add new features and support additional hardware. In addition, some of the producers
of commercial Linux distributions have released free X servers for particular video cards.
Unfortunately, because the makers of video cards are constantly changing their specifica-
tions, recently introduced cards are often not supported by a free X server. Commercial X
servers from Xi Graphics (www.xigraphics.com) and Metro Link (www.metrolink.com) may
support recent cards for which no free servers are yet available, and they frequently offer
performance and features which are not available in the free servers.
Linux often works better with “generic” PC hardware than with systems from big-
name computer makers, because the latter sometimes use nonstandard hardware that can
2 A HOWTO is a document that explains how to install or configure some aspect of
Linux. The HOWTOs evolve over time, and some of them can be very useful.
[ 4 ]
cause problems. A growing number of relatively small companies sells computers with
Linux preinstalled. Some of the bigger ones advertise in the print magazine Linux Journal
(www.linuxjournal.com). Others can be found via links on web sites such as www.linux.org.
Recently, IBM, Dell, and several other large computer makers have announced that they
will offer support for Linux on selected servers and workstations, and some of the an-
nouncements suggest that they also plan to support it on selected desktop and laptop
machines.
Installation of Debian GNU/Linux is quite easy if all hardware is properly identified
and supported, although it is wise to obtain assistance from someone who has gone through
the process before. Installation of future versions is likely to be easier, as a good deal of
effort is currently being devoted to simplifying the process. There are several methods of
installation. For modern computers that can boot from a CD-ROM, the entire installation
can be done using the CD-ROM drive. Otherwise, one boot diskette will be needed to start
the process. After the initial installation of a very basic system, the rest of the system can
be installed over the network. Since Debian GNU/Linux is open-source software, anyone
is free to make CD-ROMs, and many vendors do so; see the Debian web site for a long
list of vendors in numerous countries. Detailed installation instructions are available on
the web site and on every CD-ROM.
The various distributions of Linux differ substantially in the way they deal with
installation. The Red Hat, Caldera, and SuSE distributions are reported to have somewhat
easier, but arguably less robust, installation procedures than does Debian. At the other
extreme, the Slackware distribution has the reputation of being especially suitable for
people who really want to understand how everything works, and not very suitable for
anyone else. Sometimes, one distribution will fail to install correctly on a particular
machine, while other distributions will install with no difficulty. The most common reason
for this is that the drivers for a nonexistent device interfere with the operation of a device
that is actually present. If this happens, one can either try another distribution or use
another Linux machine to compile a custom kernel with support only for the hardware of
the target machine.3
It is quite common to run Linux and another operating system (OS) on the same
computer. The easiest and safest way to install Linux on a computer that already has an
OS on it is to put Linux on a second hard disk. The lilo boot loader, which comes with
every Linux distribution, is one of several programs that can be used to boot whichever
OS is desired. Linux is also perfectly happy to share a hard disk with another OS, but it
can be a little tricky to install two or more operating systems on the same disk. New users
are advised to read the relevant HOWTOs, or other documentation, before attempting to
do this. Since Linux can read and write to most of the different filesystems that have been
used by Microsoft operating systems over the years (FAT16, VFAT, FAT32, and so on),
it is easy to copy files back and forth. Normally, only one operating system can be active
at once. However, a recently released commercial product called VMware (available from
www.vmware.com) apparently makes it possible to run other operating systems as guests
3 The kernels that come with Debian and other Linux distributions typically contain
support for a great variety of hardware devices. A custom kernel is compiled to support
only the hardware that is actually present. It therefore uses less memory and will not
cause driver conflicts.
[ 5 ]
under Linux, thereby allowing one to use programs running under two or more operating
systems at the same time.
Debian GNU/Linux makes it very easy to install, upgrade, and remove software
packages. Version 2.1 includes over 2250 packages. In most cases, to install a new package,
one simply becomes root (the system administrator), starts a program called dselect,
points it at an ftp site or CD-ROM (in practice, this step can often be omitted, since it
only needs to be done once), chooses what package(s) to install, and hits the [ENTER] key
a few times. If the chosen package requires other packages, dselect will point this out and
offer to install them too. Sometimes, the package installation routines will require the user
to answer a few questions. Although dselect generally works well, it does take a while to
get used to it. A replacement called apt that will be easier to use and even more powerful
is currently slated to be available in Version 2.2. Packages can also be installed directly
from the command line by using the dpkg command and the new apt-get command. The
latter can automatically download requested packages and their prerequisites.
The ability to upgrade easily from one version of Debian GNU/Linux to the next is
an important part of the system’s design. In principle, one simply starts dselect as root,
points it at an ftp site or CD-ROM with the new version, and lets it upgrade everything.
Alternatively, one can issue two apt-get commands to perform a complete upgrade. In
practice, however, upgrades tend to require a bit more effort than this, and it is highly
advisable to read the instructions. If one wishes to upgrade the kernel and is using a
custom kernel, as I normally do, the kernel will have to be recompiled and then installed
separately. This is made quite easy by a Debian program called kernel-package, but a
certain amount of understanding is required, and it helps to have done it before.
The dpkg program has many useful features. For example, it is easy to obtain a list
of all the packages that have been installed, to find out what package owns a particular
file, and to find out what files are owned by a particular package. It is also easy to
create list of packages that can be fed into dselect so as to “clone” an existing system on
another machine. Removing packages is just as easy as installing them, and the package
manager makes it difficult (but not impossible) to remove packages that are essential for
the operation of other packages.
3. Advantages and Disadvantages of Linux
Like several other modern versions of Unix, Linux is very stable and multitasks extremely
well. In the absence of power failures (an uninterruptible power supply that will allow
the system to run for at least fifteen minutes without external power is a very good idea),
hardware failures, or extremely ill-behaved programs, a Linux system should never crash.
Uptimes of many months are common. I routinely run computationally-intensive jobs for
days or weeks at a time in the background on modern computers running Linux. Provided
these jobs are given a low priority (using the nice command) and do not use so much
memory that the system begins to swap, they have no impact on the responsiveness of the
system. One can use the system for hours without noticing that a big job is running.
In addition to being a true multi-user operating system, Linux works well across a
network. This means that Linux users can access their office machine from home, or
from 5000 kilometers away, almost as easily as they can when sitting in front of it. For
text-mode applications, the speed of the network is not very important. However, for
[ 6 ]
graphical applications, which can also be used remotely, a high-speed network is essential.
One big advantage of Linux, and other Unix systems, is that it is both practical and safe
to give accounts on an office machine running Linux to graduate students and coauthors.
This makes it easy to share data, programs, drafts of papers, and even CPU time. For
example, if one person needs to run several big jobs and has colleagues whose machines
are not being heavily used, each of their machines can be used to run one of the big
jobs. This can be done manually or automatically. It is also possible to put together
clusters of Linux machines using various types of networking hardware and the free Beowulf
(www.beowulf.org) software. Some of these clusters appear on lists of the world’s fastest
supercomputers (for example, see www.top500.org).
Because it is free, and because it comes with so much free software, some of which
will be discussed later in this review, Linux can be very much less costly than commer-
cial alternatives. Moreover, the hassles associated with software licensing are completely
avoided if one uses only free software. These hassles include the operational difficulties
associated with copy protection, license managers, and license files, and the problems im-
posed by trying to abide by inflexible software licenses. In practice, of course, most people
will use commercial software as well as free software, and so some of these hassles will
be encountered with Linux, but generally to a much more limited extent than on most
operating systems.
Linux makes an ideal operating system for servers. Even a machine that would
be considered obsolete today can easily handle the electronic mail of a large University
department and function as a web server. Setting up the popular Apache web server
program on a Debian system that is already connected to the Internet takes about two
minutes; of course, providing the content for the web site will take a great deal longer. A
Linux machine running the Samba software package can easily and inexpensively provide
file and print services to machines running Microsoft operating systems. Linux is also an
extremely cost-effective way to provide students with access to computing services. One
or more powerful machines, with modern processors and at least 64 MB of memory, can
be configured as application servers and connected to a larger number of low-powered
machines, with older processors and no more than 32 MB of memory, that are configured
as “X terminals.” Students can then access the Internet and make use of applications
running on the servers, either graphically or in text mode, from the X terminals. This is
a particularly attractive approach if some students need to run large jobs that take days
or weeks.
Unlike commercial operating systems, Linux does not attempt to hide how it operates
or limit what its users can do. It is almost infinitely customizable. A knowledgeable user
who does not like the way something works can probably change it. In almost every
case, the way Linux does things is logical, but learning to appreciate the logic can take
time. Tools like find, sort, and grep are very powerful and have many options. Scripting
languages like Perl, AWK, and Python provide the ability to perform extremely complex
tasks. Even though detailed on-line documentation is available through man and/or info,
few Linux users employ more than a small fraction of the system’s capabilities. It is always
fun to discover more of these as time goes by.
Many computers that run Linux are connected to the Internet, and this is certainly
likely to be the case for computers in Economics departments. Any computer that is
connected to the Internet is potentially in danger of being broken into. The default setup
[ 7 ]
for a Debian system is reasonably secure, something that cannot be said for all Linux
distributions. However, because Linux is so widely used, and because the source code is
available, ways of compromising its security are found from time to time. Security holes
are normally fixed very quickly, but it is absolutely essential to install security-related
fixes as they become available. It is a very good idea to subscribe to the Debian security
announcement mailing list.
In my view, Linux has only one significant disadvantage: Not nearly as much commer-
cial software is available for it as for Microsoft’s popular operating systems. In particular,
not surprisingly, none of the popular applications from Microsoft is available. However,
as I discuss in the following sections, quite a lot of excellent software for econometrics,
statistics, document processing, personal productivity, and many other areas is available
for Linux. Some of this software is free, and some of it is commercial. Moreover, both the
quality of free software and the availability of commercial software is improving at a very
rapid pace, and it seems likely that the recent surge of interest in Linux will cause a lot
more commercial developers to port their products to it.
4. Econometric and Statistical Software for Linux
The best place to find out about technically-oriented software for Linux is the web site
SAL.KachinaTech.com. It provides information about the vast majority of programs that
might be of interest to econometricians. One of the strengths of the Debian distribution
is that an extraordinarily large number of useful free programs is included as part of the
distribution itself. As a consequence, these programs, a few of which will be mentioned be-
low, are extremely easy to install and keep up to date. Installing and updating commercial
programs and other free programs generally requires somewhat more effort.
Most of the classic, commercial econometric packages that have their roots in batch
processing on mainframes are available for Linux. These packages include Limdep
(www.limdep.com), RATS (www.estima.com), Shazam (shazam.econ.ubc.ca), and TSP
(www.tspintl.com). The Linux versions of these packages generally perform exactly like the
versions for other Unix operating systems, but they may not be as graphically-oriented as
some other versions of the same packages.
Commercial programs of more recent origin, which tend to be more graphically ori-
ented, are often not available for Linux. One important exception is XploRe (www.xplore-
stat.de), the Linux version of which may, at present, be downloaded without charge. This
sophisticated package, which is particularly strong in the area of nonparametric methods,
has recently been reviewed by Teyssière (1998).
There are currently very few open-source packages for doing econometrics. Most
programs that are freely available are very specialized. One exception is the program tsrf
(http://econ.lse.ac.uk/staff/dquah/softw.html). Although it is not really a substitute for
classic programs like TSP, it does have some of the features of such programs, it offers
certain unique capabilities, and it is readily extensible in a way that commercial programs
can never be.
There are several general-purpose statistical packages for Linux. Two notable com-
mercial ones are Stata (www.stata.com) and S-Plus (www.mathsoft.com). There is also
an impressive open-source package called R which is quite similar to S-Plus (both were
derived from S) and is included with the Debian distribution.
[ 8 ]
Many econometricians use matrix programming languages instead of, or in addi-
tion to, conventional statistics packages. Here Linux offers several choices in addition
to R and S-Plus, which have many of the capabilities of matrix languages. GAUSS
(www.aptech.com), which is widely used in economics, is available, as is MATLAB
(www.mathworks.com), which is widely used in a number of disciplines. Rust (1993) pro-
vides an excellent, albeit now somewhat dated, comparison of these two packages. Linux
also offers free alternatives to both of these commercial packages, which are quite ex-
pensive. The package Ox (www.nuff.ox.ac.uk/users/doornik) is not open-source, but it is
currently available at no cost, for educational and research purposes only, for Linux and
several other platforms. Cribari-Neto (1997) compares the features and performance of
Ox and GAUSS. The programs Octave, Yorick, and Scilab, which are available as Debian
packages, provide no-cost alternatives to MATLAB.
Many researchers prefer to use conventional high-level languages instead of, or in
addition to, matrix programming languages. For many languages, among them C and
C++, Linux is an ideal platform. Debian GNU/Linux includes two versions of the gcc
compiler, along with a number of valuable development tools, including the GNU make
utility, the ddd and gdb debuggers, and the gprof profiler. When combined with freely
available libraries for scientific computing and statistics, many of which are included in
Debian, these tools provide an excellent environment for developing advanced programs
in econometrics and statistics; see Eddelbüttel (1996). There are also several commercial
C and C++ compilers for Linux.
Much of the free software for numerical computation that is available on the net is
written in Fortran, and many econometricians (including the author) are more familiar
with Fortran than with newer languages. Several Fortran compilers are available for
Linux. Debian GNU/Linux includes two open-source ones, the f2c translator, which works
transparently with gcc when it is called by using the fort77 script, and the g77 compiler.
These both handle Fortran 77 code, with some extensions. The g77 compiler, which is not
yet finished, typically produces faster code than f2c, but it could be more reliable, although
it is improving in this respect. At present, there are no open-source Fortran 90 or Fortran
95 compilers, but there are several commercial ones. A good source of information about
Fortran compilers for Linux is http://studbolt.physast.uga.edu/templon/fortran.html.
Another type of software that is widely used by econometricians is computer al-
gebra systems. A large number of these systems, including all of the major ones,
is available for Linux. Among these are Mathematica (www.mathematica.com), Maple
(www.maplesoft.com), and MuPAD (www.mupad.de). See Hutton and Hutton (1995) for
a review of Maple.
In summary, even though the choice is somewhat more limited than it is for the most
popular proprietary operating systems, a large and growing collection of econometric and
statistical packages and programming tools is available for Linux, and many of them
are available at no cost. When coupled with the many advantages of the underlying
operating system, this makes Linux an excellent environment for theoretical and applied
econometrics.
[ 9 ]
5. Other Software for Linux
Since most econometricians use the same computers for many purposes, availability of
software for a wide range of applications is an important consideration when choosing an
operating system. In this section, I briefly discuss several important categories of software
for Linux.
For most researchers, software for document processing is absolutely essential. The
best software for preparing technical documents is the open-source TEX system. Debian
GNU/Linux comes with the tetex distribution of TEX, which has become the standard in
the Unix world and includes a great many useful programs in addition to Plain TEX and
LaTEX. Installing tetex is very easy. There are two essential packages and six optional
ones that can be installed in the usual way, and it is advisable to run the texconfig pro-
gram afterwards. When combined with a suitable editor (many of the editors that come
with Linux support syntax highlighting for TEX), tetex provides a superb environment for
writing technical documents. The tetex system has many useful features, including auto-
matic generation of fonts at any magnification and automatic updating of the document
display when the source is run through TEX. With most window managers, it is easy to
arrange for several documents to be displayed in different virtual screens, a feature that I
find invaluable when working on multiple versions of the same document.
Like a well-known, commercial, scientific word processor for Windows, the open-source
program Lyx (www.lyx.org) provides a WYSIWYG front-end to LaTEX. This program
has been developing rapidly, and recent versions are reputed to work well. The version
included in Debian 2.1 is not entirely up-to-date, but a more recent version is included
in the “unstable” distribution that will eventually become Debian 2.2. It can easily be
installed on a 2.1 system.
Even though TEX produces much more attractive technical documents than any
WYSIWYG word processor, some people prefer to use programs of the latter type, es-
pecially for short, non-technical documents. Three major commercial word processors
are available. A Linux version of WordPerfect 8 has recently been released by Corel
(linux.corel.com), in both a downloadable version that is free for personal use and a full-
featured, non-free version. The Applixware office suite (www.applix.com) includes a WYSI-
WYG word processor with many features, a spreadsheet, and several other programs. The
StarOffice office suite (www.stardivision.com) has a great many features and is reported to
resemble Microsoft Office. Even for Linux users who rely on TEX, these commercial pro-
grams can be useful, because they are able to read documents in the proprietary formats
of popular commercial word processors.
Although there are several free spreadsheets for Linux, none of them currently ap-
proaches the capabilities of the latest commercial ones. I have been very happy with NExS
(www.xess.com), a modern, graphically-oriented, commercial spreadsheet that runs under
X on Linux and on several other versions of Unix. A rather similar program, which has
a common origin, is XESS (www.ais.com). These two programs have become much less
expensive over the course of the past two years. The Applixware and StarOffice suites
also include modern spreadsheets.
Several versions of the well-known web browser from Netscape (www.netscape.com)
are available for Linux. Like their counterparts for other operating systems, these provide
many features, tend to use a lot of memory, and occasionally crash (but without causing
[ 10 ]
Linux to crash when they do). In the spring of 1998, Netscape released the source code
of their unfinished next-generation browser under a license similar to the GNU General
Public License. It is expected that several new browsers based on this source code, both
free ones and ones from Netscape, will become available during 1999.
There are many ways to send and receive electronic mail under Linux. These include
Netscape Communicator, the emacs editor, and a wide variety of specialized mail clients
such as pine, elm, and mutt. The choice is largely a matter of personal taste, although
some mail clients may be more suitable for a machine that is permanently connected to a
network and others may be more suitable for a machine that connects only intermittently.
For advanced users, Linux offers many capabilities. For example, incoming mail can be
filtered and grouped by using the procmail package.
6. Concluding Remarks
The Linux operating system provides an excellent platform for doing theoretical and ap-
plied econometrics. Debian GNU/Linux is a particularly good distribution of Linux for
this purpose, because its package manager makes upgrading easy and because many pro-
grams of interest to econometricians are included as part of the distribution. However,
it does take a while to become used to Linux, especially for those who have no previous
experience with Unix. New users may wish to begin by installing it on an older computer,
or as a second operating system on a desktop machine that will be rebooted from time
to time anyway. Some econometricians will undoubtedly find that Linux suits their needs
extremely well, while others may find that Linux as a desktop operating system is not to
their taste. However, even those who are in the latter group will probably find that Linux
is an ideal operating system for running web servers, mail servers, and compute servers.
Those who wish to learn more about Linux (and there is a lot to learn!) should
look at some of the many books on the subject that can be found in any good bookstore.
A search on www.amazon.com turns up well over 100 titles, not including general Unix
books, many of which are relevant. Welch and Kaufman (1996) is a very good, although
now somewhat dated, introduction to Linux, while Hekman (1998) is a useful reference.
Many books come with a Linux distribution on a CD-ROM. However, it is not advisable
to install Linux from such a CD-ROM, because these distributions tend to be old. It is
much better to acquire an up-to-date set of CD-ROMs from one of the vendors listed on
the Debian web site.
One very important feature of Linux has not yet been mentioned. Running Linux
is fun! It brings back much of the excitement that used to characterize computing in
days gone by. One reason for this is that there is a strong sense of community among
Linux users. Another reason is that Linux users experience a sense of rapid progress:
New software is constantly appearing, older software is constantly improving, and even
the most experienced can always find new and better ways to use the enormously powerful
tools that come with the system.
[ 11 ]
References
Cribari-Neto, F. (1997). “Econometric programming environments: GAUSS, Ox and
S-PLUS,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 12, 77–89
Eddelbüttel, D. (1996). “Object-oriented econometrics: matrix programming in C++
using GCC and Newmat,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 11, 199-209.
Hekman, J. (1998). “Linux in a Nutshell: A Desktop Quick Reference,” Sebastopol, Cali-
fornia: O’Reilly and Associates.
Hutton, J., and J. Hutton (1995). “The Maple computer algebra system: A review,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 10, 329–337.
Rust, J. (1993). “GAUSS and MATLAB: A comparison,” Journal of Applied Economet-
rics, 8, 307–324.
Teyssière, G. (1998). “XploRe 4.0, An interactive statistical computing environment,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13, 673–679.
Welch, M. and L. Kaufman (1996). Running Linux, Second Edition. Sebastopol, Califor-
nia: O’Reilly and Associates.
[ 12 ]

