Wireless Networks 6 (2000) 307–321 307
Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks ∗
Young-Bae Ko and Nitin H. Vaidya
Department of Computer Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3112, USA
A mobile ad hoc network consists of wireless hosts that may move often. Movement of hosts results in a change in routes,
requiring some mechanism for determining new routes. Several routing protocols have already been proposed for ad hoc networks.
This paper suggests an approach to utilize location information (for instance, obtained using the global positioning system) to improve
performance of routing protocols for ad hoc networks. By using location information, the proposed Location-Aided Routing (LAR)
protocols limit the search for a new route to a smaller “request zone” of the ad hoc network. This results in a significant reduction in
the number of routing messages. We present two algorithms to determine the request zone, and also suggest potential optimizations to
our algorithms.
1. Introduction
Mobile ad hoc networks consist of wireless mobile hosts
that communicate with each other, in the absence of a
fixed infrastructure.1 Routes between two hosts in a Mo-
bile Ad hoc NETwork (MANET) may consist of hops
through other hosts in the network [7]. Host mobility can
cause frequent unpredictable topology changes. Therefore,
the task of finding and maintaining routes in MANET is
nontrivial. Many protocols have been proposed for mo-
bile ad hoc networks, with the goal of achieving efficient
routing [6,9,11,13,16,18–20,23,28,30,31,33,35]. These al-
gorithms differ in the approach used for searching a
new route and/or modifying a known route, when hosts
move.
In this paper, we suggest an approach to decrease over-
head of route discovery by utilizing location information
for mobile hosts. Such location information may be ob-
tained using the global positioning system (GPS) [10,29].
We demonstrate how location information may be used
by means of two Location-Aided Routing (LAR) proto-
cols [19,20,22] for route discovery. The LAR protocols use
location information (which may be out of date, by the time
it is used) to reduce the search space for a desired route.
Limiting the search space results in fewer route discovery
messages.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
some related work. In section 3, we describe proposed
approach for using location information for route discov-
ery in MANET. Performance evaluation of our protocols
is presented in section 4, and several optimizations to our
basic approach are described in section 5. Finally, section 6
presents conclusions.
∗ Research reported is supported in part by Texas Advanced Technology
Program grants 010115-248 and 009741-052-C, and National Science
Foundation grant CDA-9529442.
1 We will use the terms host and node interchangeably.
2. Related work
Design of routing protocols is a crucial problem in mo-
bile ad hoc networks [5,32], and several routing algorithms
have been developed (e.g., [6,9,11,13,16,18–20,23,28,30,
31,33,35]). One desirable qualitative property of a routing
protocol is that it should adapt to the traffic patterns [7].
Johnson and Maltz [17,18] point out that conventional rout-
ing protocols are insufficient for ad hoc networks, since the
amount of routing related traffic may waste a large por-
tion of the wireless bandwidth, especially for protocols that
use periodic updates of routing tables. They proposed us-
ing Dynamic Source Routing (DSR), which is based on
on-demand route discovery. A number of protocol opti-
mizations are also proposed to reduce the route discov-
ery overhead. Perkins and Royer [31] present the AODV
(Ad hoc On demand Distance Vector routing) protocol that
also uses a demand-driven route establishment procedure.
TORA (Temporally-Ordered Routing Algorithm) [27,28] is
designed to minimize reaction to topological changes by
localizing routing-related messages to a small set of nodes
near the change. Hass and Pearlman [13] attempt to com-
bine proactive and reactive approaches in the Zone Rout-
ing Protocol (ZRP), by initiating route discovery phase on-
demand, but limiting the scope of the proactive procedure
only to the initiator’s local neighborhood. Recent papers
present comparative performance evaluation of several rout-
ing protocols [4,8].
The previous MANET routing algorithms do not take
into account the physical location of a destination node. In
this paper, we propose two algorithms to reduce route dis-
covery overhead using location information. Similar ideas
have been applied to develop selective paging for cellu-
lar PCS (Personal Communication Service) networks [1].
In selective paging, the system pages a selected subset of
cells close to the last reported location of a mobile host.
This allows the location tracking cost to be decreased. We
propose and evaluate an analogous approach for routing
in MANET. In a survey of potential applications of GPS,
 J.C. Baltzer AG, Science Publishers
308 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
Dommety and Jain [10] briefly suggest use of location infor-
mation in ad hoc networks, though they do not elaborate on
how the information may be used. Other researchers have
also suggested that location information should be used to
improve (qualitatively or quantitatively) performance of a
mobile computing system [34,36]. Metricom’s Ricochet is
a packet radio system using location information for the
routing purpose [24]. The Metricom network infrastructure
consists of fixed base stations whose precise location is de-
termined using a GPS receiver at the time of installation.
Metricom uses a geographically based routing scheme to
deliver packets between base stations. Thus, a packet is
forwarded one hop closer to its final destination by com-
paring the location of packet’s destination with the location
of the node currently holding the packet. A routing and
addressing method to integrate the concept of physical lo-
cation (geographic coordinates), into the current design of
the Internet, has been investigated in [14,25]. Recently, an-
other routing protocol using location information has been
proposed [3]. This protocol, named DREAM, maintains lo-
cation information of each node in routing tables and sends
data messages in a direction computed based on these rout-
ing (location) tables. To maintain the location table accu-
rately, each node periodically broadcasts a control packet
containing its own coordinates, with the frequency of dis-
semination computed as a function of the node’s mobility
and the distance separating two nodes (called the distance
effect). Unlike [3], we suggest using location information
for route discovery, not for data delivery.
3. Location-Aided Routing (LAR) protocols
3.1. Route discovery using flooding
In this paper, we explore the possibility of using location
information to improve performance of routing protocols
for MANET. As an illustration, we show how a route dis-
covery protocol based on flooding can be improved. The
route discovery algorithm using flooding is described next
(this algorithm is similar to DSR [17,18] and AODV [31]).
When a node S needs to find a route to node D, node S
broadcasts a route request message to all its neighbors2
– hereafter, node S will be referred to as the sender and
node D as the destination. A node, say X, on receiving
a route request message, compares the desired destination
with its own identifier. If there is a match, it means that
the request is for a route to itself (i.e., node X). Otherwise,
node X broadcasts the request to its neighbors – to avoid
redundant transmissions of route requests, a node X only
broadcasts a particular route request once (repeated recep-
tion of a route request is detected using sequence numbers).
Figure 1 illustrates this algorithm. In this figure, node S
needs to determine a route to node D. Therefore, node S
broadcasts a route request to its neighbors. When nodes B
2 Two nodes are said to be neighbors if they can communicate with each
other over a wireless link.
Figure 1. Illustration of flooding.
and C receive the route request, they forward it to all their
neighbors. When node F receives the route request from B,
it forwards the request to its neighbors. However, when
node F receives the same route request from C, node F
simply discards the route request.
As the route request is propagated to various nodes, the
path followed by the request is included in the route request
packet. Using the above flooding algorithm, provided that
the intended destination is reachable from the sender, the
destination should eventually receive a route request mes-
sage. On receiving the route request, the destination re-
sponds by sending a route reply message to the sender –
the route reply message follows a path that is obtained by
reversing the path followed by the route request received
by D (the route request message includes the path traversed
by the request).
It is possible that the destination will not receive a route
request message (for instance, when it is unreachable from
the sender, or route requests are lost due to transmission
errors). In such cases, the sender needs to be able to re-
initiate route discovery. Therefore, when a sender initiates
route discovery, it sets a timeout. If during the timeout
interval, a route reply is not received, then a new route
discovery is initiated (the route request messages for this
route discovery will use a different sequence number than
the previous route discovery – recall that sequence numbers
are useful to detect multiple receptions of the same route
request). Timeout may occur if the destination does not
receive a route request, or if the route reply message from
the destination is lost.
Route discovery is initiated either when the sender S
detects that a previously determined route to node D is
broken, or if S does not know a route to the destination. In
our implementation, we assume that node S can know that
the route is broken only if it attempts to use the route. When
node S sends a data packet along a particular route, a node
along that path returns a route error message, if the next
hop on the route is broken. When node S receives the route
error message, it initiates route discovery for destination D.
When using the above algorithm, observe that the route
request would reach every node that is reachable from
node S (potentially, all nodes in the ad hoc network). Using
location information, we attempt to reduce the number of
nodes to whom route request is propagated.
Dynamic source routing (DSR) [17,18] and ad hoc on-
demand distance vector routing (AODV) [31] protocols pro-
posed previously are both based on variations of flooding.
DSR and AODV also use some optimizations – several
of these optimizations as well as other optimizations sug-
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 309
gested in this paper can be used in conjunction with the
proposed algorithms. However, for simplicity, we limit our
discussion to the basic flooding algorithm, and location-
aided route discovery based on “limited” flooding.
3.2. Preliminaries
Location information
The proposed approach is termed Location-Aided Rout-
ing (LAR), as it makes use of location information to re-
duce routing overhead. Location information used in the
LAR protocol may be provided by the Global Positioning
System (GPS) [10,15,26,29]. With the availability of GPS,
it is possible for a mobile host to know its physical lo-
cation.3 In reality, position information provided by GPS
includes some amount of error, which is the difference
between GPS-calculated coordinates and the real coordi-
nates. For instance, NAVSTAR Global Positioning System
has positional accuracy of about 50–100 m and Differential
GPS offers accuracies of a few meters [15,26]. In our ini-
tial discussion, we assume that each host knows its current
location precisely (i.e., no error). However, the ideas sug-
gested here can also be applied when the location is known
only approximately – section 4 considers this possibility.
In this paper, we assume that the mobile nodes are mov-
ing in a two-dimensional plane.
Expected zone and request zone
Expected zone. Consider a node S that needs to find a
route to node D. Assume that node S knows that node D
was at location L at time t0, and that the current time is
t1. Then, the “expected zone” of node D, from the view-
point of node S at time t1, is the region that node S expects
to contain node D at time t1. Node S can determine the
expected zone based on the knowledge that node D was
at location L at time t0. For instance, if node S knows
that node D travels with average speed v, then S may as-
sume that the expected zone is the circular region of radius
v(t1 − t0), centered at location L (see figure 2(a)). If ac-
tual speed happens to be larger than the average, then the
destination may actually be outside the expected zone at
time t1. Thus, expected zone is only an estimate made by
node S to determine a region that potentially contains D
at time t1. In general, it is also possible to define v to be
the maximum speed (instead of the average) or some other
measure of the speed distribution.
If node S does not know a previous location of node D,
then node S cannot reasonably determine the expected zone
– in this case, the entire region that may potentially be
occupied by the ad hoc network is assumed to be the ex-
pected zone. In this case, our algorithm reduces to the
basic flooding algorithm. In general, having more infor-
mation regarding mobility of a destination node, can result
in a smaller expected zone. For instance, if S knows that
3 Current GPS provides accurate three-dimensional position (latitude, lon-
gitude and altitude), velocity and precise time traceable to Coordinated
Universal Time (UTC) [12].
Figure 2. Examples of expected zone.
destination D is moving north, then the circular expected
zone in figure 2(a) can be reduced to a semi-circle, as in
figure 2(b).
Request zone. Again, consider node S that needs to de-
termine a route to node D. The proposed LAR algorithms
use flooding with one modification. Node S defines (im-
plicitly or explicitly) a request zone for the route request.
A node forwards a route request only if it belongs to the
request zone (unlike the flooding algorithm in section 3.1).
To increase the probability that the route request will reach
node D, the request zone should include the expected zone
(described above). Additionally, the request zone may also
include other regions around the request zone. There are
two reasons for this:
• When the expected zone does not include host S, a path
from host S to host D must include hosts outside the
expected zone. Therefore, additional region must be
included in the request zone, so that S and D both be-
long to the request zone (for instance, as shown in fig-
ure 3(a)).
• The request zone in figure 3(a) includes the expected
zone from figure 2(a). Is this an adequate request zone?
In the example in figure 3(b), all paths from S to D in-
clude hosts that are outside the request zone. Thus, there
is no guarantee that a path can be found consisting only
of the hosts in a chosen request zone. Therefore, if a
route is not discovered within a suitable timeout period,
our protocol allows S to initiate a new route discov-
ery with an expanded request zone – in our simulations,
the expanded zone includes the entire network space. In
this event, however, the latency in determining the route
to D will be longer (as more than one round of route
request propagation will be needed).
Note that the probability of finding a path (in the first
attempt) can be increased by increasing the size of the
initial request zone (for instance, see figure 3(c)). How-
ever, route discovery overhead also increases with the
size of the request zone. Thus, there exists a trade-off
between latency of route determination and the message
overhead.
310 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
Figure 3. Request zone. An edge between two nodes means that they are neighbors.
3.3. Determining membership of request zones
As noted above, our LAR algorithms are essentially
identical to flooding, with the modification that a node that
is not in the request zone does not forward a route request
to its neighbors.4 Thus, implementing LAR algorithm re-
quires that a node be able to determine if it is in the request
zone for a particular route request – the two LAR algo-
rithms presented here differ in the manner in which this
determination is made.
3.3.1. LAR scheme 1
Our first scheme uses a request zone that is rectangular
in shape (refer to figure 4). Assume that node S knows
that node D was at location (Xd,Yd) at time t0. At time t1,
node S initiates a new route discovery for destination D. We
assume that node S also knows the average speed v with
which D can move. Using this, node S defines the expected
zone at time t1 to be the circle of radius R = v(t1 − t0)
centered at location (Xd, Yd). (As stated before, instead of
the average speed, v may be chosen to be the maximum
speed or some other function of the speed distribution.)
In our first LAR algorithm, we define the request zone to
be the smallest rectangle that includes current location of S
and the expected zone (the circular region defined above),
such that the sides of the rectangle are parallel to the X
and Y axes. In figure 4(a), the request zone is the rectangle
whose corners are S, A, B and C, whereas in figure 4(b),
the rectangle has corners at point A, B, C and G – note
that, in this figure, current location of node S is denoted as
(Xs,Ys).
The source node S can, thus, determine the four corners
of the request zone. S includes their coordinates with the
route request message transmitted when initiating route dis-
covery. When a node receives a route request, it discards
the request if the node is not within the rectangle specified
by the four corners included in the route request. For in-
stance, in figure 4(a), if node I receives the route request
from another node, node I forwards the request to its neigh-
4 Recall that, in the flooding algorithm, a node forwards a route request if it
has not received the request before and it is not the intended destination.
Figure 4. LAR scheme 1.
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 311
bors, because I determines that it is within the rectangular
request zone. However, when node J receives the route re-
quest, node J discards the request, as node J is not within
the request zone (see figure 4(a)).
When node D receives the route request message, it
replies by sending a route reply message (as in the flooding
algorithm). However, in case of LAR, node D includes its
current location and current time in the route reply message.
When node S receives this route reply message (ending its
route discovery), it records the location of node D. Node S
can use this information to determine the request zone for a
future route discovery. (It is also possible for D to include
its current speed, or average speed over a recent time inter-
val, with the route reply message. This information could
be used in a future route discovery. In our simulations, we
assume that all nodes know each other’s average speed.)
Size of the request zone. Note that the size of the rec-
tangular request zone above is proportional to (i) average
speed of movement v, and (ii) time elapsed since the last
known location of the destination was recorded. In our
implementation, the sender comes to know location of the
destination only at the end of a route discovery (as noted in
the previous paragraph). At low speeds, route discoveries
occur after long intervals, because routes break less often
(thus, t1 − t0 is large). So, although factor (i) above is
small, factor (ii) becomes large at low speeds, potentially
resulting in a larger request zone. At high speeds as well,
for similar reasons, a large request zone may be observed.
So, in general, a smaller request zone may occur at speeds
that are neither too small, nor too large. For low speeds,
it is possible to reduce the size of the request zone by
piggybacking the location information on other packets, in
addition to route replies (this optimization is not evaluated
here).
3.3.2. LAR scheme 2
In LAR scheme 1, source S explicitly specifies the re-
quest zone in its route request message. In scheme 2, node
S includes two pieces of information with its route request:
• Assume that node S knows the location (Xd,Yd) of
node D at some time t0 – the time at which route discov-
ery is initiated by node S is t1, where t1 > t0. Node S
calculates its distance from location (Xd,Yd), denoted as
DISTs, and includes this distance with the route request
message.
• The coordinates (Xd,Yd) are also included with the route
request.
When a node I receives the route request from sender
node S, node I calculates its distance from location (Xd,Yd),
denoted as DISTi, and:
• For some parameters α and β, if α(DISTs)+β > DISTi,
then node I forwards the request to its neighbors. When
node I forwards the route request, it now includes DISTi
and (Xd,Yd) in the route request (i.e., it replaces the
DISTs value received in the route request by DISTi,
before forwarding the route request).
• Else α(DISTs)+β < DISTi. In this case, node I discards
the route request.
When some node J receives the route request (originated
by node S) from node I, it applies a criteria similar to above:
if node J has received this request previously, it discards
the request. Otherwise, node J calculates its distance from
(Xd,Yd), denoted as DISTj. Now,
• The route request received from node I includes DISTi.
If α(DISTi) + β > DISTj, then node J forwards the
request to its neighbors (unless node J is the destination
for the route request). Before forwarding the request, J
replaces the DISTi value in the route request by DISTj.
• Else α(DISTi)+β < DISTj. In this case, node J discards
the request.
Thus, a node J forwards a route request forwarded by I
(originated by node S), if J is “closer” to or “not much
farther” from (Xd,Yd) than node I. For the purpose of per-
formance evaluation, initially we use α = 1 and β = 0 in
the next section. Nonzero α and β may be used to trade-off
the probability of finding a route on the first attempt with
the cost of finding the route. Nonzero α and β may also
be appropriate when location error is nonzero, or when
the hosts are likely to move significant distances during the
time required to perform route discovery. To see how the
parameters of α and β affect the routing overhead, we do
more simulations with the change of those parameters in
section 4.2.
Figure 5 illustrates the difference between the two LAR
schemes. Consider figure 5(a) for LAR scheme 1. When
nodes I and K receive the route request for node D (orig-
inated by node S), they forward the route request, as both
I and K are within the rectangular request zone. On the
other hand, when node N receives the route request, it dis-
cards the request, as N is outside the rectangular request
zone. Now consider figure 5(b) for LAR scheme 2 (as-
sume α = 1 and β = 0). When nodes N and I receive the
route request from node S, both forward the route request to
their neighbors, because N and I are both closer to (Xd,Yd)
than node S. When node K receives the route request from
node I, node K discards the route request, as K is farther
from (Xd,Yd) than node I. Observe that nodes N and K
take different actions when using the two LAR schemes.
Error in location estimate. In the above, we assume that
each node knows its own location accurately. However, in
reality there may be some error in the estimated location.
Let e denote the maximum error in the coordinates esti-
mated by a node. Thus, if a node N believes that it is at
location (Xn,Yn), then the actual location of node N may
be anywhere in the circle of radius e centered at (Xn,Yn).
In the next section, we will refer to e as location er-
ror. In the above LAR schemes, we assume that node S
obtained the location (Xd,Yd) of node D at time t0, from
312 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
Figure 5. Comparison of the two LAR schemes.
node D (perhaps in the route reply message during the pre-
vious route discovery). Thus, node S does not know the
actual location of node D at time t0 – the actual location is
somewhere in the circle of radius e centered at (Xd,Yd).
To take the location error e into account, we modify
LAR scheme 1 so that the expected zone is now a circle
of radius e + v(t1 − t0). The request zone may now be
bigger, as it must include the larger request zone. Apart
from this, no other change is needed in the algorithm. As
the request zone size increases with e, the routing overhead
may be larger for large e. We make no modifications to
LAR scheme 2, even when location error e is nonzero.
However, the performance of scheme 2 may degrade with
large location error, because with larger e, there is a higher
chance that the request zone used by the scheme will not
include a path to the destination (resulting in a timeout and
another route discovery). This degradation could be offset
by using appropriate α and β values. We briefly evaluate
the case of e > 0 at the end of the next section.
4. Performance evaluation
To evaluate our schemes, we performed simulations us-
ing modified version of a network simulator, MaRS (Mary-
land Routing Simulator) [2]. MaRS is a discrete-event sim-
ulator built to provide a flexible platform for the evaluation
and comparison of network routing algorithms. Three rout-
ing protocols were simulated – flooding, LAR scheme 1
and LAR scheme 2. We studied several cases by varying
the number of nodes, transmission range of each node, and
moving speed.
4.1. Simulation model
Number of nodes in the network was chosen to be 15,
30 and 50 for different simulation runs. The nodes in the
ad hoc network are confined to a 1000 unit × 1000 unit
square region. Initial locations (X and Y coordinates) of
the nodes are obtained using a uniform distribution.
We assume that each node moves continuously, without
pausing at any location. Each node moves with an average
speed v. (In simulations presented here and in [21], average
speed of mobile nodes is used to define the expected zone
for LAR scheme 1. Results reported in [22] used maximum
speed instead.) The actual speed is uniformly distributed
in the range between v − δ and v + δ units/s, where we
use δ = 1.5 when v < 10 and δ = 2.5 when v > 10. We
consider average speeds (v) in the range 1.5–32.5 units/s.
Each node makes several “moves” during the simulation.
A node does not pause between moves. During a given
move, a node travels distance d, where d is exponentially
distributed with mean 20 units. The direction of movement
for a given move is chosen randomly. For each such move,
for a given average speed v, the actual speed of movement
is chosen uniformly distributed between [v − δ, v + δ]. If
during a move (over chosen distance d), a node “hits” a
wall of the 1000×1000 region, the node bounces and con-
tinues to move after reflection for the remaining portion of
distance d.
Two mobile hosts are considered disconnected if they are
outside each other’s transmission range. All nodes have the
same transmission range. For the simulations, transmission
range values of 200, 300, 400, and 500 units were used.
All wireless links have the same bandwidth, 100 Kbytes
per second.
In our simulation, simulation time is inversely propor-
tional to the average speed. For instance, simulations for
average speed 1.5 units/s run 4000 s of execution, whereas
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 313
about 1333 s for average speed 4.5 units/s. As the av-
erage speed is increased, for a given simulation time, the
number of moves simulated increases. If simulation time
is kept constant, as speed is increased, a particular config-
uration (for instance, partition) that may not have occurred
at a lower speed can occur at the higher speed. Therefore,
we chose to vary simulation time inversely with average
speed. (On a related note, observe that a configuration that
did occur at a lower speed unavoidably lasts a shorter time
when the speed is higher.)
For the simulation, a sender and a destination are cho-
sen randomly. Any data packets that cannot be delivered to
the destination due to a broken route are simply dropped.
The source generates 10 data packets per second (on av-
erage), with the time between two packets being exponen-
tially distributed. The data rate was chosen low to speed
up the simulation. However, this has the impact of sending
small number of packets between two route discoveries (as
compared to when the source continuously sends packets).
This, in turn, results in higher number of routing packets
per data packet (defined below).
When using the LAR schemes for route discovery, the
sender first uses our algorithm to determine a route – if a
route reply is not received within a timeout interval, the
sender uses the flooding algorithm to find the route. The
timeout interval is 2 s on average (specifically, the timeout
interval is equal to the time required to generate 5 data
packets).
In our simulations, we do not model the delays that may
be introduced when multiple nodes attempt to transmit si-
multaneously. Transmission errors and congestion are also
not considered.
4.2. Simulation results
Initially, we assume that a node knows its current lo-
cation accurately, without any error. At the end of this
section, we briefly consider the impact of location error on
performance of our algorithms.
In the following, the term “data packets” (or DP) is used
to refer to the data packets received by the destination –
the number of data packets received by the destination is
different from number of data packets sent by the sender,
because some data packets are lost when a route is bro-
ken. In the following, the term “routing packets” (or RP)
is used to refer to the routing related packets (i.e., route
request, route reply and route error) received by various
nodes – number of such packets received is different from
number of packets sent, because a single broadcast of a
route request packet by some node is received by all its
neighbors.
We compare the results from LAR scheme 1 and LAR
scheme 2 with those from the flooding algorithm. In
each run, one input parameter (e.g., average speed, num-
ber of nodes, or transmission range) was varied while the
other parameters were kept constant. Our simulation re-
sults are averaged over 30 runs, each with a different
(a) Number of RPs per DP
(b) Percentage improvement
Figure 6. For 30 nodes, and transmission range 300 units: (a) the number
of RPs per DP versus average speed, (b) percentage of improvement versus
average speed.
mobility pattern (different mobility patterns were obtained
by choosing different seeds for a random number genera-
tor).
The number of routing packets (RP) per data packet (DP)
is depicted in figure 6(a) as a function of average speed.
This is calculated as the ratio of the number of routing
packets, and the number of data packets received by the
destination. Figure 6(b) shows the same data, but plotted as
the percentage improvement using LAR, relative to flooding
algorithm.
Figures 6(a) and (b) show that the number of routing
packets per data packet is consistently lower for both LAR
schemes as compared to flooding. As the speed of mobile
hosts is increased, the number of routing packets begins
to increase for all routing protocols. With higher speed,
the frequency of route breaking increases, so routing over-
head to discover new routes also increases. However, LAR
schemes 1 and 2 provide a lower rate of increase than flood-
ing. This is because, with LAR, number of route requests
is significantly reduced by limiting route discovery to a
smaller request zone.
314 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
Table 1
95% confidence intervals (C.I.) for mean.
Average speed
(units/s) C.I. for mean Flooding LAR 1 LAR 2
mean 0.0828 0.0748 0.0408
1.5 lower limit 0.0805 0.0727 0.0401
upper limit 0.0851 0.0769 0.0414
mean 1.2413 0.9079 0.7800
4.5 lower limit 1.2270 0.8926 0.7697
upper limit 1.2556 0.9233 0.7904
mean 2.7660 1.9819 1.7365
8.5 lower limit 2.6630 1.8971 1.6442
upper limit 2.8689 2.0667 1.8288
mean 3.9711 2.8729 2.4442
12.5 lower limit 3.9232 2.8151 2.4093
upper limit 4.0189 2.9308 2.4791
mean 6.5810 4.7497 4.3413
22.5 lower limit 6.4606 4.5998 4.2237
upper limit 6.7014 4.8996 4.4588
mean 10.1498 6.1296 6.2471
32.5 lower limit 9.7481 5.8235 6.0650
upper limit 10.5515 6.4357 6.4292
To clarify the results of figure 6, table 1 shows 95%
confidence intervals – the table lists average overhead, and
the upper and lower limits of the confidence intervals. For
most speeds (except for average speed 32.5 units/s), LAR
scheme 2 clearly performs best in terms of the number of
routing packets per data packet. For the average speed
32.5 units/s, the confidence intervals for LAR schemes 1
and 2 significantly overlap.
Figure 7 shows the effect of varying the transmission
range. Typically, the routing overhead decreases with in-
creasing transmission range. With a larger transmission
range, the frequency of route discovery should be smaller,
as wireless links will break less frequently. This fac-
tor contributes to a decrease in routing overhead for all
three schemes. Our schemes continue to perform better
than flooding. However, with a smaller transmission range
(200 units in figure 7), performance of our schemes is not
much better than flooding. In figure 7(b), LAR scheme 1
performs even worse than flooding. When a node forwards
a route request, it broadcasts the request to all its neighbors.
With a smaller transmission range, number of neighbors for
each node decreases. This factor decreases the probability
of a route discovery within the timeout interval, using the
initial request zone. Recall that, in this case, our schemes
allow the sender to initiate a new route discovery using the
flooding algorithm. We believe that this is the reason why
LAR schemes do not perform too well when transmission
range is small. The different request zones used in the two
LAR schemes result in different routing overhead for the
two schemes.
The effect of varying the number of nodes is shown
in figure 8. Amount of routing overhead for the flooding
algorithm increases much more rapidly than LAR schemes,
when number of nodes is increased. As noted earlier in
the discussion of figure 7(b), smaller probability of success
(a) Average speed 4.5 units/sec
(b) Average speed 22.5 units/sec
Figure 7. The number of RPs per DP versus transmission range (with
30 nodes).
of route discovery using initial request zone contributes to
a larger routing overhead. Similar to the case of small
transmission range, the LAR schemes do not perform much
better than flooding with a small number of nodes (15 nodes
in figure 8).
Figure 9 shows the number of routing packets per route
discovery as a function of average speed. As can be seen
in the graph, LAR scheme 2 has the smallest number of
routing packets per route discovery, and LAR scheme 1
has smaller values than the flooding algorithm.
In the above simulations of LAR scheme 1, we defined
the request zone as the smallest rectangle that includes cur-
rent location of the source node and the expected zone.
Recall that the radius of the expected zone for these sim-
ulations is obtained using the average speed of the des-
tination node. The numerical results for LAR scheme 1
presented here match closely with those presented in [22],
even though the results in [22] were obtained using maxi-
mum speed to define the expected zone. The reason for the
similarity of these two sets of results is that, in our case, the
difference between maximum and average speed is some-
what small. Therefore, similar request zones are used in
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 315
(a) Average speed 4.5 units/sec
(b) Average speed 22.5 units/sec
Figure 8. The number of RPs per DP versus number of nodes (transmission
range 300 units).
Figure 9. The number of RPs per discovery versus speed (for 30 nodes
and transmission range 300 units).
both cases (also, note that, even if the destination is within
1 transmission range outside the request zone, it may still
receive the route request message from a node within the
request zone). In general, this would not be true, and re-
Figure 10. The number of RPs per DP versus parameter α (for β = 0)
(for 30 nodes and transmission range 300 units).
Figure 11. The number of RPs per DP versus parameter β (for α = 1)
(for 30 nodes and transmission range 300 units).
sults obtained using average speed to define the expected
zone may significantly differ from those obtained using the
maximum speed. In particular, if there is a large enough
probability that the actual speed may significantly exceed
the average speed, then using average speed may result in
poorer results (because the request zone may exclude the ac-
tual current location of the destination with non-negligible
probability).
When simulating LAR scheme 2, we used α = 1 and
β = 0. As explained in section 3.3, α and β can be varied
to tune the request zone’s size. Figures 10 and 11 show how
α and β can affect the routing overhead of LAR scheme 2.
In figure 10, the number of routing packets per data packet
becomes optimal in the interval between α = 0.8 and α =
1.2, when β = 0. On the other hand, the effect of varying
the parameter of β from −100 to 100 units seems to be
negligible in figure 11. This may be because the variation
of β is relatively small, as compared with the transmission
range of mobile hosts, 300 units.
316 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
4.3. Impact of location error
As noted at the end of the previous section, the location
of a node estimated using GPS may include some error, say
e, which causes each estimated coordinate (X and Y ) to be
in error by at most e units. In the above simulations, we
assumed e = 0. Figure 12 shows how the location error
affects routing overhead (i.e., number of routing packets
per data packet).
In figure 12, our schemes continue to perform better
than flooding for the chosen parameters (i.e., average speed,
number of nodes, transmission range). Typically, routing
overhead for LAR schemes increases with increasing lo-
cation error. However, although it is hard to see in fig-
ure 12(a), the curve for LAR scheme 1 is not monoton-
ically increasing. Note that the number of routing pack-
ets (RP) per data packet (DP) at e = 75 is smaller than
that at e = 50. Figure 12(b) plots the relative increase
in the routing overhead of LAR schemes 1 and 2, when
location error is nonzero, as compared to when the er-
(a)
(b)
Figure 12. For 30 nodes, average speed 4.5 units/s, and transmission
range 300 units: (a) the number of routing packets per data packet versus
location error, (b) percentage increase in the number of routing packets
per data packet versus location error.
ror is 0. Observe that the increase in routing overhead
is small.
With a larger location error, the size of request zone in-
creases – in figures 13(a) and (b) area of the request zone
is plotted as a fraction of the 1000 unit × 1000 unit net-
work area. Increase in request zone size usually contributes
to an increase in routing overhead. However, routing over-
head, when location error is increased, may also decrease.
This is because, when the size of request zone is larger, the
probability that the discovery will succeed on the first at-
tempt is larger, which can result in smaller number of RPs
per DP.
LAR schemes use location information to attempt to im-
prove routing performance. Intuition suggests that, when
location error is very large, such schemes would not be
very effective. Further work is needed to determine at what
location error levels proposed LAR schemes become inef-
fective.
(a)
(b)
Figure 13. For 30 nodes, average speed 4.5 units/s, and transmission range
300 units: (a) size of request zone versus location error, (b) percentage
increase in the size of request zone for the LAR scheme 1. Note that size
of the request zone for the flooding scheme is always constant (the entire
network).
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 317
5. Variations and optimizations
5.1. Alternative definitions of request zone
In this paper, we consider two ways of defining a request
zone. Several other alternatives may be conceived. For
instance, in the rectangular request zone of LAR scheme 1,
sender node S may be on the border of the zone (refer
figure 4(a)). Instead, one may define a larger rectangle
as the request zone. Also, in LAR scheme 1, the sides
of the rectangle are always parallel to the X and Y axes.
It is possible to remove this restriction when defining the
rectangular region. For instance, one side of the rectangle
may be made parallel to the line connecting the location
of node S to previous location of D – this approach would
often result in a smaller request zone (see figure 14).
In our simulation for the two LAR schemes, the request
zone is expanded to the entire network space when a sender
using our algorithm fails to find the route to a destination
within a timeout interval. This simple strategy of expanding
the request zone causes performance degradation of LAR
schemes with a smaller transmission range and number of
nodes. This scheme may be improved by increasing the
request zone gradually.
Definition of a request zone is also dependent on how
much information regarding the mobile hosts is available.
We assume that only average speed of the nodes is known.
It is interesting to consider situations wherein additional
information may be available (for instance, direction of
movement).
5.2. Adaptation of request zone
Accuracy of a request zone (i.e., probability of finding
a route to the destination) can be improved by adapting
the request zone, initially determined by the source node S,
with up-to-date location information for host D, which can
be acquired at some intermediate nodes. Let us consider the
case that node S starts search of a destination node D within
a request zone Z at time t1, which is based on location
information about D learned by S at time t0. Let us assume
that the route request includes the timestamp t0, because
Figure 14. Alternative definitions of request zone for LAR scheme 1.
the location of node D at time t0 is used to determine the
request zone. Also, location of node S and the time t1 when
the request is originated are also included. Now suppose
that some intermediate node I within Z receives the route
request at time t2, where t1 < t2. More recent location
information for D may potentially be known by node I
(as compared to node S), and the expected zone based on
that information may be different from previous request
zone Z. Therefore, request zone initially determined at a
source node may be adapted at node I.
For instance, when using LAR scheme 1, node I may
determine the expected zone using more recent location in-
formation for node D, and define the adapted request zone
as the smallest rectangle containing node S and the new
expected zone for node D. Similarly, when using LAR
scheme 2, node I may calculate distance from the more
recent location of destination D that it knows, and use this
distance in the decision rule (to decide whether to discard
a route request) of scheme 2.
5.3. Another adaptation of request zone
Even though the LAR scheme 2 does not explicitly
specify the request zone, the request zone at node S can
be thought to be implicitly defined as a circle of radius
αDISTs + β. As the route request packet is propagated
to various nodes, this implicit request zone is adapted by
an intermediate node I as a circle of radius αDISTi + β, as
shown in figure 15(a). On the other hand, in LAR scheme 1
the request zone is specified explicitly by the source S, and
the request zone is not modified by any intermediate nodes.
We can improve the performance of LAR scheme 1 by hav-
ing the request zone be adapted at an intermediate nodes I,
such that the request zone for the request propagated by
node I includes the current location of I and the expected
zone of the destination D. For instance, in figure 15(b),
when node I receives the route request from the source S
and forwards the request to its neighbors because I is within
the request zone Z (defined by S), it can replace Z by an
adapted request zone Z ′ before forwarding the request. By
applying the same reasoning when node J receives the route
request message from node I, the request zone can be again
adapted.
Generalizing the above idea, although a rectangular
shape is used for the request zone in LAR scheme 1, any
other form may also be used. For instance, figure 15(c)
shows the case when the request zone is defined as a cone
rooted at node S, such that angle made by the cone is large
enough to include the request zone – the angle made by
the cone may be chosen by some other heuristic as well
(for instance, if the angle is always chosen to be 90 de-
grees, this scheme would become similar to that in fig-
ure 15(b)). Similar to adaptation of the rectangular request
zone in figure 15(b), the cone-shaped request zone may
also be adapted as shown in figure 15(c). This approach
using cone-shaped region is analogous to the approach used
in [3] to deliver data to a destination node. The significant
318 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
Figure 15. Explicit adaptation of request zone for LAR scheme 1.
difference between the two approaches is that we use the
cone-shaped regions for route discovery, not for data deliv-
ery. Also, our scheme does not require periodic broadcast
of location information, unlike [3].
5.4. Propagation of location and speed information
Initially, in ad hoc network environments, a node may
not know the physical location (either current or old) of
other hosts. However, as time progresses, each node can
get location information for many hosts either as a result of
its own route discovery or as a result of message forwarding
for another node’s route discovery. For instance, if node S
includes its current location in the route request message,
and if node D includes its current location in the route
reply message, then each node receiving these messages
can know the locations of nodes S and D, respectively. In
general, location information may be propagated by piggy-
backing it on any packet. Similarly, a node may propagate
to other nodes its average speed (or some other measure of
speed). In our simulations, we assume that average speed
is constant and known to all nodes. In practice, the speed
distribution could be time-variant.
5.5. Local search
In our protocol, any intermediate node I detecting rout-
ing failure (due to a broken link) informs the source node S
by sending a route error packet (see figure 16(a)). Then,
S initiates a new route discovery (using a request zone),
to find a path to the destination D. As we have already
seen, if we use location information, routing messages can
be reduced by limiting propagation of route request pack-
ets to the request zone determined (implicitly or explicitly)
by node S, as shown in figure 16(b). Figure 16(c) shows
how this scheme may be improved to reduce the size of
request zone as well as latency of route re-determination
for node D. This can be done by allowing any intermediate
node I detecting route error to initiate a route discovery
using a request zone based on its own location information
for node D. Such a local search may result in a smaller re-
quest zone (as shown in figure 16(c)) because node I may
be closer to D than S. Smaller request zone could reduce
routing overhead. The time to find the new path to D may
also be reduced, as a smaller request zone is searched.
5.6. Combining with time-to-live (TTL)
In DSR [18], route discovery using expanding ring
search has been suggested as one optimization over flood-
ing. In this approach, a source initially sends a route re-
quest with setting its time-to-live (TTL) field to 1. If no
route reply is received for some time, the source increases
the TTL to a larger value and tries again. Although both
TTL and LAR schemes limit the spread of route request
messages, their behavior is quite different. In fact, the
LAR protocols may also be used in combination with the
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 319
Figure 16. Local search to re-establish a broken route.
TTL optimization. By setting the TTL to some reasonable
number, the source can bound the number of hops the re-
quest packet will travel. Therefore, even if a node exists
within the request zone defined by the LAR scheme, it will
drop the packet when it is over TTL hops away from the
source.
5.7. Use of directional antennas
The LAR protocol lowers routing overhead by reducing
the number of nodes that will receive and forward a route
request message. However, the basic LAR approach is
still limited in a sense due to the broadcast propagating
nature of mobile ad hoc networks. In general, MANET
nodes are assumed to have omnidirectional antennas for
wireless communication [7]. This assumption implies that
any request message broadcast by a node will reach all its
neighbors, even if some of these neighbors are outside the
intended request zone. This may be improved upon by
using directed antennas.
For instance, in figure 17, let us assume that node S
needs to determine a route to node D so it broadcasts a route
request packet. Let us also assume that LAR scheme 1 is
used for this route discovery phase with omnidirectional
antennas. With LAR scheme 1 based on the viewpoint
of S, the request zone is defined as the rectangle in which
only node S, A, B and D are included. Nodes C and E
do not need to receive any route request packets, because
they are both outside the request zone. However, due to
the broadcast transmission properties of wireless networks,
node C receives a route request packet from node S whose
transmission range covers C as well as A. Similarly, the
request message will be forwarded to node E, via node A,
unnecessarily. (In fact, when node A forwards the route
request, all it neighbors B, C, E, and S, will receive the re-
quest.) This inherent limitation can be mitigated by using
directional antennas. A directional antenna is an antenna
in which the radiation pattern is not omnidirectional. LAR
Figure 17. LAR with directional antennas.
protocols, particularly those using the optimizations in fig-
ure 15, make it possible to utilize directional antennas for
routing in MANET.
Again, assume that node S having a directional antenna
initiates a route discovery phase for node D. Based on the
previous location information of D, route request packets
may only be directed at a small group of mobile nodes (see
figure 17). Therefore, in this scenario, node C does not re-
ceive the request packet from S even though C is a neighbor
of S. When node A forwards the route request (originated
by node S), it applies a similar criteria. Continuing in this
fashion, intuitively, an extention of LAR protocols with di-
rectional antennas will substantially decrease the cost of ad
hoc routing.
5.8. Clock synchronization
For the LAR scheme 1, we assumed clock synchroniza-
tion between the nodes. However, our approach can be eas-
320 Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks
ily extended to the case when clocks are unsynchronized.
When a node X receives location information for another
node Y (for instance, in a route reply packet), node X would
timestamp the information as per its local clock. This infor-
mation can be used in a future route discovery, as described
in LAR scheme 1. This approach is likely to perform as
well as in the case of synchronized clocks, because mes-
sage delivery delays are likely to be relatively small. LAR
scheme 2 does not need synchronized clocks, which may
be considered to be an advantage over scheme 1.
6. Conclusion
This paper describes how location information may be
used to reduce the routing overhead in ad hoc networks. We
present two location-aided routing (LAR) protocols. These
protocols limit the search for a route to the so-called request
zone, determined based on the expected location of the
destination node at the time of route discovery.
Simulation results indicate that using location informa-
tion results in significantly lower routing overhead, as com-
pared to an algorithm that does not use location information.
We also suggest several optimizations on the basic LAR
schemes which may improve performance. Further work
is required to evaluate efficacy of these optimizations, and
also to develop other ways of using location information in
ad hoc networks, for instance to improve performance of
reactive algorithms such as TORA [27,28], or to implement
location-based multicasting [21].
Acknowledgements
We thank the reviewers for their helpful comments.
References
[1] I.F. Akyildiz, S.M. Joseph and Yi-Bing Lin, Movement-based lo-
cation update and selective paging for PCS networks, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking 4 (1996) 94–104.
[2] C. Alaettinoglu, K. Dussa-Zieger, I. Matta and A.U. Shankar, MaRS
user’s manual – version 1.0, Technical Report TR 91-80, The Uni-
versity of Maryland (June 1991).
[3] S. Basagni, I. Chlamtac, V.R. Syrotiuk and B.A. Woodward, A dis-
tance routing effect algorithm for mobility (DREAM), in: Proc. of
ACM/IEEE MOBICOM ’98 (1998).
[4] J. Broch, D.A. Maltz, D.B. Johnson, Y.-C. Hu and J. Jetcheva, A per-
formance comparison of multi-hop wireless ad hoc network routing
protocols, in: Proc. of MOBICOM ’98 (1998).
[5] S. Corson, S. Batsell and J. Macker, Architectural considerations for
mobile mesh networking (Internet draft RFC, version 2), in: Mobile
Ad-hoc Network (MANET) Working Group, IETF (1996).
[6] S. Corson and A. Ephremides, A distributed routing algorithm for
mobile wireless networks, Wireless Networks (1995) 61–81.
[7] S. Corson and J. Macker, Mobile ad hoc networking (MANET):
Routing protocol performance issues and evaluation considerations
(Internet-draft), in: Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) Working
Group, IETF (1998).
[8] S.R. Das, R. Castaneda, J. Yan and R. Sengupta, Comparative perfor-
mance evaluation of routing protocols for mobile, ad hoc networks,
in: Proc. of IEEE IC3N ’98 (1998).
[9] B. Das, E. Sivakumar and V. Bhargavan, Routing in ad-hoc networks
using a spine, in: Proc. of IEEE IC3N ’97 (1997).
[10] G. Dommety and R. Jain, Potential networking applications of global
positioning systems (GPS), Technical report TR-24, The Ohio State
University (1996).
[11] R. Dube, C.D. Rais, K.-Y. Wang and S.K. Tripathi, Signal stability
based adaptive routing (SSA) for ad hoc mobile networks, IEEE
Personal Communications 4(1) (1997) 36–45.
[12] GPS and precision timing applications, available via WWW
at URL: http://wwwtmo.external.hp.com/tmo/pia/
infinium/PIATop/Notes/English/5965-2791E.html
[13] Z.J. Haas and M.R. Pearlman, The zone routing protocol (ZRP)
for ad hoc networks (Internet-draft), in: Mobile Ad-hoc Network
(MANET) Working Group, IETF (1998).
[14] T. Imielinski and J.C. Navas, GPS-based addressing and routing,
Technical report LCSR-TR-262, Rutgers University (March, updated
August 1996).
[15] Iowa State University GPS page, available via WWW at URL:
http://www.cnde.iastate.edu/gps.html
[16] M. Jiang, J. Li and Y.-C. Tay, Cluster based routing protocol (CBRP)
functional specification (Internet-draft), in: Mobile Ad-hoc Network
(MANET) Working Group, IETF (1998).
[17] D.B. Johnson and D.A. Maltz, Dynamic Source Routing in Ad Hoc
Wireless Networks (Kluwer Academic, 1996).
[18] D. Johnson, D.A. Maltz and J. Broch, The dynamic source routing
protocol for mobile ad hoc networks (Internet-draft), in: Mobile Ad-
hoc Network (MANET) Working Group, IETF (1998).
[19] Y.-B. Ko and N.H. Vaidya, Using location information to improve
routing in ad hoc networks, Technical report 97-013, Texas A&M
University (1997).
[20] Y.-B. Ko and N.H. Vaidya, Location-aided routing in mobile ad hoc
networks, Technical report 98-012, Texas A&M University (1998).
[21] Y.-B. Ko and N.H. Vaidya, Location-based multicast in mobile ad
hoc networks, Technical report 98-018, Texas A&M University
(1998).
[22] Y.-B. Ko and N.H. Vaidya, Location-aided routing (LAR) in mobile
ad hoc networks, in: Proc. of MOBICOM ’98 (1998).
[23] P. Krishna, M. Chatterjee, N.H. Vaidya and D.K. Pradhan, A cluster-
based approach for routing in ad hoc networks, in: Proc. of USENIX
Symposium on Location Independent and Mobile Computing (1995).
[24] Metricom Web Page, available via WWW at URL: http://www.
metricom.com
[25] J.C. Navas and T. Imielinski, Geocast – geographic addressing and
routing, in: Proc. of ACM/IEEE MOBICOM ’97 (1997).
[26] NAVSTAR GPS operations, available via WWW at URL: http://
tycho.usno.navy.mil/gpsinfo.html
[27] V.D. Park and S. Corson, A highly adaptive distributed routing al-
gorithm for mobile wireless networks, in: Proc. of INFOCOM ’97
(1997) pp. 1405–1413.
[28] V.D. Park and S. Corson, Temporally-ordered routing algorithm
(TORA) version 1 functional specification (Internet-draft), in: Mo-
bile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) Working Group, IETF (1998).
[29] B.W. Parkinson and S.W. Gilbert, NAVSTAR: global positioning
system – ten years later, Proceedings of the IEEE 71(10) (1983)
1177–1186.
[30] C.E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, Highly dynamic destination-sequenced
distance-vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers, in: Proc. of
ACM SIGCOMM ’94 Symposium on Communication, Architectures
and Protocols (1994) pp. 234–244.
[31] C.E. Perkins and E.M. Royer, Ad hoc on demand distance vec-
tor (AODV) routing (Internet-draft), in: Mobile Ad-hoc Network
(MANET) Working Group, IETF (1998).
[32] S. Ramanathan and M. Steenstrup, A survey of routing techniques for
mobile communication networks, Mobile Networks and Applications
(1996) 89–104.
[33] R. Sivakumar, P. Sinha and V. Bharghavan, Core extraction distrib-
uted ad hoc routing (CEDAR), in: Proc. of INFOCOM ’99 (1999).
Y.-B. Ko, N.H. Vaidya / Location-Aided Routing (LAR) in mobile ad hoc networks 321
[34] M. Spreitzer and M. Theimer, Providing location information in a
ubiquitous computing environment, in: Proc. of Symposium on Op-
erating System Principles (1993).
[35] C.-K. Toh, A novel distributed routing protocol to support ad-hoc
mobile computing, Wireless Personal Communication (1997).
[36] M. Weiser, The computer for the 21st century, Scientific American
(1991) 94–104.
Young-Bae Ko received the B.S. degree in com-
puter science and the MBA degree in management
information systems from the Ajou University, Ko-
rea, in 1991 and 1995, respectively. He has pur-
sued his Ph.D. degree in computer science at the
Texas A&M University since 1996. He is cur-
rently a research assistant in the mobile and wire-
less networking lab at the Texas A&M University.
His research interests include wireless networking
and mobile computing. Especially, his main re-
search area is design of routing, multicasting, and wireless medium access
control protocols in mobile ad hoc networks. Young-Bae Ko is a recipi-
ent of the Best Student Paper Award from the 4th conference on mobile
computing and networking (MOBICOM ’98) in 1998. He is a student
member of the IEEE Computer Society.
E-mail: youngbae@cs.tamu.edu
Nitin Vaidya received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst
in 1991 and 1992, respectively. He also received
the M.E. degree from the Indian Institute of Sci-
ence, Bangalore, in 1988 and the B.E. (Hons) de-
gree from the Birla Institute of Technology and
Science, Pilani, in 1986. He is currently an Asso-
ciate Professor of Computer Science at the Texas
A&M University. His research interests include
wireless networking, mobile computing, and fault-
tolerant computing. Nitin Vaidya is a recipient of a 1995 CAREER award
from the National Science Foundation. He has served on program and
organizing committees of several conferences. Dr. Vaidya is a member of
the ACM and the IEEE Computer Society.
E-mail: vaidya@cs.tamu.edu

