www.ets.org 1
Assistive Technologies for  
Computer-Based Assessments
No. 24  •  June 2015
By Mark Hakkinen1
1  Editor’s note: Mark Hakkinen is a research scientist in ETS’s Research & Development division.
Introduction
It is ETS’s mission to help advance quality and equity in education by providing fair and 
valid assessment, research, and services for all people worldwide, and that includes 
people who have disabilities. The work to achieve this mission is facing a number of 
challenges in a changing world, partially due to rapid technological change and the 
spread of information technology. 
This essay discusses the impact of technology on education and educational 
assessment, which is even more profound for test takers with disabilities and  
special needs.
Disability is not a small or marginal phenomenon. The World Health Organization and 
the World Bank reported in 2011 that 20% of the global population has a disability — 
that is, about one billion people (World Health Organization & the World Bank, 2011). 
In addition, this segment of the population can include persons with any of a broad 
range of physical, sensory, cognitive, psychiatric, and learning disabilities. While 
computer technology can impede access to information for people with disabilities, 
it can also open new opportunities to improved fairness and validity of assessments 
(Bennett, 1999).
New computer and information technologies have fundamentally changed the 
landscape in ways that provide unprecedented access to information and educational 
resources for all students, including those with disabilities. These technologies have 
also made it easier and less expensive to accommodate specific needs for presenting 
instructions and test items during an assessment to students with a disability. 
Assistive technologies are key to providing access. Today they often come as built-in  
features in off-the-shelf products such as the iPad®, iPhone®, Apple TV®, and  
Android™-based phones and tablets. A user with a visual impairment can simply turn  
on a device’s accessibility features to enable programs such as the VoiceOver screen 
reader or a magnifier. Such applications can be downloaded (for free or at low cost) 
and installed if the device does not already have that capability preinstalled. For users 
Key definitions:
accessibility – the degree to  
which a product, device, service, 
or environment is available.
assistive technology – any item, 
piece of equipment, or system 
used to increase, maintain, or 
improve functional capabilities 
of individuals with disabilities or 
functional limitations.
haptics – a technology that 
provides communication 
feedback via touch. 
Acronyms:
AAC: augmentative and 
alternative communication 
CBT: computer-based testing 
IMS GLC: IMS Global Learning 
Consortium 
LD: learning disabilities 
W3C: World Wide Web 
Consortium
WCAG: W3C’s Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 2
with a communications impairment, applications are available that can turn the tablet 
or smartphone into an augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) device. 
Many newer devices are also able to interoperate with various types of assistive 
technology hardware, such as wireless refreshable braille displays. 
As much as the new technologies present opportunities for learners with and without 
disabilities, it is crucial that the new computer-based delivery platforms and assistive 
technologies not alter the construct to be assessed or make the assessment process 
more complicated for the test taker.   
Laws and regulations  
related to persons  
with disabilities
ADA: Americans With 
Disabilities Act (1990)
IDEA: Individuals with 
Disabilities Education 
Improvement Act (2004) 
RA: Rehabilitation Act (1973)
European Commission 
Standardization Mandate  
376 (2013)
United Nations’ Convention  
on the Rights of Persons  
With Disabilities (2007)
Drivers of Innovation
Innovations in technology have spurred the development of assistive technologies 
that have helped make information technology and the World Wide Web accessible 
to individuals with disabilities. Another key driver behind this technology innovation 
is the trend toward standardization, which essentially means that something is built 
or executed in a certain way, adhering to technical or other specifications that have 
evolved over time or were set deliberately. It is hard to imagine the modern world 
without standards for measurement, machine parts, tools, electrical current, data 
traffic, file format, and so on. Without such standards, computer-based information 
and communication would have been more expensive, harder to access, and harder 
to learn and keep up with. Some standards have been driven by commercial needs 
to spur interchange of information resources, developed and monitored by national 
and international standards organizations, while others have been mandated by 
national governments. Technical standards are essential to ensuring that end users 
with disabilities are able to use assistive technologies across different software 
products, document files, and websites in a reliable and robust manner. In addition 
to standards from the domain of technology, the field of assessment develops and 
maintains its own standards. The Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing 
(Testing Standards for short) emphasizes “that fairness to all individuals in the intended 
population of test takers is an overriding, foundational concern” (American Educational 
Research Association [AERA], American Psychological Association [APA], and National 
Council for Measurement [NCME], 2014, p. 49). The latest edition of the Testing 
Standards (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014) adds two relatively recent concepts, accessibility 
and universal design, which are key components to supporting the needs of a diverse 
population of test takers, including those with disabilities.
In addition to the Testing Standards (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014), the 2014 edition of the 
ETS Standards for Quality and Fairness (Educational Testing Service [ETS], 2015), which 
are based on the 2014 edition of the Testing Standards, requires ETS, when providing 
assessments for people with disabilities, to
… ensure that ETS will take into account the diversity of the populations served as 
it designs, develops, and administers products and services. ETS will treat people 
comparably and fairly regardless of differences in characteristics that are not 
relevant to the intended use of the product or service. (ETS, 2015, p. 19)
A refreshable braille display, upon which 
users can read using their fingertips. The 
braille text is displayed through a long matrix 
of pins that can be individually raised to form 
letters and words. Above the display pins on 
this photo are braille input keys. The braille 
display can be used in combination with a 
speech synthesizer, which converts text  
to speech.
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 3
“ As much as the new 
technologies present 
opportunities for learners 
with and without disabilities, 
it is crucial that the new 
computer-based delivery 
platforms and assistive 
technologies not alter the 
construct to be assessed or 
make the assessment process 
more complicated for the  
test taker.”
and to
Provide appropriate accommodations or modifications for people with disabilities. 
(ETS, 2015, p. 21)
Standards typically define technical requirements that enable accessibility, but there 
are also legal requirements that people with disabilities be treated fairly. The United 
States government has enacted laws, specifically the Americans With Disabilities Act of 
1990, as amended (ADA), and the Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement 
Act of 2004 (IDEA). 
IDEA requires that state- and district-wide assessments be accessible to students  
with disabilities. The law mandates that all such computer-based testing (CBT) 
programs develop accessibility features and possibly offer alternate assessments so 
that students with disabilities can participate. 
These laws seek to prevent people with disabilities from being excluded from 
educational or employment opportunities. The combination of technical standards 
and laws that incorporate or reference those standards is an emerging trend and 
specifically define the technical requirements to ensure access. A growing number 
of states rely on the accessibility standard in Section 5082 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973, as amended, which requires that federal agencies make their electronic 
and information technology accessible to people with disabilities and favor the 
procurement of technologies that meet specific technical criteria for accessibility. 
Section 508 specifically addressed technical requirements that computer-based 
systems can be used by people with disabilities, and this requirement also covers 
digital assessments. These technical requirements are based on the accessibility 
standards developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).3
Similar requirements have also begun to appear internationally in the form of 
accessibility legislation modeled on that of the United States. For example, the 
European Union’s Standardization Mandate 376 (European Commission, 2013) seeks 
to prevent new Internet and computing technology products and services from 
introducing accessibility barriers and, like Section 508, emphasizes procurement 
of products and services that support accessibility. On a global level, the United 
Nations’ Convention on the Rights of Persons With Disabilities (United Nations 
General Assembly, 2007) is another important starting point when countries consider 
accessibility legislation, with the convention’s specific reference to inclusion of people 
with disabilities in all aspects of life, including education.
What does this mean for educational assessment? The combination of industry 
standards and legal requirements as described above, with increased innovation in 
testing (e.g., simulations, adaptive assessments), present increased challenges for 
digital delivery of assessments. There already have been several legal challenges to 
2 http://www.section508.gov/section508-laws
3 http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 4
testing organizations when students with disabilities were not included in the digital 
delivery of the assessment, including the Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for 
College and Career (PARCC; Samuels, 2014). In 2012, the Office of Civil Rights at the U.S. 
Department of Justice was asked to intervene when a student in Oregon challenged 
the use of a paper-based braille format that was offered to braille readers when 
other students were offered a computer-adaptive assessment (Samuels, 2012). This 
challenge resulted in the development and delivery of the first computer-adaptive 
assessment administered using refreshable braille, text to speech, and on-demand 
embossing. And in a broad settlement of a suit on behalf of test takers with disabilities 
against the Law School Admissions Council, a key provision will allow test takers to use 
accommodations, including screen-reading software that they have been allowed to 
use on previous assessments (U.S. Department of Justice, 2014).
Further challenges and opportunities are expected as the demand, based both on 
specific state requirements and technology adoption, grows for technology-enhanced 
assessments delivered to the students’ own computing devices, especially tablets. 
With growing availability of assistive technology solutions on mainstream technology 
platforms, including tablets, students with disabilities who use those technologies 
daily are primed to expect that digital assessments will be compatible with the tools 
they are already using. As noted, recent legal decisions appear to support that view.
The move toward more complex and interactive test items delivered on a range of 
different platforms (ranging from traditional desktop PCs and Chromebooks™ to 
tablets such as the iPad) will present significant challenges to assessment developers 
as they address accessibility issues. An additional challenge is that more test  
takers will be English language learners with disabilities, combining the need to 
incorporate accommodations specific to language learners with the need to do so  
in an accessible manner. 
There has been important progress in ensuring that CBT can accommodate the 
needs of all test takers, but much work remains to be done. As legal requirements are 
bringing the issue of accessibility and accommodations to the forefront, more research 
is needed on design of accessible assessments, and in particular the integration of 
mainstream assistive technologies and accessibility standards in CBT. To successfully 
align accessible CBT with standards and legal requirements, it is first necessary to 
understand the population of test takers with disabilities and their specific needs. 
Especially in the context of technical accessibility standards, the needs of test takers 
with disabilities can go beyond what has been codified in standards originally 
developed for accessibility of the World Wide Web. 
Test takers with disabilities: Who are they and what do they need? Approximately 
13% of the United States population ages 3 to 21 have been identified as having a 
disability (Snyder & Dillow, 2013). The functional limitation may be physical, sensory, 
cognitive, or a combination, and can be permanent or temporary. 
“ Further challenges and 
opportunities are expected  
as the demand, based both 
on specific state requirements 
and technology adoption, 
grows for technology-
enhanced assessments 
delivered to the students’  
own computing devices, 
especially tablets.”
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 5
Table 1. Children 3–21 Years Old Served Under Individuals With Disabilities 
Act, Part B, 2010–2011
Disability Percentage of all enrolled  disabled students 
Autism 6.5
Deaf-blindness < 1.0
Developmental delay 5.9
Emotional disturbance 6.1
Hearing impairments 1.2
Intellectual disability 7.0
Multiple disabilities 2.0
Orthopedic impairments 1.0
Other health impairments 11.1
Specific learning disabilities 36.7
Speech or language impairments 21.7
Traumatic brain injury 0.4
Visual impairments 0.4
Note: Data from Digest of Education Statistics, 2012 (NCES 2014-015; Table 48), by T. D. Snyder and S. A. Dillow, 
2013, Washington DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
However, disability statistics (see Table 1) tell only part of the story, as it is easy to focus 
on one type of disability, while a student may have multiple disabilities. There can also 
be individual differences in terms of the severity or extent of the functional limitation 
a student experiences. For example, autism can describe a range of functional 
limitations that exist along the autism spectrum; visual impairments can include 
blindness, partial vision, and low vision. 
What are assessment accommodations? The traditional way of addressing 
specific needs of a student with a disability has been to provide an assessment 
accommodation, which is defined as “a change in the materials or procedures used for 
testing that does not change the construct that a test is intended to measure” (Lazarus, 
Thurlow, Lail, & Christensen, 2009) (Thurlow & Larson, 2011, Definitions section, para. 1). 
A review (Thurlow & Larson, 2011) of testing accommodations provided to students 
with disabilities on state accountability assessments identified 72 types of testing 
accommodations listed in state policies. The range of accommodations requested 
highlights the diversity of disabilities. At present, though, there is little information 
about which accommodations are used most often in K–12 and higher education in 
the United States and globally.
“ It is important to consider a 
broad range of disabilities 
right from the beginning 
in the research and design 
of computer-based and 
technology-enhanced 
assessments.”
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 6
Assessment accommodations are essential to supporting the needs of students with 
disabilities, but the prevalence of a disability varies, and some accommodations may 
be requested less frequently than others simply based on how many students with 
a particular disability take a specific assessment. It is important to consider a broad 
range of disabilities right from the beginning in the research and design of computer-
based and technology-enhanced assessments. 
On ETS admissions and licensure assessments, the most commonly granted 
accommodations are extended time, separate room, audio (i.e., screen reader or 
human reader), large print, screen magnification, calculator (or talking calculator), 
scribe or keyboard entry aide, additional supervised break time, and sign language 
interpreted instructions for deaf or hard of hearing test takers.   
It can be challenging to identify and implement the best accommodations for all test 
takers with special needs. However, there exists a solid foundation for incorporating 
accessibility in computer-based systems, and it is important to apply current 
knowledge when creating computer-based assessments while at the same time 
directing research efforts to areas where important unanswered questions remain.
Accommodations that target specific disabilities may require complex and overly 
specialized functions resulting in CBT platforms where functionality, appearance, and 
quality vary from vendor to vendor. Such built-in accommodations may also differ 
from the assistive technology tools that a student uses on a daily basis, whether in the 
classroom or at home. A growing number of students prefer to use their own assistive 
technologies, such as screen readers or magnifiers, instead of equivalent features built 
into a CBT platform.  
One way to approach this problem is to create computer-based assessment 
platforms that support both student-preferred assistive technologies and built-in 
accommodations, but this can be technically daunting. Given the wide range of 
assistive technologies in use, the developers of CBT are faced with concerns ranging 
from ensuring test security to verifying compatibility with specific versions of tools. 
Allaying these concerns will require collaboration across the assessment, standards, 
and assistive technology communities.
Further, deciding which accommodation features to build in to a CBT platform and 
which should be handled by a compatible assistive technology is critical, as the 
decision can impact software complexity, implementation costs, and test-taker 
experience, particularly if there are differences between mainstream assistive 
technologies students may already be familiar with and similar functions implemented 
directly in the CBT. The greatest technical challenge is in providing accommodations 
for students with sensory disabilities, specifically those with visual impairments. 
Because of the complexity of the software behind assistive technologies such as 
screen readers, a strong case can be made that developers of CBT should focus on 
supporting those technologies rather than creating them. Such an approach can 
leverage the assistive technology skills of the student when it comes time to taking  
an assessment. 
“ Because of the complexity of 
the software behind assistive 
technologies such as screen 
readers, a strong case can be 
made that developers of CBT 
should focus on supporting 
those technologies rather 
than creating them.”
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 7
The next section explores how students with sensory disabilities use technology to 
access both learning materials and assessments.
Trends in technology use by students with sensory disabilities. Students with 
disabilities have access to a growing ecosystem of technology products and software 
that support learning. Students in the subgroup that have sensory disabilities can 
access learning materials and assessments through assistive technologies — that 
is, objects, pieces of equipment, or systems that are used to increase, maintain, or 
improve these students’ functional capabilities. Visually impaired students can use 
common assistive technologies such as screen readers — software tools that translate 
textual information displayed on the computer or tablet screen into an alternative 
format such as computer-synthesized text-to-speech (TTS) or a refreshable braille 
display. Screen readers such as VoiceOver for Apple® products and JAWS for Windows® 
PCs enable visually impaired users to access information nonvisually. For students 
with speech impairments, AAC technology provides hardware and software interfaces 
that enable a student to generate speech. And for students with physical limitations 
who cannot use a computer mouse or keyboard, switch interfaces enable software 
applications to be controlled via external hardware such as sip-puff tubes (a form of 
on/off switch) or large, easy-to-activate buttons. 
Assistive technologies have historically been expensive and required special training. 
They have often only been able to reduce a functional limitation and not eliminate 
it. Assistive technologies may allow a person to perform a task, but not always as 
efficiently as a person who does not have a disability. 
However, the choices available for students with disabilities have never been greater, 
thanks to the wide and inexpensive availability of computer-based products that 
feature accessibility and assistive technologies. Many smartphones and tablets 
support TTS and refreshable braille. Hence, many students with disabilities expect 
technologies used in the classroom for learning and assessment to be compatible and 
work just as well as their own computers, tablets, and phones.
“ A growing number of 
students prefer to use their 
own assistive technologies, 
such as screen readers 
or magnifiers, instead of 
equivalent features built into 
a CBT platform.”
 A workstation that can enable a person with a visual impairment to type, read and “print” braille text. To the left 
is an embossing printer, which embosses raised dots onto paper to form braille text, as well as raised dot tactile 
graphics. In front of the laptop is a refreshable braille display.
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 8
The Need for Technical Accessibility Standards in Assessment
The potential benefit of technology is obvious, but that potential is wasted if different 
technologies cannot work together. Puffert (2000) described a classic story of 
standardization from the early 1800s. At that time railroads in the United States used 
nine different gauges (width) of track, leading to incompatibility between rail systems 
and the free movement of passengers and cargo. When tracks were standardized to 
a single gauge beginning in 1860, rail traffic grew, enabling economic expansion and 
opportunity. The effectiveness that technology can bring to accessibility requires 
that software and devices can reliably and seamlessly work together to the benefit 
of the user. Standards-based software and hardware have the important benefit of 
driving down the cost of the technology development and acquisition, and this is 
especially true with assistive technologies. Standards can also lower the necessary 
investment in learning how to operate new hardware or software applications. The 
user benefits from consistent and robust standards for components such as (a) the 
computer’s operating system and user interface to web pages containing assessment 
items; (b) web browsers used to deliver a web page, such as Apple’s Safari® or Google’s 
Chrome™ browser; and (c) assistive technologies with screen readers and refreshable 
braille displays. Standards allow multiple vendors and technologies to work together, 
but there are many standards and they, too, need to interoperate (i.e., be able to 
work seamlessly together to achieve a common goal). When standards with a similar 
goal take different approaches to reaching that goal, the seamless, reliable ability 
to exchange information in an interoperable manner becomes difficult, increasing 
costs to convert information into a common format and resulting in inconsistent 
experiences for the users of systems based on each standard. Seeking to harmonize 
multiple accessibility standards has become a critical concern in the assessment 
community. In assessment, two technical standards have emerged that are both 
crucial to delivering digital assessments to test takers with disabilities:
•	 World Wide Web Consortium Web Content Accessibility Guidelines  
(World Wide Web Consortium, 2008)4
•	 IMS Global Learning Consortium standards (IMS GLC)5
“ Standards-based software and 
hardware have the important 
benefit of driving down 
the cost of the technology 
development and acquisition, 
and this is especially true 
with assistive technologies.”
4 http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
5 http://www.imsglobal.org/background.html
Need for Empirical Research to Support Computer-Based Testing 
Standards and Guidelines
Accessibility is becoming the norm for computer-based systems, whether it relates 
to an assessment, web-based practice material, or an item-authoring tool. Guidelines 
and requirements, such as Section 508 and the Web content accessibility guidelines 
(WCAG) (World Wide Web Consortium, 2008) provide system designers and developers 
with valuable baseline guidance on accessible design, but they are not specific to the 
context of CBT. This is particularly crucial in an assessment context. Design guidelines 
for accessibility recommend adapting content to better meet the needs of the user, 
which could require providing descriptions of complex images for persons with visual 
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
www.ets.org 9
“ The challenge for researchers 
is that new technologies 
emerge rapidly, gain rapid 
adoption, and can have 
significant impact for 
accessibility. Understanding 
the tools that test takers use 
in their daily lives will be  
key for researchers focused 
on the development of  
accessible CBT.”
impairments and alterations of visual layout for persons with low vision. However, 
a textual description of an image could invalidate an item for students with visual 
impairments if it reveals the answer when describing its salient features or spatial 
relationships. Alternate media such as embossed paper tactiles may be appropriate 
alternatives from the assessment perspective and are already in use (Greenberg, 
2012). Emerging technologies offer further options for the future, including haptic 
effects on a tablet (Hakkinen, Rice, Liimatainen, & Supalo, 2013) or 3D-printed objects 
(Siu, 2014), but these approaches will need to be verified by evidence that supports 
their appropriateness in assessments. The challenge for researchers is that new 
technologies emerge rapidly, gain rapid adoption, and can have significant impact for 
accessibility. Understanding the tools that test takers use in their daily lives will be key 
for researchers focused on the development of accessible CBT. 
Conclusion
Ensuring accessibility of computer-based assessments is vital to serving the needs of 
test takers with disabilities. While the goal is often set by legal requirements to provide 
access to education for students with disabilities, research is essential to achieving 
that goal in a way that meets the students’ needs in a valid, fair, and reliable manner. 
The key to doing this is a multipart effort. The focus must be on understanding the 
requirements of test takers with disabilities and the assistive technologies they use 
both in and out of the classroom. Knowing what works, especially in a period of 
rapid technological change, is essential in creating computer-based assessments. 
Developing and using technical standards and guidelines across the learning and 
assessment environment plays an essential role, as does harmonizing the critical 
requirements of assessment and accessibility. While there is still a long way to go, 
research and standards are showing the way forward for achieving computer-based 
assessments that can serve the needs of all test takers.
References
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, & 
National Council on Measurement in Education. (2014). Standards for educational and 
psychological testing. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. (2000). 
Bennett, R. E. (1999). Computer-based testing for examinees with disabilities: On the road 
to generalized accommodation. In S. Messick (Ed.), Assessment in higher education: 
Issues of access, quality, student development, and public policy (pp. 181–191). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Educational Testing Service. (2015). ETS standards for quality and fairness. Princeton, NJ: 
Author. http://www.ets.org/s/about/pdf/standards.pdf
European Commission. (2013). European accessibility requirements for public procurement 
of products and services in the ICT domain (European Commission Standardization 
Mandate M 376). Retrieved from http://www.mandate376.eu/ 
R&D Connections • No. 24 • June 2015
R&D Connections is published by
ETS Research & Development 
Educational Testing Service 
Rosedale Road, 19-T 
Princeton, NJ 08541-0001 
email: RDWeb@ets.org
Editor: Hans Sandberg 
Copy Editor: Eileen Kerrigan 
Layout Design: Sally Acquaviva
Visit ETS Research &  
Development on the web  
at www.ets.org/research
Follow ETS Research on Twitter®  
(@ETSresearch)
Copyright © 2015 by Educational Testing 
Service. All rights reserved. ETS and the ETS 
logo are registered trademarks of Educational 
Testing Service (ETS). MEASURING THE 
POWER OF LEARNING is a trademark of ETS. 
All other trademarks are property of their 
respective owners. 30503
Greenberg, E. (2012, June). Computer-based adaptive testing of blind students [PowerPoint® 
presentation]. Presentation at the Council of Chief State School Officers National 
Conference on Student Assessment, San Diego, CA. Retrieved from https://ccsso.
confex.com/ccsso/2012/webprogram/Presentation/Session3185/AIR%20Text%20
to%20Braille.ppt
Hakkinen, M., Rice, J., Liimatainen, J., & Supalo, C. (2013, March). Tablet-based haptic 
feedback for STEM content [PowerPoint presentation]. Presentation at the 28th Annual 
International Technology & Persons with Disabilities Conference, San Diego.
IMS Global Learning Consortium. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.imsglobal.org/ 
Individuals With Disabilities Education Improvement Act of 2004, 20 U.S.C. § 1400 et seq. 
Puffert, D. J. (2000). The standardization of track gauge on North American Railways, 
1830–1890. The Journal of Economic History, 60, 933–960.
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 29 U.S.C. § 701. 
Samuels, C. (2012). Oregon braille testing prompted in part by complaint. Education 
Week. http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/speced/2012/06/oregon_braille_testing_
prompte.html
Samuels, C. (2014, February 25). National Federation of the Blind settles lawsuit against 
PARCC. Education Week. Retrieved from http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/
speced/2014/02/national_federation_of_the_bli_1.html
Siu, Y.-T. (2014). 3D printing for accessible materials in schools – Final report. Retrieved 
from the DIAGRAM Center website: http://diagramcenter.org/wp-content/
uploads/2014/06/3D_FinalReport_SIU_3.docx
Snyder, T. D., & Dillow, S. A. (2013). Digest of education statistics, 2012 (NCES 2014-015). 
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
Thurlow, M. L., & Larson, J. (2011). Accommodations for state reading assessments: Policies 
across the nation. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota, Partnership for Accessible 
Reading Assessment.
United Nations General Assembly. (2007, January 24). Convention on the rights of persons 
with disabilities. Retrieved from http://www.un.org/disabilities/convention/
conventionfull.shtml 
United States Department of Justice. (2014, May 20). Law school admission council agrees 
to systemic reforms and $7.73 million payment to settle Justice Department’s nationwide 
disability discrimination lawsuit [Press release]. Retrieved from http://www.justice.
gov/opa/pr/law-school-admission-council-agrees-systemic-reforms-and-773-
million-payment-settle-justice 
World Health Organization, & the World Bank. (2011). World report on disability. Geneva, 
Switzerland: WHO Press.
World Wide Web Consortium. (2008). Web content accessibility guidelines 2.0. Retrieved from 
http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 

