© MASTERSERIES
Abstract:
Single carrier frequency
division multiple access (SC-
FDMA), a modified form of Orthogo-
nal FDMA (OFDMA), is a promising
technique for high data rate uplink communi-
cations in future cellular systems. SC-FDMA has
similar throughput performance and essentially the
same overall complexity as OFDMA. A principal
advantage of SC-FDMA is the peak-to-average power
ratio (PAPR), which is lower than that of OFDMA. SC-
FDMA is currently a strong candidate for the uplink multi-
ple access scheme in the Long Term Evolution of cellular
systems under consideration by the Third Generation Part-
nership Project (3GPP). In this paper, we give an overview
of SC-FDMA. We also analyze the effects of subcarrier
mapping on throughput and PAPR. Among the possible
subcarrier mapping approaches, we find that localized
FDMA (LFDMA) with channel-dependent scheduling
(CDS) results in higher throughput than interleaved
FDMA (IFDMA). However, the PAPR performance
of IFDMA is better than that of LFDMA. As in
other communications systems there are
complex tradeoffs between design
parameters and performance in  
an SC-FDMA system.
30 |||| 1556-6072/06/$20.00©2006IEEE IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE  |  SEPTEMBER 2006 
Single Carrier FDMA for Uplink 
Wireless Transmission
Hyung G. Myung, Junsung Lim, and David J. Goodman, Polytechnic University
Over the past fifteen years, the bit rates achieved incellular and local area wireless communicationssystems have increased steadily. The earliest digi-tal cellular systems, North American TDMA and
GSM employed time division multiple access. Second gen-
eration CDMA systems and the two third generation cellu-
lar systems all use direct sequence spread spectrum for
multiplexing and multiple access [1]. The highest bit
rates in commercially deployed wireless systems are
achieved by means of Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing (OFDM) in wireless LANs based on the IEEE
802.11a and IEEE 802.11g standards. The next advance in
cellular systems, under investigation by the Third Gener-
ation Partnership Project (3GPP), also anticipates the
adoption of OFDMA to achieve higher bit rates. 
1.1 Frequency Division Multiple Access
In cellular applications, a big advantage of OFDMA is its
robustness in the presence of multipath signal propaga-
tion [2]. The immunity to multipath derives from the fact
that an OFDMA system transmits information on M
orthogonal frequency carriers, each operating at 1/M
times the bit rate of the information signal. On the other
hand, the OFDMA waveform exhibits very pronounced
envelope fluctuations resulting in a high peak-to-average
power ratio (PAPR). Signals with a high PAPR require
highly linear power amplifiers to avoid excessive inter-
modulation distortion. To achieve this linearity, the ampli-
fiers have to operate with a large backoff from their peak
power. The result is low power efficiency (measured by
the ratio of transmitted power to dc power dissipated),
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
which places a significant burden on portable wireless ter-
minals. Another problem with OFDMA in cellular uplink
transmissions derives from the inevitable offset in fre-
quency references among the different terminals that
transmit simultaneously. Frequency offset destroys the
orthogonality of the transmissions, thus introducing multi-
ple access interference.
To overcome these disadvantages, 3GPP is investigat-
ing a modified form of OFDMA for uplink transmissions in
the “long-term evolution (LTE)” of cellular systems
[3]–[5]. The modified version of OFDMA, referred to as
single carrier FDMA (SC-FDMA), is the subject of this
paper. As in OFDMA, the transmitters in an SC-FDMA sys-
tem use different orthogonal frequencies (subcarriers) to
transmit information symbols. However, they transmit
the subcarriers sequentially, rather than in parallel. Rela-
tive to OFDMA, this arrangement reduces considerably
the envelope fluctuations in the transmitted waveform.
Therefore, SC-FDMA signals have inherently lower PAPR
than OFDMA signals. However, in cellular systems with
severe multipath propagation, the SC-FDMA signals arrive
at a base station with substantial intersymbol interfer-
ence. The base station employs adaptive frequency
domain equalization to cancel this interference. This
arrangement makes sense in a cellular system because it
reduces the burden of linear amplification in portable
terminals at the cost of complex signal processing (fre-
quency domain equalization) at the base station. 
1.2 Performance Measures
While PAPR is a major concern in portable terminals,
information throughput is an even more important indica-
tor of system performance. As in OFDMA, throughput in
SC-FDMA depends on the way in which information sym-
bols are applied to subcarriers. There are two approach-
es to apportioning subcarriers among terminals. In
localized SC-FDMA (LFDMA), each terminal uses a set of
adjacent subcarriers to transmit its symbols. Thus the
bandwidth of an LFDMA transmission is confined to a
fraction of the system bandwidth. The alternative to
LFDMA is distributed SC-FDMA in which the subcarriers
used by a terminal are spread over the entire signal band.
One realization of distributed SC-FDMA is interleaved
FDMA (IFDMA) where occupied subcarriers are equidis-
tant from each other [6]. Figure 1 shows
the two arrangements in the frequency
domain. There are three terminals, each
transmitting symbols on four subcarriers
in a system with a total of 12 subcarriers.
In the distributed arrangement, terminal 1
uses subcarriers 0, 3, 6, and 9; with
LFDMA it uses subcarriers 0, 1, 2, and 3.
With respect to immunity to transmis-
sion errors (which determines through-
put), distributed SC-FDMA is robust
against frequency selective fading because its informa-
tion is spread across the entire signal band. Therefore it
offers the advantage of frequency diversity. On the other
hand, LFDMA can potentially achieve multi-user diversity
in the presence of frequency selective fading if it assigns
each user to subcarriers in a portion of the signal band
where that user has favorable transmission characteris-
tics (high channel gain). Multi-user diversity relies on
independent fading among dispersed transmitters. It also
requires channel-dependent scheduling (CDS) of subcarri-
ers. CDS requires the system to monitor the channel
quality as a function of frequency for each terminal, and
adapt subcarrier assignments to changes in the channel
frequency responses of all the terminals.
In this paper, we present the results of our studies of
some of the important issues in the design of a SC-FDMA
system. In particular, we compare LFDMA and IFDMA
with respect to the two major performance indicators,
system throughput and PAPR. For each configuration, we
present throughput measures with static subcarrier
assignments and with channel dependent scheduling. We
find that as in other engineering systems there are com-
plex tradeoffs between design parameters and perfor-
mance. Configurations with the lowest PAPR tend to have
lower throughput. Therefore equipment designers and
system operators can use their judgment to find the best
tradeoff to meet their specific needs. For example, we find
that a system with many users each transmitting at a
moderate bit rate is better off with IFDMA, while LFDMA
works better in a system with a few high-bit-rate users.
This article is organized as follows. We describe the
signal processing operations in SC-FDMA and OFDMA
systems in the next section. The third section contains
the results of our analysis of PAPR. We show that IFDMA
has inherently lower PAPR than LFDMA and that both of
them are better than OFDMA with respect to PAPR. How-
ever, much of the advantage of IFDMA is eroded by the
pulse shaping that is necessary to curtail out-of-band
spectrum components prior to radio transmission. The
fourth section analyzes system throughput, with respect
to two performance measures: an upper bound on
achievable bit rate given by Shannon’s capacity formula,
and outage defined as the probability that the signal-to-
interference ratio falls below a certain threshold. The
FIGURE 1 Subcarrier allocation methods for multiple users (3 users, 12 subcarriers,
and 4 subcarriers allocated per user).
SEPTEMBER 2006  |  IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE ||| 31
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
analysis considers static subcarrier assignments and
channel dependent scheduling for LFDMA and IFDMA. It
demonstrates that LFDMA with channel-dependent
scheduling has the potential for considerably higher
capacity in terms of number of users than IFDMA. The
final section summarizes our major findings and
describes work in progress.
2. System Configuration of Single Carrier FDMA
The transmitter of an SC-FDMA system converts a binary
input signal to a sequence of modulated subcarriers. To
do so, it performs the signal processing operations
shown in Figure 2. Signal processing is repetitive in a few
different time intervals. Resource assignment takes place
in transmit time intervals (TTIs). In 3GPP LTE, a typical
TTI is 0.5 ms. The TTI is further divided into time inter-
vals referred to as blocks. A block is the time used to
transmit all of subcarriers once. At the input to the trans-
mitter, a baseband modulator transforms the binary
input to a multilevel sequence of complex numbers xn in
one of several possible modulation formats including
binary phase shift keying (BPSK), quaternary PSK (QPSK),
16 level quadrature amplitude modulation (16-QAM) and
64-QAM. The system adapts the modulation format, and
thereby the transmission bit rate, to match the current
channel conditions of each terminal. 
The transmitter next groups the modulation symbols,
xn into blocks each containing N symbols. The first step
in modulating the SC-FDMA subcarriers is to perform an
N -point discrete Fourier transform (DFT), to produce a
frequency domain representation Xk of the input sym-
bols. It then maps each of the N DFT outputs to one of
the M(> N) orthogonal subcarriers that can be transmit-
ted. As in OFDMA, a typical value of M is 256 subcarriers
and N = M/Q is an integer submultiple of M . Q is the
bandwidth expansion factor of the symbol sequence. If
all terminals transmit N symbols per block, the system
can handle Q simultaneous transmissions without co-
channel interference. The result of the subcarrier map-
ping is the set X̃l (l = 0, 1, 2, . . . , M − 1) of complex
subcarrier amplitudes, where N of the amplitudes are
non-zero. As in OFDMA, an M -point inverse DFT (IDFT)
transforms the subcarrier amplitudes to a complex time
domain signal X̃m. Each X̃m then modulates a single fre-
quency carrier and all the modulated symbols are trans-
mitted sequentially. 
The transmitter performs two other signal processing
operations prior to transmission. It inserts a set of sym-
bols referred to as a cyclic prefix (CP) in order to provide a
guard time to prevent inter-block interference (IBI) due to
multipath propagation. The transmitter also performs a
linear filtering operation referred to as pulse shaping in
order to reduce out-of-band signal energy. In general, CP is
a copy of the last part of the block, which is added at the
start of each block for a couple of reasons. First, CP acts
as a guard time between successive blocks. If the length of
the CP is longer than the maximum delay spread of the
channel, or roughly, the length of the channel impulse
response, then, there is no IBI. Second, since CP is a copy
of the last part of the block, it converts a discrete time lin-
ear convolution into a discrete
time circular convolution. Thus
transmitted data propagating
through the channel can be
modeled as a circular convolu-
tion between the channel
impulse response and the trans-
mitted data block, which in the
frequency domain is a point-
wise multiplication of the DFT
frequency samples. Then, to
remove the channel distortion,
the DFT of the received signal
can simply be divided by the
DFT of the channel impulse
response point-wise or a more
sophisticated frequency domain
equalization technique can be
implemented, as described at
the end of this section.
Figure 2 includes a block dia-
gram of an OFDMA transmitter
and receiver. It has much in
common with SC-FDMA. The
only difference is the presenceFIGURE 2 Transmitter and receiver structure of SC-FDMA and OFDMA systems.
32 |||| IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE  |  SEPTEMBER 2006 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
of the DFT in the SC-FDMA transmitter and the IDFT in the
SC-FDMA receiver. For this reason SC-FDMA is sometimes
referred to as DFT-spread OFDMA. 
Several approaches to mapping transmission symbols
Xk to SC-FDMA subcarriers are currently under consider-
ation. They are divided into two categories; distributed
and localized as shown in Figure 1. In the distributed sub-
carrier mapping mode, DFT outputs of the input data are
allocated over the entire bandwidth with zeros occupying
the unused subcarriers resulting in a non-continuous
comb-shaped spectrum. As mentioned earlier, interleaved
SC-FDMA (IFDMA) is an important special case of distrib-
uted SC-FDMA. In contrast with IFDMA, consecutive sub-
carriers are occupied by the DFT outputs of the input
data in the localized subcarrier mapping mode resulting
in a continuous spectrum that occupies a fraction of the
total available bandwidth. Subcarrier mapping methods
are further divided into static and channel dependent
scheduling (CDS) methods. CDS assigns subcarriers to
users according to the channel frequency response of
each user. For both scheduling methods, distributed sub-
carrier mapping provides frequency diversity because
the transmitted signal is spread over the entire band-
width. With distributed mapping, CDS incrementally
improves performance. By contrast CDS is of great bene-
fit with localized subcarrier mapping because it provides
significant multi-user diversity as discussed in the first
section of this paper.
Until now, we have referred in general to mappings of
the N symbols in each block onto the M > N transmis-
sion subcarriers. However, with M = 256 in a practical
system the number of possible mappings is far too large
for practical scheduling algorithms to consider. To
reduce the complexity of the mapping, subcarriers are
grouped into chunks and all of the subcarriers in a chunk
are assigned together. In our research we have studied
256 subcarriers grouped in 32 chunks of 8 subcarriers
per chunk or 16 chunks with 16 subcarriers per chunk.
Figure 3 shows an example of SC-FDMA transmit symbols
in the frequency domain for N = 4, Q = 3 and M = 12.
After subcarrier mapping, the frequency data is trans-
formed back to the time domain by applying M -point
inverse DFT (IDFT). As in Figure 1, different users occupy
different orthogonal subcarriers. 
For IFDMA, time symbols are simply a repetition of
the original input symbols with a systematic phase
rotation applied to each symbol in the time domain [6].
Therefore, the PAPR of IFDMA signal is the same as in
the case of a conventional single carrier signal. In the
case of LFDMA, the time signal has exact copies of
input time symbols in N sample positions. The other
M -N time samples are weighted sums of all the sym-
bols in the input block [7]. Figure 4 shows an example
of IFDMA and LFDMA signals that occupy the chunk
that includes subcarrier zero.
The receiver transforms the received signal into the
frequency domain via DFT, de-maps the subcarriers, and
then performs frequency domain equalization. Because
SC-FDMA uses single carrier modulation, it suffers from
intersymbol interference (ISI) and thus equalization is
necessary to combat the ISI. Practical considerations
favor minimum mean square error (MMSE) frequency
domain equalization. MMSE is generally preferred over
zero forcing (ZF) due to the robustness against noise. The
equalized symbols are transformed back to the time
domain via IDFT, and detection and decoding take place
in the time domain.
Relative to OFDMA, there is a fundamental difference
in the SC-FDMA receiver equalization and detection
processes. Since each data symbol is conveyed on indi-
vidual subcarriers in OFDMA, channel equalization or
FIGURE 3 An example of SC-FDMA transmit symbols in the fre-
quency domain for N = 4 subcarriers per user, Q = 3 users, and
M = 12 subcarriers in the system. X̃l,Distributed denotes transmit
symbols for distributed subcarrier mapping scheme and X̃l,Localized
denotes transmit symbols for localized subcarrier mapping scheme.
FIGURE 4 An example of SC-FDMA transmit symbols in the time
domain for N = 4, Q = 3, and M = 12.
SEPTEMBER 2006  |  IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE ||| 33
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
inversion is performed individually on each subcarrier
and data detection is also carried out on each subcarrier.
Thus, a null in the channel spectrum severely degrades
the system performance since there is essentially no way
to recover the data that is affected by the null. To protect
individual subcarriers from frequency nulls in the chan-
nel, channel coding or power/rate adaptation is required
for OFDMA. In the case of SC-FDMA, channel equalization
is done similarly in the frequency domain but data detec-
tion is performed after the frequency domain equalized
data is reverted back to time domain by IDFT. Hence, it is
more robust to spectral nulls compared to OFDMA since
the noise is averaged out over the entire bandwidth.
Additional disadvantages of OFDMA compared to SC-
FDMA are the strong sensitivity to carrier frequency off-
set and strong sensitivity to nonlinear distortion in the
power amplifier due to the high PAPR, both properties of
the multicarrier nature of OFDMA [8], [9].
The next two sections of this paper demonstrate that the
details of the subcarrier mapping have a strong effect on the
two main performance measures: PAPR and throughput. We
also describe how the pulse shaping influences PAPR. 
3. PAPR analysis of SC-FDMA
In this section, we analyze the PAPR of the SC-FDMA sig-
nal. We use the notation in Figure 3 and assume that the
total number of subcarriers is M = Q · N , where N is the
number of subcarriers per block. The integer Q is the
maximum number of terminals that can transmit simulta-
neously. For distributed subcarrier mapping, we consider
the case of IFDMA with subcarriers equally spaced over
the system bandwidth.
The PAPR is defined as the ratio of peak power to aver-
age power of the transmitted signal in a given transmis-
sion block. Without pulse shaping, that is, using
rectangular pulse shaping, symbol rate sampling will give
the same PAPR as the continuous time domain case since
an SC-FDMA signal is modulated over a single carrier.
To evaluate PAPR of individual system configurations,
we have simulated the transmission of 105 blocks of sym-
bols. After calculating PAPR for each block, we present
the data as an empirical CCDF (Complementary Cumula-
tive Distribution Function). The CCDF is the probability
that PAPR is higher than a certain PAPR value PAPR0
(Pr{PAPR > PAPR0}). Our simulations apply to 256 subcar-
riers in a transmission bandwidth of 5 MHz. The data block
size is N = 64 and the spreading factor is Q = M/N = 4.
We used 8 times oversampling to calculate PAPR for each
block when pulse shaping is considered. To evaluate the
effects of pulse shaping on SC-FDMA, we convolved each
transmitted symbol waveform with a raised cosine pulse
truncated from −6T to +6T , where T seconds is the sym-
bol duration. No pulse shaping was applied in the case
OFDMA. The impulse response of a raised cosine filter is,
r(t ) = sinc
(
π
t
T
)
cos
(
παt
T
)
1 − 4α2t2T2
(1)
where the parameter α(0 ≤ α ≤ 1) is referred to as the
rolloff factor. Lower values of α introduce more pulse
shaping and more suppression of out-of-band- signal
components.
Figure 5 contains plots of the distribution (CCDF) of
PAPR for IFDMA, LFDMA, and OFDMA. For each example,
FIGURE 5 Comparison of CCDF of PAPR for IFDMA, LFDMA, and OFDMA with M = 256 system subcarriers, N = 64 subcarriers per user,
and a = 0.5 rolloff factor; (a) QPSK; (b) 16-QAM.
34 |||| IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE  |  SEPTEMBER 2006 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
we observe the PAPR0 value that is exceeded with proba-
bility less than 0.1% (Pr{PAPR > PAPR0} = 10−3), or 99.9-
percentile PAPR. First, in the case of no pulse shaping,
the PAPR of IFDMA is 10.5 dB lower than the PAPR of
OFDMA for QPSK modulation. The difference is 7 dB for
16-QAM. The PAPR of LFDMA is lower than the PAPR of
OFDMA by 3 dB for QPSK. The difference is 2 dB for 16-
QAM. Therefore LFDMA has 7.5 dB higher PAPR than
IFDMA with QPSK and 5 dB higher PAPR for 16-QAM. With
raised-cosine pulse shaping with rolloff factor of 0.5,
PAPR increases significantly for IFDMA whereas PAPR of
LFDMA hardly increases.
Figure 6 also shows that raised-cosine pulse shaping is
more harmful in terms of PAPR for IFDMA than it is for
LFDMA. As the rolloff factor α increases from 0 to 1 (pro-
gressively less rolloff), PAPR decreases significantly for
IFDMA. This implies that there is a tradeoff between PAPR
performance and out-of-band radiation since out-of-band
radiation increases with increasing rolloff factor.
We also relate the PAPR to RF transmit power
amplifier efficiency. In an ideal linear power amplifier
where linear amplification is achieved up to the satu-
ration point, maximum power efficiency is achieved
when the amplifier is operating at the saturation point.
To prevent distortion in the presence of PAPR, trans-
mit power backoff is needed to operate the power
amplifier in the linear region. 
Together, Figures 5 and 6 show that SC-FDMA signals
indeed have lower PAPR than OFDMA signals. Also,
LFDMA incurs higher PAPR compared to IFDMA but,
compared to OFDMA, it is lower, though not significant-
ly. Another noticeable fact is that pulse shaping signifi-
cantly increases the PAPR of IFDMA. A pulse shaping
filter should be designed carefully in order to limit the
PAPR without degrading the system performance. In
general, IFDMA is more desirable than LFDMA in terms
of PAPR and power efficiency. However, in terms of sys-
tem throughput, we will show in the next section that
LFDMA is clearly superior when channel-dependent
scheduling is utilized [10].
4. Channel-Dependent Scheduling (CDS) 
for Uplink SC-FDMA
In this section, we investigate channel-dependent
resource scheduling for an SC-FDMA system in uplink
communications. A key question of CDS is how we should
allocate time and frequency resources fairly among users
while achieving multi-user diversity and frequency selec-
tive diversity. To do so, we introduce utility-based sched-
uling where utility is an economic concept representing
level of satisfaction. The choice of a utility measure influ-
ences the tradeoff between overall efficiency and fairness
among users. In our studies, we consider two different
utility functions: aggregate user throughput for maximiz-
ing system capacity and aggregate logarithmic user
throughput for maximizing proportional fairness [11],
[12]. The objective is to find an optimum chunk assign-
ment for all users in order to maximize the sum of user
utility at each transmit time interval (TTI). If the user
throughput is regarded as the utility function, the
FIGURE 6 Comparison of CCDF of PAPR for IFDMA and LFDMA with M = 256 system subcarriers, N = 64 subcarriers per user, and rolloff
factor α of 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1; (a) QPSK; (b) 16-QAM.
SEPTEMBER 2006  |  IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE ||| 35
A KEY QUESTION OF CHANNEL DEPENDENT
SCHEDULING IS HOW WE SHOULD ALLOCATE TIME
AND FREQUENCY RESOURCES FAIRLY AMONG
USERS WHILE ACHIEVING MULTI-USER DIVERSITY
AND FREQUENCY SELECTIVE DIVERSITY.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
resource allocation maximizes rate-sum capacity ignoring
fairness among users. Therefore, only the users near the
base station who have the best channel conditions occu-
py most of the resources. On the other hand, setting the
logarithmic user data rate as the utility function provides
proportional fairness.
In considering the optimization problem of CDS for
multicarrier multiple access, it is theoretically possible to
assume that the scheduler can assign subcarriers individ-
ually. Allocating individual subcarriers is, however, a pro-
hibitively complex combinatorial optimization problem in
systems with 256 subcarriers and on the order of ten ter-
minals transmitting simultaneously. Moreover, assigning
subcarriers individually would introduce unacceptable
control signaling overhead. In practice, the units of
resource allocation are chunks, which are disjoint sets of
subcarriers. As a practical matter chunk-based transmis-
sion is desirable since the input data symbols are
grouped into a block for DFT operation before subcarrier
mapping. We will consider only chunk-based scheduling
in the remainder of this section. With regards to chunk
structure, there is a restriction on chunk selection for
IFDMA such that all assigned subcarriers should be
equidistant in order to maintain the lowest PAPR [13]. 
Even with subcarriers assigned in chunks, optimum
scheduling is extremely complex for two reasons: 1) The
objective function is complicated, consisting of nonlinear
and discrete constraints dependent on the combined chan-
nel gains of the assigned subcarriers; and 2) there is a total
transmit power constraint for each user. Furthermore, the
optimum solution entails combinatorial comparisons with
high complexity. Instead of directly solving the optimiza-
tion problem, a sub-optimal
chunk allocation scheme
can be used for both IFDMA
and LFDMA to obtain most
of the benefits of CDS. For
LFDMA, a greedy chunk
selection method can be
applied where each chunk
is assigned to the user who
can maximize the marginal
utility when occupying the
specific chunk. For IFDMA,
the benefit of multi-user
diversity can be achieved
by selecting users in order
of the estimated marginal
utility based on the average
channel condition over the
entire set of subcarriers.
The users with higher chan-
nel gains may occupy a
larger number of chunks
than users with lower chan-
nel gains [10]. 
Our throughput mea-
sure in this study is the
sum of the upper bound
on user throughputs given
by Shannon’s formula,
C = B log(1 + S N R) where
B is the effective band-
width depending on the
number of occupied sub-
carriers and SNR is signal-
to-noise ratio of a block. 
Figures 7, 8, and 9 are
the results of computer sim-
ulations of SC-FDMA with
256 subcarriers spread over
FIGURE 7 Comparison of rate-sum capacity with M = 256 system subcarriers, N = 8 subcarriers per
user, bandwidth = 5 MHz, and noise power per Hz = −160 dBm; (a) utility function: sum of user
throughputs; (b) utility function: sum of the logarithm of user throughputs.
FIGURE 8 Average user data rate as a function of user distances with M = 256 system subcarriers,
N = 8 subcarriers per user, bandwidth = 5 MHz, and noise power per Hz = −60 dBm; (a) utility function:
sum of user throughputs; (b) utility function: sum of the logarithm of user throughputs.
36 |||| IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE  |  SEPTEMBER 2006 
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
a 5 MHz band. They compare the effects of channel depen-
dent subcarrier allocation (S) with static (round-robin)
scheduling (R) for localized FDMA (L-FDMA) and inter-
leaved FDMA (I-FDMA). In all of the examples, the schedul-
ing took place with chunks containing 8 subcarriers.
Figure 7 shows two effects of applying different utility
functions in the scheduling algorithm. In the two graphs
in Figure 7, the utility functions are the sum of user
throughputs and the sum of the logarithm of user
throughputs, respectively. Each graph shows the aggre-
gate throughput as a function of the number of simultane-
ous transmissions. Figure 8 shows the expected user
throughput at each distance from the base station for the
same utility functions. The simulation results in the fig-
ures use the following abbreviations: R-LFDMA (static
round robin scheduling of LFDMA), S-LFDMA (CDS of
LFDMA), R-IFDMA (static round robin scheduling of
IFDMA), and S-IFDMA (CDS of IFDMA).
Figure 7 shows that for throughput maximization
(utility=bit rate), the advantage of channel dependent
scheduling over round robin scheduling increases as the
number of users increases. This is because the sched-
uler selects the closer users who can transmit at higher
data rate. If there are more users, the possibility of
locating users at closer distance to the base station
increases. As a result, the CDS achieves significant
improvements for both IFDMA and LFDMA. In the case
of logarithmic rate utility, the CDS gain stops increasing
beyond approximately 32 users. With 32 users, maximiz-
ing logarithmic rate utility can increase system capacity
by a factor of 1.8 for LFDMA and 1.26 for IFDMA relative
to static scheduling.
Figure 8 shows that the CDS scheme based on the loga-
rithm of user throughput as a utility function provides
proportional fairness whose gains are shared among all
users, whereas the CDS gains are concentrated to the
users near the base station when the user throughput is
considered as the utility function.
Figure 9 shows the outage probability which is
defined as the probability that the average user through-
put is lower than the minimum required data rate after
100 msec. Considering user capacity at 1% outage prob-
ability and minimum required rate of 144 Kbps, round
robin scheduling supports less than 20 users but CDS
schemes can support 24 users for
IFDMA and 48 users for LFDMA. Table
I compares round robin scheduling
and utility-based scheduling with log-
arithmic user data rate with respect
to system capacity and fairness.
For static subcarrier assignment
(round robin scheduling), a system
with users each transmitting at a
moderate data rate is better off with
IFDMA while LFDMA works better in
a system with a few high date rate users. Due to the
advantages of lower outage probability and lower
PAPR, IFDMA is an attractive approach to static subcar-
rier scheduling. For channel-dependent scheduling,
LFDMA has the potential for considerably higher data
rate. The results show that CDS increases system
throughput by up to 80% relative to static scheduling
for LFDMA but the increase is only 26% for IFDMA. The
scheduling gains in LFDMA can be exploited to reduce
power consumption and PAPR by using power control
to establish a power margin instead of increasing sys-
tem capacity.
FIGURE 9 Outage probability (utility: logarithmic user data rate,
minimum required data rate = 144 Kbps, M = 256, system subcar-
riers, N = 8 subcarriers per user, bandwidth = 5 MHz, and noise
power per Hz = −160 dBm).
Type S-LFDMA R-LFDMA S-IFDMA R-IFDMA
Rate-sum capacity 18 Mbps 10 Mbps 12 Mbps 9.55 Mbps
(32 users)
Fairness (32 users) 0.417 0.334 0.352 0.334
User capacity 48 users Less than 20 24 users Less than 20
Fairness = average user data rate of users at the cell boundary (900 m – 1 km)/average user data rate.
User capacity: Number of users achieving 1% outage probability when the minimum rate equals to 144 Kbps.
TABLE 1 Comparisons between utility-based scheduling
and round-robin scheduling (logarithmic rate utility).
SEPTEMBER 2006  |  IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE ||| 37
RESULTS SHOW THAT CHANNEL DEPENDENT
SCHEDULING INCREASES SYSTEM THROUGHPUT BY
UP TO 80% RELATIVE TO STATIC SCHEDULING FOR
LOCALISED FDMA BUT THE INCREASE IS ONLY
26% FOR INTERLEAVED FDMA.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
5. Conclusions
SC-FDMA is a promising technique for high data rate
uplink communication in future cellular systems. Within a
specific SC-FDMA system configuration, there are many
design and operational choices that affect performance in
a complex manner. In this paper, we have focused on the
effects of subcarrier mapping on throughput and peak-to-
average power ratio (PAPR). Among the possible subcar-
rier mapping approaches, we find that localized FDMA
(LFDMA) with channel-dependent scheduling (CDS)
results in higher throughput than interleaved FDMA
(IFDMA). However, the PAPR performance of IFDMA is
better by 4 to 7 dB than that of LFDMA. When we consid-
er the pulse shaping necessary to control adjacent chan-
nel interference, we find a narrower difference between
LFDMA and IFDMA in terms of PAPR performance.
Our work in progress is an investigation of the impact
of channel estimation error on the throughput perfor-
mance of SC-FDMA. Effective scheduling depends on
accurate information about the frequency response of the
radio channels linking terminals to an SC-FDMA base sta-
tion. Channel estimation errors are caused by noisy esti-
mation and changes in channel properties. The errors
degrade the performance of CDS by causing incorrect
adaptation of the modulation technique and incorrect
assignment of subcarriers to users. Our research aims to
quantify the effects of these errors. 
Author Information
Hyung G. Myung received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in EE
from Seoul National University, South Korea, and the M.S.
degree in applied mathematics from Santa Clara Universi-
ty. He is currently working towards his Ph.D. degree at
Polytechnic University, Brooklyn. From 1997 to 1999, he
was with Republic of Korea Air Force Academy as an aca-
demic instructor. From 2001 to 2003, he was with Array-
Comm as a software engineer. In summer of 2005, he was
an intern at Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
and from February to August of 2006, he was an intern at
InterDigital. His research interests include DSP for com-
munications and wireless communications. For more
information, visit http://hgmyung.googlepages.com/.
Junsung Lim received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering from Hallym University, South Korea, in 1999,
the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Sogang Uni-
versity, South Korea, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree at the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department of Poly-
technic University, Brooklyn, NY in 2006.
He was a summer intern in System Archi-
tecture Group of InterDigital Communica-
tion Corporation, Melville, NY, in 2005,
and has a pending patent resulting from
the works. He is currently with Samsung
Electronics. His current research inter-
ests are single-carrier frequency division
multiple access, resource management, and system per-
formance for wireless communications.
David J. Goodman (M’67-SM’86-F’88) is currently a
Program Director at the National Science Foundation on
leave from his position as Professor of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Polytechnic University, 
Brooklyn, New York. At Poly, he was Director of WICAT,
the Wireless Internet Center of Advanced Technology, a
National Science Foundation Industry/University Cooper-
ative Research Center. Prior to joining Poly in 1999, he
was at Rutgers University where he was founding director
of WINLAB, the Wireless Information Network Laboratory.
Until 1988, he was a Department Head in Communications
Systems Research at AT&T Bell Laboratories. Dr. 
Goodman was recently elected to the National Academy
of Engineering in recognition of his contributions to digi-
tal signal processing and wireless communications.
References
1. D.J. Goodman, Wireless Personal Communications Systems, Addison-Wesley,
1997.
2. R. van Nee and R. Prasad, OFDM for Wireless Multimedia Communications,
Artech House, 2000.
3. H. Ekström, A. Furuskär, J. Karlsson, M. Meyer, S. Parkvall, J. Torsner, and M.
Wahlqvist, “Technical Solutions for the 3G Long-Term Evolution,” IEEE Com-
mun. Mag., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 38–45, Mar. 2006.
4. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP); Requirements for Evolved UTRA (E-
UTRA) and Evolved UTRAN (E-UTRAN), http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-
info/25913.htm.
5. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP); Technical Specification Group
Radio Access Network; Physical Layer Aspects for Evolved UTRA,
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/25814.htm.
6. U. Sorger, I. De Broeck, and M. Schnell, “Interleaved FDMA—A New Spread-
Spectrum Multiple-Access Scheme,” Proc. IEEE ICC ‘98, Atlanta, GA, pp.
1013–1017, June 1998.
7. H.G. Myung, J. Lim, and D.J. Goodman, “Peak-to-Average Power Ratio of Single
Carrier FDMA Signals with Pulse Shaping,” to be presented at The 17th Annual
IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communica-
tions (PIMRC ‘06), Helsinki, Finland, Sep. 2006.
8. D. Falconer, S.L. Ariyavisitakul, A. Benyamin-Seeyar, and B. Eidson, “Frequency
Domain Equalization for Single-Carrier Broadband Wireless Systems,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 58–66, Apr. 2002.
9. H. Sari, G. Karam, and I. Jeanclaude, “Transmission Techniques for Digital Ter-
restrial TV Broadcasting,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 100–109, Feb.
1995.
10. J. Lim, H.G. Myung, and D.J. Goodman, “Proportional Fair Scheduling of Uplink
Single-Carrier FDMA Systems,” to be presented at The 17th Annual IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC
‘06), Helsinki, Finland, Sep. 2006.
11. G. Song and Y. Li, “Cross-layer Optimization for OFDMA Wireless Networks-Part
II: Algorithm Development,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 4, pp. 625–634, Mar.
2005.
12. Z. Han, Z. Ji, and K. Liu, “Fair Multiuser Channel Allocation for OFDMA Net-
works Using Nash Bargaining Solutions and Coalitions,” IEEE Trans. on Com-
mun., pp. 1366–1376, Aug. 2005.
13. R. Dinis, D. Falconer, C.T. Lam, and M. Sabbaghian, “A Multiple Access Scheme
for the Uplink of Broadband Wireless Systems,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM ’04, vol.
6, Dallas, TX, pp. 3808–3812, Dec. 2004.
38 |||| IEEE VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE  |  SEPTEMBER 2006 
RESULTS SHOW THAT SINGLE CARRIER FREQUENCY DIVISION
MULTIPLE ACCESS (SCFDMA) IS A PROMISING TECHNIQUE FOR
HIGH DATA RATE UPLINK COMMUNICATIONS IN FUTURE CELLULAR
SYSTEMS, THOUGH THERE ARE MANY DESIGN AND OPERATIONAL
ASPECTS THAT AFFECT PERFORMANCE.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIJING UNIVERSITY OF POST AND TELECOM. Downloaded on November 11, 2008 at 07:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

