1Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 2010
Unit 2: Computer Systems 
Unit code: M/601/7261
QCF Level 3: BTEC National
Credit value: 10
Guided learning hours: 60
Aim and purpose
The aim of this unit is to enable learners to understand the components of computer systems and develop 
the skills needed to recommend appropriate systems for business purposes and set up and maintain 
computer systems.
Unit introduction
At some stage most IT professionals will have to set up and customise a computer system or systems. To do 
so effectively they will need to understand the components that make up computer systems. The operating 
system interacts with the hardware and software components in order to make a functioning machine. 
In this unit learners will consider a range of hardware and come to understand the technical specifications of 
components. There are a number of different operating systems, despite the dominance of the Microsoft 
operating system, and learners will explore at least one other. In terms of software, the operating system itself 
often provides utility programmes that assist the user in managing the machine. Other third party software 
utility programmes such as virus checkers are also used extensively. This unit considers both types of utility 
software. 
IT professionals will often be asked to recommend systems for varied user needs. There are many different 
manufacturers of computer systems and each manufacturer produces a wide range of models with 
different specifications. Deciding which particular model is appropriate for a given situation depends on a 
variety of factors. These factors are explored in this unit so that learners can make informed choices when 
recommending computer systems.
IT professionals also need to develop the skills required to install and configure computer systems. A large part 
of this unit will involve practical work in installing hardware components and software, configuring systems to 
meet specific requirements and testing to ensure a fully functioning system is produced.
Learning outcomes
On completion of this unit a learner should:
1 Understand the components of computer systems 
2 Be able to recommend computer systems for a business purpose
3 Be able to set up and maintain computer systems.
Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology
– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 20102
Unit content
1 Understand the components of computer systems 
Internal system unit components: processors; motherboard; BIOS; power supply; fan and heat sink or 
cooling; hard drive configuration and controllers eg SATA, IDE, EIDE, master, slave; ports eg USB, parallel, 
serial; internal memory eg RAM, ROM, cache; specialized cards eg network, graphic cards
Peripherals: output devices eg monitor, printer, plotter; input devices eg camera, scanner; cabling eg 
coaxial, optical, twisted pair
Backing storage: types eg disks, pen drives, optical media, flash memory cards; portable and fixed drives; 
performance factors eg data transfer rate, capacity
Operating system software: operating system examples eg LINUX, Windows, DOS, MAC OS; command 
line and GUI operating systems; operating system functions and services eg machine and peripheral 
management, security, file management; device drivers; features eg ability to customize, support for 
connectivity of portable media, security, stability and reliability, ease of management, associated utilities, 
cost and support for the user.
Software utilities: security eg virus protection, firewalls; clean up tools eg for removal of cookies, internet 
history, defragmentation; drive formatting
2 Be able to recommend computer systems for a business purpose
Considerations for selection: cost; user requirements eg software to be used, network sharing, need for 
maintenance contract, outputs required, need for integration with other systems eg home entertainment; 
processing power, storage capacity, accessibility for disabled users, the ICT competence of the intended 
user, training requirements
3 Be able to set up and maintain computer systems
Connect and set up: equipment eg monitor, printer, modem/router, keyboard, mouse, speakers, 
microphone, RAM, hard drive
Install hardware: components eg graphics card, sound card, CD/DVD drive
Install software: operating system software eg Windows; applications software eg Microsoft Office; security 
software eg virus checkers, firewalls; device drivers; create appropriate directory/folder structures
Configure: BIOS configuration eg setting a BIOS password, editing power management options; editing 
anti-virus configurations; editing the desktop eg icon size, font size, colour, background, icon choice; 
creating start-up options; setting file sharing/permissions; creating and reconfiguring application toolbars
Testing: functionality eg software applications open and work as intended, default folder settings are 
correct, desktop shortcuts go to the right place, the correct device drivers are installed, the correct paper 
sizes are set for printing, menu options work as intended, the correct date and time are set
Routine maintenance: organisation and naming of files; back-up procedures eg online, off-line; back-
up media; automatic scheduling and deletion of unwanted data; archiving; defragmentation; deleting 
temporary files; cleaning hardware eg keyboard, mouse, display screen equipment (DSE), ventilation 
grills; replacing consumables eg printer paper, ink or toner cartridges; replacing damaged components
3Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 2010
Assessment and grading criteria
In order to pass this unit, the evidence that the learner presents for assessment needs to demonstrate that 
they can meet all the learning outcomes for the unit. The assessment criteria for a pass grade describe the 
level of achievement required to pass this unit.
Assessment and grading criteria
To achieve a pass grade the 
evidence must show that the 
learner is able to:
To achieve a merit grade the 
evidence must show that, in 
addition to the pass criteria, 
the learner is able to:
To achieve a distinction grade 
the evidence must show that, 
in addition to the pass and 
merit criteria, the learner is 
able to:
P1 explain the function of 
computer hardware 
components
 
P2 explain the purpose of 
operating systems
M1  compare the features 
and functions of different 
operating systems
P3 explain the purpose of 
different software utilities
D1  explain how software utilities 
can improve the performance 
of computer systems
P4 recommend a computer 
system for a given business 
purpose
[IE1, IE2]
M2 justify choice of computer 
system to meet a given 
business purpose
[IE6]
P5 set up a standalone computer 
system, installing hardware 
and software components
[SM3]
P6  configure a computer system 
to meet user needs
P7 test a configured computer 
system for functionality
M3  evaluate the performance of 
a computer system.
[IE4]
D2  explain and justify 
improvements that could be 
made to a computer system.
P8 undertake routine 
maintenance tasks on a 
standalone computer system.
PLTS: This summary references where applicable, in the square brackets, the elements of the personal, 
learning and thinking skills applicable in the pass criteria. It identifies opportunities for learners to demonstrate 
effective application of the referenced elements of the skills.
Key IE – independent enquirers
CT – creative thinkers
RL – reflective learners 
TW – team workers
SM – self-managers
EP – effective participators
Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology
– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 20104
Essential guidance for tutors
Delivery
The way in which the content is ordered can guide the delivery as outlined in the outline learning plan.
To start with, learners could research the different internal and external hardware components of computer 
systems and develop their own ‘Dummies Guide’. They should be encouraged to investigate cutting-edge 
technology, not just the safe options. This can be supported with practical sessions where learners can see 
and handle the components. A stock of redundant or superseded components is a useful aid.
Facilities will need to be available for learners to practise installing both hardware and software components 
as outlined in the unit content. Note this is for stand-alone machines. This needs to be done under careful 
supervision, not least to ensure longevity of resources. Health and safety must be a priority and learners must 
be taught how to work in a safe manner. It should become second nature for learners to take appropriate 
precautions using static mats and wristbands when handling hardware components. Health and safety issues 
relating to electrical appliances and use of tools also need to be addressed.
One possible strategy is for learners to first work on ‘dead’ computers, or even just components not in a 
casing, before progressing on to a ‘live’ machine as their skills develop.
Learners will need opportunities to practise configuring systems to meet specific requirements. A variety of 
requirements should be covered as outlined in the unit content.
Good practice in planning and recording testing should be developed as practical work progresses.
While it will be natural to concentrate on the operating system in use in the centre, learners must be given 
the opportunity to work with at least one other system, and understand other operating systems as outlined 
in the content.
A range of software utilities should be investigated. Learners will be familiar with virus protection and firewalls 
and useful research can be undertaken to discover the latest threats and barriers. It may be difficult for 
learners to use clean-up tools on the centre systems but they should understand the range and function of 
these tools.
Once a basic understanding of components is in place, learners can start researching component costs and 
compatibilities. It can be useful to compile a comparative table, which will help when it comes to assessment.
Using case studies will help learners to understand how to select a system set up for a particular user 
requirement. As many different scenarios as possible should be used. Commercially available computer 
systems should be investigated and assessed for compatibility as well as considering building a system from its 
component parts. 
5Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 2010
Outline learning plan
The outline learning plan has been included in this unit as guidance and can be used in conjunction with the 
programme of suggested assignments.
The outline learning plan demonstrates one way in planning the delivery and assessment of this unit. 
Topic and suggested assignments/activities and/assessment
Introduction to the unit
Components of computer systems:
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on internal system unit components, followed by practical exercise
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on backing store, followed by practical exercise
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on peripherals, followed by practical exercise
a mixture of practical exploration of the technologies and detailed investigation
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on operating system software, followed by practical exercise 
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on software utilities, followed by practical exercise 
a mixture of practical exploration of the technologies, learner exercises and detailed investigation.
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Assignment 1 – Decoding the Jargon
Installing and testing hardware:
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on test plans and test records, followed by practical exercise 
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on precautions (static mats etc), followed by practical exercise
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on health and safety regulations
practical installation of hardware.
●
●
●
●
Installing and testing software:
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on test plans and test records, followed by practical exercise
practical installation of software
whole-class exercise – tutor presentation on configuring system settings, types of settings and reasons for 
changing them, followed by practical exercise
practical tasks and tutor demonstrations.
●
●
●
●
Selecting systems:
whole-class exercise – directed research followed by group discussion on user needs and other 
considerations
research, case studies, exercises.
●
●
Assignment 2 – The Best Solution
Assignment 3 – Setting up the System
Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology
– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 20106
Assessment
The suggested assessment of this unit is through the three assignments summarised in the Programme of 
suggested assignments (PSA) table below. 
Suggested Assignment 1 – Decoding the Jargon
For P1, evidence such as diagrams or photographs with clear supporting notes will be sufficient. An alternative 
form of evidence is a web page with hot-spots over different components explaining what the components 
are. The communication between components must be identified. It is possible that everything could be 
identified within one diagram. 
Alternatively, learners could give a demonstration to the tutor with documented questions and answers or 
undertake a short test. However, if a test is used, learners must show competence in all areas of the unit 
content and not just achieve a certain percentage. Potentially, a detailed diagram or poster supplemented by a 
short test would be appropriate.
For P2, learners should outline the basic functions of operating systems in general, explaining how they are 
used to facilitate users.
For M1, learners must review the features and functions of different operating systems. Learners will need to present 
a comparison of selected operating systems, summarising their respective strengths and weaknesses in context. 
Suggested Assignment 2 – The Best Solution
For this assignment learners will need to be given a detailed business requirement. This need not be the same 
as that for the installation assignment (see below), indeed separating the two may give more scope for varying 
the detail given to learners and allow for more unusual requirements to be included.
For P3, a table is an appropriate format for structuring the information. Learners are required to give one 
example from each category of software utilities defined in the content. 
For P4, learners could present the evidence as a report or presentation. The choice of components should 
be briefly explained but may not make reference to all the user requirements. It is important that the final 
specification includes all the necessary hardware and software components for the system to work.
For M2, learners must justify why the system set up was chosen, eg cost, and suggest alternative set ups (at 
least one) and discuss why they could also be appropriate. The reasons for the choices should be clearly 
explained and referenced to the user need. Any optional extras must be justified.
For D1, learners must consider the benefits of computer performance created by using software utilities. In 
this case, learners should give reasons for possible improvements from using a specific utility.
Suggested Assignment 3 – Setting up the System 
Ideally, the same business requirement used in Suggested Assignment 2 will be used for this assignment. 
However, that may not be possible, in which case another scenario can be used to match the hardware/
software available for installation.
For P5, learners must install at least one hardware and one software component in a stand-alone system. This 
is best evidenced with a witness statement or observation record and screenshots. Learners must use suitable 
safety equipment/tools and pay due regard to health and safety issues.
For P6, learners must configure some basic system settings, such as left and right mouse buttons, power-
saving options, screen resolution, desktop theme, font size, default language setting, default folder locations 
etc. They may have needed considerable prompting to do so. This is best evidenced with a witness statement 
or observation record and screenshots. To achieve M3, learners will have configured system and software 
settings in order to make the system more appropriate for the specified purpose.
For P7, evidence will be provided by a test plan and subsequent test results. Screenshots may be relevant. 
Any test failures should be explained, with reasons.
7Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 2010
For P8, evidence will be provided by a short report with screengrabs.
M3 is an extension of P7. Learners should gauge system performance in their tests and evaluating the data.
For D2, learners should offer suggestions on how the system could be improved, considering costs involved 
and potential benefits gained.
Programme of suggested assignments
The table below shows a programme of suggested assignments that cover the pass, merit and distinction 
criteria in the assessment and grading grid. This is for guidance and it is recommended that centres either 
write their own assignments or adapt any Edexcel assignments to meet local needs and resources.
Criteria covered Assignment title Scenario Assessment method
P1, P2, M1 Decoding the Jargon A business manager has 
asked for a presentation on 
computer components for 
staff development purposes.
Diagrams
Notes
Comparative tables
P3, P4, M2, D1 The Best Solution You are to recommend 
a suitable hardware and 
software configuration 
for a specific business 
requirement.
Presentation
Supporting handouts
P5-P8, M3, D2 Setting up the System Install, configure and test 
system components.
Perform routine 
maintenance.
Witness statement
Observation records
Screenshots
Test records
Report
Links to National Occupational Standards, other BTEC units, other BTEC 
qualifi cations and other relevant units and qualifi cations
This unit forms part of the BTEC in IT sector suite. This unit has particular links with the following unit titles in 
the IT suite:
Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
Unit 3: Computer Systems Unit 9: Computer Networks Unit 26: Design a Small Office 
Home Office Network
Unit 25: Maintaining Computer 
Systems
This unit maps to some of the underpinning knowledge from the following areas of competence in the 
Level 3 National Occupational Standards for IT (ProCom):
4.1 Systems Architecture
4.3 Human Needs Analysis
4.4 Systems Analysis
4.7 Systems Design.
●
●
●
●
Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology
– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 20108
Essential resources
Learners will need access to practical resources and suitable technology, they can also use simulators or 
multimedia tools to gain experience before handling ‘live resources’. Learners will require access to computer 
equipment to enable them to gain a practical awareness and enable them to apply their knowledge and 
understanding in a practical situation.
Employer engagement and vocational contexts
The use of vocational context is essential in the delivery and assessment of this unit. 
There is a range of organisations that may be able to help centres engage and involve local employers in the 
delivery of this unit, for example:
Work Experience/Workplace learning frameworks – Centre for Education and Industry (CEI University of 
Warwick) – www.warwick.ac.uk/wie/cei
Learning and Skills Network – www.vocationallearning.org.uk
Network for Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths Network Ambassadors Scheme –
www.stemnet.org.uk
National Education and Business Partnership Network – www.nebpn.org
Local, regional business links – www.businesslink.gov.uk
Work-based learning guidance – www.aimhighersw.ac.uk/wbl.htm.
Indicative reading for learners
Textbooks
Anderson H and Yull S – BTEC Nationals IT Practitioners: Core Units for Computing and IT (Newnes, 2002) 
ISBN-10 0750656840, ISBN-13 978-0750656849
Fulton J – Complete Idiot’s Guide to Upgrading and Repairing PCs, 4th Edition (Alpha, 1999) 
ISBN-10 0789722062, ISBN-13 978-0789722065
Knott G and Waites N – BTEC Nationals for IT Practitioners (Brancepeth Computer Publications, 2002) 
ISBN-10 0953884821, ISBN-13 978-0953884827
White R and Downs T – How Computers Work, 9th Edition (Que, 2007) ISBN-10 0789736136, 
ISBN-13 978-0789736130
Journals
Computer Weekly
Which? Computer
Websites
www.bized.co.uk
 www.computerweekly.com
www.wrx.zen.co.uk/magazines.htm For a comprehensive list of UK computer/internet/web/IT magazines
●
●
●
●
●
●
9Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 2010
Delivery of personal, learning and thinking skills
The table below identifies the opportunities for personal, learning and thinking skills (PLTS) that have been 
included within the pass assessment criteria of this unit.
Skill When learners are …
Independent enquirers identifying questions to answer and problems to resolve when specifying suitable 
components to meet user requirements
planning and carrying out research, appreciating the consequences of decisions 
when selecting suitable components to meet user requirements
analysing and evaluating information, judging its relevance and value when 
evaluating the performance of a computer system
supporting conclusions, using reasoned arguments and evidence when justifying a 
choice of computer system.
Although PLTS are identified within this unit as an inherent part of the assessment criteria, there are further 
opportunities to develop a range of PLTS through various approaches to teaching and learning. 
Skill When learners are …
Independent enquirers supporting conclusions, using reasoned arguments and evidence when giving 
reasons for the choice of components to meet a given need
Self-managers organising time and resources, prioritising actions when setting up, testing and 
maintaining the system.
Edexcel BTEC Level 3 Nationals specification in Information Technology
– Issue 3 – September 2010 © Edexcel Limited 201010
Functional Skills – Level 2 
Skill When learners are …
ICT – Using ICT
Plan solutions to complex tasks by analysing 
the necessary stages
specifying suitable components to meet user requirements
Select, interact with and use ICT systems 
safely and securely for a complex task in non-
routine and unfamiliar contexts 
connecting hardware safely to a computer system, testing for 
functionality
configuring software for a given user requirement
maintaining the system
ICT – Developing, presenting and 
communicating information
Combine and present information in ways 
that are fit for purpose and audience
explaining and justifying choices to a business.

