Adventures in Windows 7 Migration 
2www.DimensionalResearch.com Adventures in Windows 7 Migration
Introduction
Microsoft’s intent to end support for the Windows XP operating system is well known among  
IT professionals. Yet many companies have delayed migrating to Windows 7 and moving away from  
the operating system they have relied on for more than a decade. 
This is not surprising. The migration to Windows 7 is an enormous undertaking for IT organizations. The 
combination of massive IT effort plus the potential for impacting end-user productivity can be intimidating 
for IT, even before considering the migration costs. 
This paper evaluates the experiences of IT professionals who have migrated large numbers of corporate 
desktop computers from Windows XP to Windows 7. It combines insights received from a series of in-depth 
telephone interviews and a quantitative survey in order to clearly evaluate the cost, effort, and challenges 
associated with this major operating system migration.
Motivations for moving to Windows 7
Why is corporate IT going through the effort and expense of migrating from Windows XP to Windows 7? 
The simple answer is that as of April 8, 2014, Microsoft will end its support for Windows XP. After this 
date, there will be no new security updates, non-security hotfixes, free or paid assisted support options, or 
online technical content updates from Microsoft.
However, the motivations for a corporate migration to Windows 7 can be much more nuanced. In some IT 
groups, the end-of-support date is all that matters. This factor is particularly true in vertical industries where 
complying with regulatory requirements means companies can only use software that has current vendor 
support. Examples of these requirements include the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) for healthcare organizations and Payment Card Industry (PCI) standards for the retail industry.
For many IT groups, the Windows 7 migration is driven by other factors. For example, new or upgraded 
business applications that are not supported on Windows XP, and the inability to purchase additional XP 
licenses may play a role in this decision. Additionally, some IT groups face pressure from their employees to 
move to more current technology. 
“Our end-users are frustrated. They have better technology at home now than at work.”
24%	  
25%	  
25%	  
41%	  
49%	  
51%	  
56%	  
0%	   10%	   20%	   30%	   40%	   50%	   60%	  
Can't	  purchase	  Windows	  XP	  licenses	  
Employees	  want	  current	  technology	  
Windows	  XP	  is	  too	  slow	  
SoDware	  requires	  Windows	  7	  
Corporate	  mandate	  
Compliance	  requirements	  
Security	  updates	  
Mo#va#ons	  for	  Windows	  7	  migra#on	  	  
3 www.DimensionalResearch.comAdventures in Windows 7 Migration
Approaches to migration vary
IT professionals described three different approaches they had taken for 
upgrading large numbers of computers from Windows XP to Windows 7:
• In place – Changing the operating system without moving the 
physical location of the desktop or laptop being upgraded. 
• In lab – A group of PCs are configured with Windows 7 in the 
IT department, then physically distributed to users. The existing 
computers of those users are taken back to the IT lab to repeat the 
process.
• Hardware upgrade – Rather than migrating existing machines, IT 
purchases new computers with Windows 7 already installed.
Most IT organizations have a wide range of existing PC hardware, so 
required a mix of these approaches. Hardware upgrades were typical for 
the oldest desktops that could not support the requirements of Windows 
7, while in place or in lab upgrades were used for the rest. In place 
upgrades were most common in organizations with geographically 
distributed offices, and relied heavily upon tools to remotely access the 
computers being upgraded. 
Windows 7 migrations present challenges to IT
The vast majority (92%) of IT organizations that have migrated from 
Windows XP to Windows 7 reported challenges with those migrations. 
Issues ranged from user downtime and high costs to issues with remote 
offices, lost data, technical failures, user adoption, and more.
Some challenges, such as user training, were well understood and planned 
for by IT. However, the technical challenges faced during migration were 
often not well understood until the migration process had begun. 
Failure rates were mentioned frequently as a key issue of the Windows 
7 migration. The cause of these failures ranged wildly, even within the 
same project, and encompassed issues such as improper config files, 
network problems with the operating system image, conflicts with 
peripherals, hardware problems with bad disks or memory, and more. 
While no single issue caused failures when upgrading a desktop OS, the 
message was clear: Failures will happen and that knowledge needs to be 
part of your migration plan.  
Project Methodology
VMware commissioned 
Dimensional Research to 
interview and survey  
IT professionals with hands-on  
experience in migrating 
corporate desktop operating 
systems from Windows XP to 
Windows 7. Eleven one-hour 
telephone interviews were 
conducted to gain in-depth 
perspectives on the migration, 
then an online survey of 322 
qualified IT professionals 
gave a broad view across a 
wide range of experiences. All 
content in this report was taken 
directly from survey results and 
interview transcripts, although 
some quotes have been edited 
for grammar and readability. 
All participants were ensured 
their feedback would be 
presented only as part of a 
summarized report with no 
attribution in order to ensure 
that they presented the most 
realistic, unfiltered information 
about their experiences.
40%	  
59%	  
73%	  
0%	   10%	   20%	   30%	   40%	   50%	   60%	   70%	   80%	  
In	  lab	  
Hardware	  upgrade	  
In	  place	  
Migra&on	  approaches	  used	  	  
4www.DimensionalResearch.com Adventures in Windows 7 Migration
To deal with these migration failures, IT professionals came up with very convoluted solutions. Stories told 
by participants included mailing DVDs or other media, careful handholding of onsite staff at remote sites, 
and even putting a working PC in a car and driving it a few hours to a site that needed it when the office 
opened Monday morning.
Significant effort taken to avoid loss of productivity
Changing a computer’s operating system will have an impact its users. There is simply no way to get around 
the usability adjustments including new icons, new menus, and other changes. 
However, IT can take steps to ensure that users don’t lose data or have system downtime during migration. 
The IT professionals in our study went to great lengths to ensure users were not impacted as a result of the 
move away from Windows XP. Steps taken included extensive user communication plans, increased help 
desk staffing, and heavily beefed-up backup strategies. 
“We did many painful things so our users weren’t impacted.”
The vast majority (83%) of participants reported their IT teams were directly impacted by the migration, and 
their staff frequently ended up working nights and weekends.
Desktop migrations are costly
IT organizations expect big migrations to have a cost and the migration from Windows XP to Windows 7 is 
no exception. The IT professionals in our study often did not know the details of the migration expenses—
particularly because many costs were rolled-up in enterprise licenses or salary costs that were not general 
knowledge—but they did know it was expensive. Of particular concern were stories of consultants being 
paid top dollar to work unpleasant hours during the deployment.
1%-­‐3%	  failure	  
16%	  
4%-­‐6%	  failure	  
28%	  
7%-­‐9%	  failure	  
18%	  
10%	  or	  more	  failures	  
28%	  
No	  failures	  
10%	  
Migra&ons	  requiring	  manual	  interven&on	  	  
17%	  
30%	  
37%	  
44%	  
47%	  
0%	   5%	   10%	   15%	   20%	   25%	   30%	   35%	   40%	   45%	   50%	  
No	  impact	  
Hired	  temporary	  staff	  
Put	  other	  projects	  on	  hold	  
Worked	  evenings	  
Worked	  weekends	  
Impact	  of	  migra-on	  on	  IT	  staff	  
5 www.DimensionalResearch.comAdventures in Windows 7 Migration
“We had 4-6 consultants just for the deployment, costing well 
over $200K. Most of that time was spent on the tedious stuff 
like running scripts and troubleshooting failures.”
Another common complaint among participants was the surprise 
discovery of hardware that did not support Windows 7 while in the 
middle of the deployment process. This discovery not only meant costs 
for purchasing new hardware, but also significant effort and cost  to 
roll-back the impacted computers or find other interim solutions for 
employees until new hardware could be procured
Most participants (89%) reported incurring direct migration costs 
including training, additional headcount, and tool purchases. The vast 
majority (87%) reported indirect costs including user downtime, lost 
productivity, and distractions from revenue-generating IT projects.
The right tool can simplify migration
IT organizations used a wide range of tools for their migrations, 
including free tools, writing scripts, leveraging existing tools, or even 
purchasing tools specifically for the migration. Just having a migration 
tool was not the solution; it was important to pick the right tool.
Participant Profile
All participants were 
responsible for their corporate 
desktops and had experience 
migrating from Windows XP to 
Windows 7. 
Participants included a mix 
of IT managers responsible 
for strategy, timeframe, and 
budgets, as well as front-line 
professionals who performed 
the execution and program 
management. The research 
project included representation 
from the Americas, Europe, and 
Asia-Pacific.
Companies represented 
included a wide range of sizes, 
although the focus was on 
large companies. Many vertical 
industries were represented 
in both the interviews 
and the surveys including 
manufacturing, financial 
services, healthcare, education, 
government, transportation, 
hospitality, and services.
100	  -­‐	  1000	  
desktops	  
19%	  
1000	  -­‐	  5,000	  
desktops	  
56%	  
More	  than	  5,000	  
desktops	  
25%	  
Size	  
!Americas	  
59%	  
 Europe,	  Middle	  
East,	  and	  Africa	  
22%	  
 Asia	  Pacific	  and	  
Australia	  	  
19%	  
Loca%on	  
11%	  
29%	  
29%	  
35%	  
36%	  
43%	  
46%	  
0%	   5%	   10%	   15%	   20%	   25%	   30%	   35%	   40%	   45%	   50%	  
No	  costs	  
Increased	  OS	  license	  costs	  
Addi;onal	  employees	  
Tool	  purchases	  
Addi;onal	  consultants	  
Increased	  helpdesk	  costs	  
Training	  costs	  
Direct	  migra+on	  costs	  incurred	  
13%	  
46%	  
51%	  
61%	  
0%	   10%	   20%	   30%	   40%	   50%	   60%	   70%	  
No	  addi0onal	  costs	  
Lost	  user	  produc0vity	  
IT	  distracted	  from	  other	  projects	  
User	  down0me	  
Indirect	  migra-on	  costs	  incurred	  
© 2013, Dimensional Research. All rights reserved. www.dimensionalresearch.com
There was a clear correlation between the tools used for migration and the technical 
challenges experienced, particularly in areas such as:
• Backup of user data
• Rollback after failure
• User productivity impact
• Data loss prevention
The lowest level of technical challenges (9%) was reported by participants who 
purchased new tools specifically for the migration. The participants with the most 
technical challenges (26%) where those who used free tools from Microsoft such 
as Windows Deployment Services (WDS), User State Migration Tool (USMT), or 
Windows Transfer. 
Interestingly, the cost to purchase new tools did not have an impact on the overall 
cost of the migration compared to those who used existing or free tools. Those who 
purchased new tools typically chose modern tools that were easier to use which resulted 
in reduced staffing requirements. Participants who used existing tools or free tools 
reported higher staffing costs to operate tools that were cumbersome.
Conclusion
The migration from Windows XP to Windows 7 does create challenges for IT 
organizations. However, there are many lessons to be learned from those who have 
already been through the process. 
For any company facing a large-scale desktop OS migration, the experiences documented 
in this report can offer important guidelines. Key factors for success include:
• Prepare for technical failures and surprises - they will happen
• Carefully evaluate backup strategies to reduce user impact
• Be realistic about both direct and indirect migration costs
• Choose the right migration tool to minimize technical challenges.
9%	  
15%	  
18%	  
24%	  
26%	  
0%	  
5%	  
10%	  
15%	  
20%	  
25%	  
30%	  
Purchased	  new	  tools	   Other	  free	  tools	   Used	  exis?ng	  tools	   Wrote	  scripts	   Free	  tools	  from	  
MicrosoF	  
Experienced	  technical	  challenges	  
(By	  tool	  used)	  
About  
Dimensional Research
Dimensional Research® 
provides practical market 
research services that help 
technology companies make 
smarter business decisions. 
Our researchers are experts 
in technology and understand 
how corporate IT organizations 
operate. We partner with every 
client to deliver actionable 
information that reduces risk and 
increases customer satisfaction. 
Our research services deliver a 
clear understanding of customer 
and market dynamics. For  
more information visit  
www.dimensionalresearch.com.
About  
VMware Horizon Mirage
The report was commissioned 
by VMware. VMware Horizon 
Mirage™ enables true zero-
touch PC image deployment, 
meaning that the new OS can 
be deployed during a Windows 
7 migration with no manual 
effort for deployment. VMware 
Horizon Mirage is a layered 
image-management solution that 
separates the PC into logical 
layers, which are owned and 
managed by either your IT 
organization or the end user. 
Now you can update IT-managed 
layers while maintaining end-
user files and personalization. 
And to maximize end-user 
productivity, snapshots and 
backups of layered desktop 
images enable quick recovery or 
rollback in case of failure.
With VMware Horizon Mirage, 
IT organizations can:
• Save up to 70 percent on 
migration costs versus 
traditional tools
• Reduce end-user downtime to 
minutes
• Deliver a standard Windows 7 
image across platforms
• Enable desktop backup and 
recovery
• Easily migrate branch and 
remote office employees  

