A Report from a Community Workshop
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing  
and Information Systems
www.cra.org/ccc/
2
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
CRICIS
Executive summary
We propose a new research area—Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS)—that has 
the potential to revolutionize our nation’s preparedness and resilience in the face of future disasters by adopting 
a computational perspective to fundamental scientific, engineering, and social barriers in disaster management. 
Computing is essential for the collection and transformation of data into usable and secure forms of information 
tailored for disaster professionals, citizens, and their information devices. A revolutionary socio-technical 
investigation is needed to harness the opportunities offered by the spread of new classes of devices, sensors, 
networks, and social media in the past decade. The needed research investigation will encompass multiple diverse 
disciplines and will have to address significant challenges of scale, complexity, and uncertainty. 
CRICIS requires fundamental new research in socio-technical systems that enable decision-making for 
extreme scales under extreme conditions. This research cuts across physical and engineered artifacts, information 
technology, and human-computer collaboration. It is an example of the general shift in science and industry from 
physical devices and computational packages to socio-technical information systems used by a diverse population. 
CRICIS consists of five themes of cross-disciplinary research: integrating computing, physical science, and social 
science; working and comprehending at scale; real-time awareness and modeling; methods and metrics; and 
training and education. 
The expected societal benefits are profound. CRICIS will save lives, improve the quality of life for the injured, 
accelerate economic recovery, preserve the continuity of government, and create new jobs and a new sector of 
the economy. Computing, together with advances in other disciplines such as social science, can revolutionize the 
training of workers, including returning veterans, and exploit the attractiveness of “helping others” to recruit larger 
and diverse populations to science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.
Disasters pose four broad challenges for fundamental research in computing, which are distinct from existing 
programs and initiatives at the Federal level: 
•  Simultaneous Extreme-Scale Challenges. Disaster computation must deal with challenge problems that 
occur at several exceptionally stressful scales simultaneously, including:
      Time: Disaster management encompasses preparedness and prevention (past), real-time response (present), 
and recovery (future). Events can be discrete and short lived, as in the case of a tornado, or long-term, as with 
climate change.
      Space: Damage can be highly localized, e.g., a bridge collapse, or spread over states, e.g., a hurricane or 
earthquake, while the economic impacts can be national or global.
      Stakeholders: Citizens, governments (municipal, county, state and federal), industry, and non-governmental 
organizations all have roles to play.
      Data: Data is heterogeneous, takes many forms and content, comes from different sources, arrives in different 
volumes at different times, and exhibits different priorities for different phases of the disaster.
3
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
•  Computational Complexity Exacerbated by Interdependencies. 
The disaster event, as well as the associated response, is 
one in which the behavior is non-linear and there exist large 
interdependencies between variables, multiple temporal and spatial 
scales, and no single optimal solution. This complexity propagates to 
algorithmic and data complexity and challenges in modeling chaotic 
systems. Other sources of computational complexity include the need 
for maintaining privacy and security of the data; the politics, sociology, 
psychology, and native language issues; and the impact of the 
resilience of the underlying electrical, communications, transportation, 
and financial infrastructure.
•  Human-System Integration in Adverse Environments. Critical 
Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) is about 
enhancing human capabilities in making decisions for extreme events 
that challenge comprehension under extreme situations during which 
decision makers are tired, dirty, and hungry; they may be working 
remotely and under dangerous, uncomfortable, demanding conditions 
that are physiologically and cognitively disrupting. Research is needed in 
sensemaking, comprehension, visualization, trustworthy data, decision 
support tools, and determining physiological and cognitive impacts. 
•  A Different Style of Research. The manner in which research on 
Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) is 
conducted is distinctive in at least three ways. Similar to the cross-
cutting Smart Health and Wellbeing program at the National Science 
Foundation, which aims to tackle the myriad challenges of health 
care delivery within a large, expensive, and ever-evolving system, 
Computing for Disasters research is holistic and conducted almost 
solely in the context of the domain—and thus it is essential to have 
peer-partnerships with stakeholders. In addition, it relies primarily on 
empirical methodologies.
Dramatic advances in disaster computation are possible with a long-
term research investment to facilitate and sustain an organic research 
community. A living roadmap would create a common ground for 
stakeholders and researchers and serve as a basis to define and 
evangelize desirable computing capabilities, lower the bar of entry 
for new researchers, and encourage adoption of technologies by 
interested agencies and NGOs. A portfolio is envisioned comprised of 
traditional small, medium, and large grants with regional centers that 
would connect stakeholders with researchers and provide testbeds of 
sufficiently high fidelity and scale to support formative experimentation 
and evaluation of progress.
4
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
1. Importance of Critical 
Real-time Computing and 
Information Systems (CRICIS) 
The purpose of this report1 is to capture the role and benefits of computing in disaster management, articulate the 
fundamental research challenges posed by the extreme scales and complexity of disasters, and provide a roadmap 
to inform investments. Disasters are often viewed as an application domain for computing, in which data must be 
gathered, transmitted, transformed, and presented to stakeholders so that they can make decisions. However, 
the unique attributes of disasters (extreme temporal, geographical, stakeholder, and data scales, unpredictability, 
compromised wireless and physical information infrastructures, lack of access to the disaster sites, distributed 
sources of information and expertise, etc.) pose hidden computing challenges in real-time data collection, 
integration, and preservation, privacy and security, visualization, analysis, and predictive capabilities for on-the-fly 
decision-making. Addressing these challenges can not only advance emergency response and recovery, but also 
drive forward areas of computer and information science and engineering. 
1.1 Disasters
[1]. Each phase conjures up expectations of different agencies. For example, the U.S. Forest Service created 
Smokey the Bear to encourage prevention of forest fires; state Departments of Transportation direct evacuations 
in preparation for an event; response is synonymous with urban search and rescue and National Guard teams; 
and recovery is associated with insurance inspectors, business recovery loans, and medical or mental health 
workers. The four phases are not independent and sequential; indeed response and recovery operations start 
instantaneously, and sub-populations have different long-term recovery needs. Life-saving response operations 
rarely last beyond 10 days, though local officials may be reluctant to declare the response phase over. Recovery 
operations can go on for months and are generally marked by when roads, schools, and hospitals are re-opened. 
Economic and public health recovery often takes years beyond that.
1.2 What is CRICIS?
CRICIS addresses all four phases of disasters by fostering a systems approach to enabling timely and effective 
decision making by all stakeholders. As highlighted by the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and 
Technology (PCAST) [2, 3] and the Computing Research Association [3], disaster response constitutes a societal 
Grand Challenge. Over a dozen studies since 2003 by PCAST [2, 4], the National Science and Technology Council 
Figure 1 The four phases of a disaster.
Disasters are often associated by the Public with immediate life-saving or mitigation efforts, leading to “disaster response” or 
“disaster management” being used as the overall term for what are actually four phases of a disaster: prevention, preparation, 
response, and recovery.
1   This report reflects findings from a Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) 
Workshop held April 24-25, 2012, in Arlington, Virginia, and subsequent feedback from the 
computing community. The workshop was co-sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF) 
and the Computing Community Consortium (CCC; http://cra.org/ccc). A complete list of workshop 
participants appears in the Acknowledgments.
Prevention RecoveryPreparedness Response
5
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
(NSTC) [5], and the National Academies [6-13]  have concluded 
success will not be found in component technologies, manpower, 
or physical resources by themselves. While advances in wireless 
networks, unmanned systems, embedded sensors, pattern 
recognition, surface reconstruction, data fusion, and scheduling 
algorithms can be expected to continue and even accelerate, these 
advances individually will not necessarily result in usable information 
or better decisions. Rather each study has found that success will 
come from systems approaches to developing the information for 
timely decision making and synchronizing the flow of this information 
to the shifting demands of disasters and resources.
Disasters, and by extension CRICIS, are already a national priority, 
and the increasingly negative impact of disasters will amplify the 
visibility and urgency of handling disasters. The most recent World 
Disasters Report [14] found that, between 2000 and 2009, a total 
of over 7,000 disasters resulted in 1.1 million people casualties 
worldwide, affected another 2.5 million directly, and yielded a loss of 
$986.7 billion. The number of disasters each year during this 10-
year period remained relatively constant, around 700. However, the 
impact of the disaster was a function of whether the event occurred 
in an urban area, not the sophistication of the country. The report 
argues that deaths and impacts of disasters will continue to increase 
due to the increasing numbers of people living in concentrated 
urban environments, and because of the consequences of damage 
to urban structures where people live and work (e.g., office and 
apartment buildings) and that serve to mitigate disasters (e.g., 
hospitals, transportation and other critical infrastructure).
1.3 The Time is Now
The nation, and the world, stands at an inflection point today. 
Disasters have long impacted society, resulting in mass casualties 
and huge financial tolls. However, key advances in computing 
over the past several decades—smartphones, worldwide mobile 
Internet access, social media, ultra-cheap small computers, sensors, 
visualization, human-computer interaction, artificial intelligence, 
robotics, Cloud computing, high-performance computing, ultra low 
cost storage, data mining, information retrieval, machine learning, 
geospatial databases, computing for economics, and game theory—
position the U.S. at the cusp of a watershed of advances in this 
revolutionary socio-technical discipline. 
6
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
CRICIS is different from existing research areas and paradigms. It transcends current research in topics such 
as artificial intelligence, evolutionary network dynamics, GIS, human-centered computing, natural language 
understanding, data mining, digital libraries, remote sensing, visualization, universal usability, unmanned systems, 
and wireless networks by exploring how these disciplines address extreme (and dynamically changing) temporal, 
geographical, stakeholder, and data scales. CRICIS has at least five distinct, cross-cutting themes that shift 
research from reductionism and static models to a holistic focus on how dynamic socio-technical systems work, 
how stakeholders can comprehend data at scale, how models can be adapted in real-time, and how to effectively 
train and educate the population to exploit technical improvisation in order to respond to disasters. 
2.1 Expands Fundamental Research Applied to Disasters
Many of the areas of exploration described below have a long history of fundamental research, sometimes 
motivated by disaster situations (e.g., unmanned systems and social networks). However, as illustrated in Figure 
2, disasters create extreme scales and complexity for those areas of computing and require pervasive integrative 
human-computer systems approaches. Thus, Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) will 
extend and expand on research in these areas, benefiting both the disaster management community and providing 
feedback and new directions for the computing research community.
2.1.1 Computing at the Extremes
CRICIS must operate over extreme temporal, geographical, stakeholder, and data scales. Worse yet, 
the scales of operation cannot be predicted because they depend on the specifics of the disaster (e.g., type, 
duration, geographic area impacted, population size affected, etc.) and the phase of consideration (prevention, 
preparedness, response, and recovery). Temporally, disasters start before the incident, have intense data-driven 
decision demands in the first weeks following the incident, and then taper off over the years, with gradual economic 
recovery. Geographically, disasters may directly impact large regions, with secondary impacts at the national 
or international scale (such as the loss of Taiwanese chip manufacturing facilities in 1999) or engage external 
resources and expertise. However, disasters may be geographically limited, such as the September 11, 2001, 
World Trade Center collapse. The number of stakeholders also varies from a small population affected by the 
2011 Joplin Missouri tornado or the diaspora following Hurricane Katrina in 2005. The data elements may also be 
extreme. The input to algorithms or sensors may be huge; consider the number of cell towers to restore, bridges or 
nodes in critical infrastructure to manage, houses to be inspected, or people (and cars) to evacuate. The data itself 
may be extreme, especially given the staggering amount of information (and misinformation) available from social 
media (i.e., Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, YouTube) and other tools and services with user-generated content. 
Of these scales, data and the ensuing challenges of extreme, diverse data integration are especially important 
to CRICIS. Data is critical for predicting infrastructure and social vulnerabilities, preventing disasters, saving lives 
and mitigating damage, and minimizing recovery time. However, the needed information must be extracted from 
extremely diverse data sets; usually one type of data is not sufficient and thus stakeholders must contend with 
heterogeneous data sets. These data sets may be diverse in terms of time, ranging from historical records (e.g., 
last census, analyses of previous responses, etc.) to real-time social media feeds (e.g., tweets, Facebook posts, 
2. Why CRICIS is Different 
7
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
volunteered geographic information from NGOs such as ushahidi, Crisismappers, etc.). The timing of the data is 
often unrelated to the priority of the data. The type of GIS data varies as well, as Public Safety databases may use 
place names, street addresses, and property owners, expecting responders to rely on street signs – but these 
street signs may be swept away. The type of GIS data also varies, with GPS and map coordinates being expressed 
in diverse reference systems such as latitude-longitude and state-plain coordinates. Types of data content vary as 
well, ranging from numbers and text to photographs and videos. The sources for data types vary in institutional 
heritage ranging from government, private section, non-profit organization and recently formed volunteer groups, 
Figure 2.
How Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) Expands Fundamental Research through Extremes and 
Human-Computer Systems.
Computing for Disasters
Human-Computer
Systems
Extreme Scales
•   Time (before, during, after, real-time, descrete 
events vs. climate change...)
•   Space (local, geographically large, global 
impacts...)
•   Stakeholders (citizens, government, fromal, 
response agencies, inmformal response agencies 
and social media, industry...)
•   Data (time, priority, heterogeneity, types, content, 
sources...)
Extreme Complexity
•   Non-linear, large interdependencies, multiple 
temporal and spatial scales, no single optimal 
solution ("wicked problem")
•  Algorithmic, data complexity
•  Modeling under uncertainty
•  Privacy, security
•  Politics, sociology, psychology, language
•   Resilience of infrastructure (electrical, 
communications, transportation, financial...)
Decision-Making For Extremes
Under Extreme Conditions
•   Sensemaking, comprehension, and visualization
• Trustworthy data
•  Decision support
• Physiological and cognitive impacts
8
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
which may include a diverse set of languages, ethnicities, cultures, motivations, etc. These sources vary widely 
in accuracy and credibility requiring a diversity of validation methods including automated methods (e.g., voting), 
manual methods (e.g., site visited by a trusted personnel) and a combination of these methods.
CRICIS must also address the behavioral complexity within a system. Disasters do not have a simple solution 
or a single technological fix; they are complex events with large interdependencies, multiple temporal and spatial 
scales that exhibit nonlinear behavior, and no single optimal solution or analytic framework. This complexity 
poses a major challenge for modeling and simulation. The complexity challenges are exacerbated by the extreme 
scales diversity of data and time that computations have to work over. Complexity can be increased by the lack 
of resiliency in the critical infrastructure, which disrupts interdependencies. For example, large disasters such 
as Hurricane Katrina and the Haiti Earthquake introduced a large number of faults ranging from electrical power 
failure to building and transportation infrastructure decimation; these cascaded into computer failures, data-center 
failures, communication network failures, financial networks outage (automatic teller machines), telephone network 
outage, more transportation failures (gas pumps), etc. Even a resilient infrastructure may not be able to adequately 
cope with a disaster; consider that celluar communication networks may survive or cell towers on wheels (COWS) 
be rapidly deployed, but these are unable to handle the volume of high-resolution maps, images, and video. 
Complexity also is evident in recovery, as recovering from an event involves diverse resource and scheduling, as 
captured in [15]. Disaster managers need local data collection to assess situation on the ground and local supply 
chain to distribute relief supplies (e.g., food, water, fuel, shelter, medicines, etc.) to affected population. 
Extreme complexity also arises from the human element in disasters. Data about people, their location, income, 
medical condition, etc. entails issues of privacy and security. States, counties, and municipalities have different 
policies and attitudes towards disasters. For example, the politics of privacy has led to situations such as those at 
Hurricanes Charley and Ike when data from functioning traffic cameras could not be used by state transportation 
officials to monitor evacuation on surface roads or by law enforcement to monitor for looting due to restrictions in 
some municipalities that such data be limited to specific traffic infractions. Human complexity arises because of 
diversity in sociology, psychology, and language. Both Florida and Texas have large Spanish-speaking populations; 
the sociology of these populations leads to a different style of communication of public risk and different patterns of 
behavior during and after a disaster. 
CRICIS must not only handle these extreme scales and complexities but also ensure technology supports 
decision-making under extreme conditions. Decisions during a disaster have significant life-saving and economic 
9
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
consequences, introducing stress. Decision-making is harder because of the extreme conditions. Formal 
stakeholders such as responders will have cognitive deficits due to sleep deprivation, disruption of routine, having 
to work in unfamiliar settings and/or with technology or data sources, and in many cases working remotely through 
computer mediation. Informal stakeholders such as citizens in the disaster area may be experiencing cognitive 
deficits due to emotional upheaval. 
CRICIS is distinct from existing research areas because of the challenges in managing scales and in 
comprehension. The safety-critical, accelerated decision-making and concentrated problem solving for disasters 
complicates the problem of individual and collective comprehension. CRICIS is needed to support rapid 
sensemaking for the current phase of the disaster and for a particular stakeholder, with inclusion of trustworthy data 
from any number of sources, both machine sourced, and human sourced (and often technologically-mediated). 
CRICIS is not only about improving the acquisition or quality of human-sourced or machine-sourced data but rather 
about getting, transforming, and tailoring the entire set of relevant data. 
2.1.2 Human-Computer Systems at the Extremes
CRICIS is also distinct from existing research because of the view of computing for disasters within a human-
computer system framework. Because CRICIS is about enhancing human capabilities, the technology must be 
tailored to the stakeholders’ needs. Stakeholder needs vary significantly; the erroneous assumption that disaster 
response is isomorphic with military command and control functions have resulted in brittle systems that do 
not address the real needs and constraints of formal responders. Likewise, the oversimplification of Citizens 
as stakeholders within a rational social system ignores how people really behave. Thus CRICIS research is 
characterized by the pervasive presence of human-computer system principles and methods. 
A fundamental principle of CRICIS is that the technology must be tailored to the human stakeholders and needed 
capabilities. For example, a robust low-bandwidth network is of little value to responders attempting to share 
high-resolution imagery early in the initial phase of the response, but can be of great value for long-term monitoring 
of evacuation and return patterns, environmental sensing, etc. A sophisticated algorithm that produces a highly 
optimal, but counter-intuitive, allocation of resources may be rejected by an emergency support function manager 
if the algorithm does not provide a means to explain or justify its recommendation. Technology is not sufficient; 
technology must be designed and evaluated in terms of the larger socio-technical context. 
10
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Another fundamental principle is that formal stakeholders are not the same as military stakeholders. Investments by 
the U.S. Department of Defense have produced advances in unmanned systems, sensors, and situation awareness 
displays. However, this technology was designed for a very different ecology; formal stakeholders such as fire 
rescue departments have significantly less time set aside for training on new technology than the military and have 
reduced training budgets that in turn prevent responders from training at scale. Therefore human-computer system 
research must be involved in extending military solutions to disasters. Another misconception is that disaster 
response is command-and-control based following a hierarchical decision-making organization. Disasters involved 
multiple agencies and stakeholders who maintain their own individual hierarchies and are trained separately. 
A third principle is that informal stakeholders, particularly Citizens, have an important role in providing data and 
consuming information. Research in disasters has largely been either/or: focused on tools for formal stakeholders 
or on tools for informal stakeholders. The assumption has been that formal stakeholders make decisions that help 
the Public at large while informal stakeholders make decisions for individuals or small groups. However, computing 
is enabling Citizens to move from the role of passive victim to active collaborator in disaster management. CRICIS 
can foster crossing these boundaries, for example, enabling valuable information from informal sources such as 
ad hoc NGOs or social networking reaches formal stakeholders in a trustworthy usable form, and information 
generated by formal stakeholders is shared with informal stakeholders such as insurance agencies. 
The final principle is that stakeholder behavior, even for formal responders, cannot be modeled as a rationalized 
social system. A tenet of persuasive computing is that people do not blindly follow recommendations, even from 
authority figures. One example was the grid-locked evacuation of the Houston-Galveston region in anticipation 
of Hurricane Rita. CRICIS favors solutions which both incorporate realistic models of human behavior (versus 
consistent, compliant behavior) and real-time feedback (what people are actually doing). It is important to 
keep in mind that formal stakeholders also behave unexpectedly. Formal stakeholders often take on initiative 
and unimagined responsibility, such as when the FAA Air Traffic Controllers shut down all air traffic during the 
9/11 attacks. CRICIS should enable the needed flexibility and adaptability to permit extraordinary responses to 
unimaginable situations. 
2.2 Poses Unique Computer Science Research Directions
CRICIS contributes to fundamental computer science research by expanding and creating new, distinct research 
directions that cut across physical and engineered artifacts, information technology, and human-computer 
collaboration. Five themes of cross-disciplinary research in systems with extreme scales and complexity have been 
identified: integrating computing, physical science, and social science; working and comprehending at scale; real-
time modeling; methods and metrics; and training and education.
1.  Integrating computing, physical science, and social science. CRICIS research is characterized by its 
explicit focus on the socio-technical system and the creation of novel integrative capabilities. A new embedded 
sensor for recording damage to a structure from a meteorological event is a great advance in physical science. 
An algorithm that can in real-time fuse and analyze multiple sensor readings and represent uncertainty in the 
analysis is a powerful computation advance. A system that applies the fusion algorithm to any set of embedded 
shock sensors and then is able to display what that means to a city manager (e.g., Red-Yellow-Green tagging of 
unsafe, work needed, and safe for re-entry) and create trust is a valuable capability. 
11
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
2.  Working and comprehending at scale. CRICIS research explicitly addresses the issues of extreme temporal, 
geographical, and data scales and diversity but goes further to consider how stakeholders comprehend the 
meaning of the data in the context of their goals and responsibilities. For example, a worthy CRICIS project 
would create systems for supporting information flow and sense-making among distributed communities with 
differing levels of technology, education, skills, etc. to build consensus that supports scalable real-time decisions 
on a particular aspect of the response, such as searchers, city managers and inspectors, insurance agencies, 
construction firms sharing information to speed inspection, bidding, permitting, repair, and re-opening of critical 
facilities such as hospitals and schools. Another project might increase the speed and efficacy of actionable 
situation awareness by integrating sensors, text, voice, and video into a device-aware display. 
3.  Real-time Modeling. Accurate models of the physical, social, and economic impacts of disasters are 
essential to prevention and preparedness for disasters; these models also initialize the response and recovery 
activities. However, for a large-scale problem with complex interdependencies, a priori models are unlikely to 
be completely accurate or inclusive of all relevant situations. Therefore, CRICIS research focuses on how to 
incorporate observations into existing models in real-time or to create new models which can then be used 
to project damage, vulnerabilities, social consequences, etc. Behavioral models which move away from the 
rationalized social response and capture the effects and propagation of trust, impact of noisy data, etc., are  
also needed. 
4.  Methods and Metrics. CRICIS research is distinct from other research areas in part because the methods 
and metrics do not wholly exist. Socio-technical systems are difficult to reproduce or simulate at scale. Can 
evaluations be conducted without scale exercises? Existing metrics for task performance, especially with teams 
of human and agents, cannot assign the credit for performance: was it a helpful technology or was it a mediocre 
technology operated by a masterful human? CRICIS projects might include creating data-flow models (or new 
cognitive analysis techniques for modeling) of key data throughout a particular decision-making process. 
5.  Training and Education. Training of stakeholders and the education (or re-education) of professionals and 
students is a major theme of CRICIS research. Normal stakeholders such as Public Safety agencies have 
extremely limited training budgets and thus computing for cost-effective training is highly desirable. However, 
CRICIS is an example of the general shift in science and industry from “widgets” and  “computational devices” 
to socio-technical systems used by a diverse population. Thus, CRICIS should include research in how to 
educate computing, engineering, and social professionals in socio-technical system design as well as create new 
programs for graduates and undergraduates. Examples of CRICIS projects would be systems that use familiar 
and widely available tools such as smart phone apps for facilitating coordination and for simplifying “just in time” 
training and the use of “serious games” for training. However, it is expected that all CRICIS projects would 
explicitly consider the limited training time and access to physical facilities as well as how to compensate for the 
cognitive deficits encountered in the field that can lead to stakeholders discarding tools or procedures. 
The types of innovation involved in integrating computing, physical science, and social science for CRICIS include 
but are not limited to:
•  Unmanned systems and new sensors for safe, remote exploration and sensing in structural collapse (e.g., World 
Trade Center) and chemical, biological, or radiological hazardous materials releases (e.g., Bhopal, Sarin release 
on the Tokyo subway, Fukushima). In these cases, responders work remotely through technology to perceive and 
act in the access-denied area. 
12
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
•  Artificial intelligence and computer vision tools expressed through human-computer interaction for rapidly 
generating, modifying and tracking a “bird’s-eye” situational overview of a complex and diffuse event. Without 
appropriate visualizations of the data, the decision maker may miss critical cues that will either create secondary 
crises or prolong economy recovery; the benefit of the availability of the data is lost if the system doesn’t include 
how to display it effectively. 
•  Optimization and search algorithms leveraging collective behavior and action in diffuse events where solutions 
might be highly localized, or where the search space is large. These algorithms must account for actual human 
behavior or allow real-time adaptation to observed behavior. 
•  Re-establishing communication networks under adverse conditions based on dynamically changing priorities and 
opportunities. Restoring networks must support decision-making priorities; this was seen in Hurricane Andrew 
where large portions of Florida were stranded without response help because there was no way to communicate 
the depth of the damage. Algorithms must balance where the needs are rather than restrict themselves to an 
orderly, frontier-like resumption of services. 
•  Use of “serious games”, computer and mixed-reality simulations to allow responders to train and experiment with 
new technologies and scenarios on demand. 
2.3 Conducts Research Differently
The manner in which research Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) is conducted is 
noteworthy in at least three ways: it is holistic and conducted in the context of the domain; it relies primarily on 
empirical methodologies; and it is based on partnerships with stakeholders. These are discussed in more detail 
below.
Is holistic. A reductionist model does not apply to decision-making for disasters, or indeed complex non-linear 
problems in general. Decomposing the complex physical and social interactions over time and space neglects 
that it is the interactions that enable rapid, effective decision-making. Rather than extrapolating how an atomic 
phenomenon tested in isolation will scale, CRICIS research is holistic. It places the research in the context of 
the socio-technical system, exhibiting a  “because gap G in computing for disasters exists and is preventing 
stakeholder S from capability C, we propose to investigate P to address G…” flavor. 
Relies primarily on empirical methodologies. CRICIS research is characterized by its observational nature. 
Empiricism is appropriate because there is no significant, comprehensive corpus of data (yet) on how computing 
or information and communication technology has been used in disasters. This corpus would be acquired through 
detailed ethnographic observation and rigorous case studies, which then leads to the formation of principles 
and theories that can be examined through field tests with stakeholders in simulated and realistic situations. 
13
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Controlled experimentation and simulation is less relevant because, each disaster is unique and thus provides 
new innovations, bottlenecks, and requirements for computing. If researchers aren’t in place to ethically deploy 
a solution, they should be carefully committed to identifying solutions for innovation and to the study of those 
identified problems in the event to inform innovation for the next disaster.
Is based on meaningful partnerships with a stakeholder(s). Because CRICIS research is holistic, it must 
derive requirements from direct contact with practitioners throughout the disaster cycle phases. Involving 
practitioner organizations will ensure that the NSF’s research community begins with realistic requirements, 
while addressing significant problems. Then as the research develops, feedback from practitioners will guide 
implementations, sympathetic partners will be available for pilot testing, and mature projects can be appropriately 
integrated for evaluation in genuine crises. CRICIS projects should require field study partnerships to ensure 
requirements are accurate and guidance for refinement is readily available, much as bioinformatics programs 
generally require medical practitioners on the research team. However, university Human Review Committees 
(HRC) must be trained and prepared to readily guide and approve such research in a rapid time frame to make 
such field commitments possible.
2.4 Comparison to Other Programs
The previous sections have elaborated on the many ways in which fundamental research at the intersection of 
computing and disaster management stands to yield advances that will vastly improve the way in which society 
prepares for, respond to, and recovers from natural and man-made disasters. However, it is important to emphasize 
that these advances are not simply dependent upon computing; rather, an initiative that brings together researchers 
from multiple disciplines—to include computer scientists, as well as electrical engineers, civil and transportation 
engineers, systems engineers, geoscientists, social, behavioral, and economic scientists, and so on—is crucial for 
achieving the kind of revolutionary breakthroughs that are necessary in this space. Equal partnerships between 
researchers across these disciplines—combined with disaster stakeholders—must be enabled.
Furthermore, CRICIS integrates areas addressed through existing programs within NSF: physical science and 
engineering (e.g., sensors, unmanned systems, models, etc.), social sources of data  (e.g., social networking, 
citizen science, etc.), transfer and storage of data (e.g., networks, cloud computing, context-aware networks, 
data warehousing, security, privacy, etc.), transformation of data into useful information (e.g., computer vision, 
human computation, etc.), real-time formal and informal decision making support  (e.g., artificial intelligence, 
optimization, visualization, interfaces, cognitive science, CSCW, policy, etc.). Similarly, it operates over large sets 
of heterogeneous data, a key focus of the recent multi-agency Core Technologies and Technologies for Advancing 
Big Data Science & Engineering (BIGDATA) solicitation. And it targets human-computer partnerships where 
computing becomes a key tool in facilitating decision-making.
However, as previously have described, disaster management requires a concerted effort beyond these programs 
given the unique attributes of scale and complexity. It includes non-digital sources of information, such as 
the decision-making behavior of the stakeholders, and considers the physical domain-computer relationship, 
incorporating the physicality of disasters and the technological challenges of obtaining data remotely (in other 
words, CRICIS constitutes a more focused, but more comprehensively socio-technical, exploration of a  
single domain). 
14
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Intuitively, CRICIS offers multiple benefits to society by empowering formal and informal stakeholders: computing 
will enable them to increase lives saved, improve quality of life for the injured, accelerate economic recovery, and 
preserve the continuity of government. However, CRICIS will also lead to the creation of new jobs and a new sector 
of the economy, leveraging investments in Defense technologies and expertise of returning veterans, but will also 
requiring new methods of training and education. It will broaden the perspectives of researchers and encourage 
fundamental advances in computing for socio-technical systems in general. This section attempts to capture the 
less intuitive benefits of CRICIS through a set of examples, then a discussion of the benefits to stakeholders, the 
economy, and research in general.
3.1 Examples of How Computing Can Revolutionize Disasters 
Computing can revolutionize multiple facets of the disaster management challenge. The core element of 
a computational perspective is the construction and analysis of algorithms and systems for the collection, 
transmission, and transformation of data to provide semantically rich forms of information tailored for stakeholders 
via multiple interface modalities. The general principle in each of the examples below is that computing cuts across 
the diverse range of actionable information needs of disaster response. 
Computing is a key element in gathering data. Data for disasters is acquired from diverse sources both a priori and 
in real-time. Maps, building and land-use plans, and predictive models of the location and severity of damage serve 
to ground prevention and preparedness and to bootstrap response and recovery planning. For example, computing 
could provide an accurate, timely event detection by fusing data using diverse components including sensors, the 
acquisition network, the Cloud, and human volunteers and trained staff. After the incident has occurred, the sources 
of information increase: direct observations of responders; unmanned systems and sensors deployed by government 
agencies, corporations, and private citizens; photographs and other information uploaded from phones; information 
in social networks; and news feeds are all in play. Data sources are diverse in type (numerical, audio, video, natural 
language), format, precision, trustworthiness, responsiveness, and location. Moreover, all these parameters may 
change with time. Computing can exploit this huge number of data sources, while managing their immense 
heterogeneity, uncertainty, and security restrictions. Developments in data mining, machine learning, large multimedia 
archiving and retrieval systems, efficient search, human-computer interfaces and visualization, and statistics enable 
these challenges to be overcome today whereas they were insurmountable as recently as a decade ago. 
Computing can transmit and transform the data into actionable information, while hiding complexities of superfluous 
information, and help provide accurate situation awareness across all echelons of decision makers. Data from 
multiple sources can be fused across distributed data-acquisition networks and servers, possibly in Cloud 
computing systems. Disaster management systems have to operate in environments in which power may be 
intermittent and communication bandwidth is limited and unpredictable. However, not all data are best represented 
3 Benefits of Critical 
Real-time Computing and 
Information Systems (CRICIS)
15
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
geospatially; fortunately computing, coupled with perceptual psychology, can match the specific decision-
making needs for a particular role with the appropriate visualization. Artificial intelligence can generate commands 
to machine components (“close the gas valve”) and recommendations to Citizens (“go to the high school for 
immediate mustering and evacuation”). Computing can provide resilient networking, allowing the right information 
to get to the right person at the right time, rather than the current approach of sending all the data at the highest 
resolution to everyone. 
Computing can explicitly represent and mitigate uncertainty. A priori knowledge such as maps may be 
compromised by a meteorological event or a structural collapse. The relative infrequence of disaster events 
suggests that simulations of damage severity, plume tracking, or evacuation patterns will have areas of inaccuracies 
or regions where the projections simply do not apply. Computing using probabilistic and other evidential reasoning 
techniques can explicitly determine the amount of certainty in projections; this data then can be used to temper 
decisions or to direct gathering of new data. Computing advances in modeling and simulation can create methods 
to update and refine models in real-time. 
Computing can assist with the social, behavioral, and economic consequences, and opportunities, of disasters. 
Formal preventions, preparations, responses, and recoveries from disasters are orchestrated by multiple agencies– 
each of which has mechanisms for providing situation awareness to its network of agents and making decisions 
(what Nobel laureate Elinor Ostrom describes as polycentric control architectures [16]). Informally, Citizens respond 
as individuals based on their own goals and their knowledge of unfolding situations. Responders (the “tired, dirty, 
and hungry”) may be cognitively impaired during disasters and reluctant to adopt new technology or trust new 
sources of data. Citizens may not behave “rationally;” they may not follow recommendations, opting instead 
to focus on finding their families. The economic consequences of poor situation awareness can be immense. 
However, few applications allow those on-site to contribute data or for the worldwide participation of people who 
desperately want to help. Computing, integrated with the social sciences, can develop systems that orchestrate 
responses and harness the human dimension to changing critical situations in the most efficacious ways.
Computing can optimize resources and logistics, as well as help predict and maintain the critical infrastructure. 
Computing can provide timely situation awareness and management of resources across large regions of energy, 
water, terrorism, and logistics. Early warning of disasters or of secondary crises such as epidemics or dwindling fuel 
reserves are often beyond the ability or scope of agencies to notice until it becomes too late. Efficient transport of 
responders and relief supplies, repairs to the transportation and energy grids, as well as evacuation and re-entry 
models can be optimally computed. 
Computing can be a tool to reunite families, identify and triage victims, and optimally allocate resources as part 
of a coordinated real-time response. Advances in computer vision and digital libraries have already resulted in 
computer programs that allow parents to more rapidly find children who have been dislocated during a disaster 
in the immediate aftermath of a crisis. During an event response, real-time Disaster ISR (Intelligence, Surveillance, 
and Reconnaissance) can provide decision-makers and first responders with information vital to resource allocation 
and triage. Ground-based robot searchers could assess the medical state of victims found inside buildings, while 
aerial/wide area search could employ coordinated fleets of low-cost UAVs to survey structure damage, navigable 
transportation routes, and locations of displaced populations. A general principle of Disaster ISR would be to 
explore how to combine on-board autonomous intelligence and crowd-sourced human-computation from remote 
participants to effect faster, better medical triage or structure stability estimation.
16
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Computing can revolutionize training of workers. Because disasters are rare and hard to physically duplicate 
and because government Public Safety budgets are diminishing, training for these events is often inadequate in 
practice. “Serious games” or training via computer games, online learning, mixed reality simulation, and computer 
supported workgroup tools can provide more cost-effective and readily available training. 
Computing can exploit the attractiveness of helping others to attract larger and more diverse populations to 
STEM disciplines. Few application domains can capture the interests of young students as much as systems that 
integrate STEM disciplines to help them deal with disasters that impact their families and friends. From kindergarten 
onwards, students in earthquake-prone regions, are naturally interested in systems that sense and respond to 
earthquakes, just as students along the East Coast and Gulf are interested in hurricanes. An excellent way of 
exciting students about STEM disciplines and information and communication technology is to enable them to 
participate in direct ways – deploying inexpensive sensors, posting photographs and videos, helping connect 
families with lost pets in faraway locations.
3.2 Benefits Both Formal and Informal Stakeholders 
CRICIS will benefit all stakeholders in a disaster. As shown in Figure 3, disasters involve both formal and informal 
stakeholders2. Formal stakeholders consist of groups with a formal role under the National Response Framework: 
federal, state, and local government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and industry associations. Informal 
stakeholders include response-related industries (e.g., CrisisMappers, insurance companies, etc.) and industries 
with key technologies (e.g., telecommunications, networks, robotics, construction, etc.) as well as citizens
2   It is worth noting that formal and informal does not 
correspond to government and Public. For example, 
NGOs such as the American Red Cross have specific 
responsibilities under the National Response Framework.
Figure 3.
Two types of stakeholders based on role in disaster response.
FEMA National 
Guard
City 
Manager
Red 
Cross
Formal Stakeholders Informal Stakeholders
Insurers
Construction
Business
Citizens
17
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Disasters directly impact many informal stakeholders as victims or industries with economic interests, but indirectly 
impact the formal stakeholders who must make decisions. Figure 4 shows the current relationship of these two 
classes of stakeholders. In making decisions, formal stakeholders rely upon data provided by projections from 
damage models, or by observations from manned and increasingly unmanned systems transmitted via wireless 
networks and displayed in various types of GIS representations. The data and decision making process used by 
formal stakeholders is opaque to the informal stakeholders, who often only receive information such as evacuation/
re-entry postings. The informal stakeholders may exploit social networking and wireless networks to self-organize. 
Self-organization can also lead to data gathering, often expressed as GIS mash-ups that can in turn be used by all 
stakeholders. Industry and insurance agencies may be forced to duplicate data collection in order to support  
their needs.
Figure 4.
Data sources for stakeholders.
Damage Models
Wireless 
Networks
Communication  
of Risk
Unmanned
Systmes
GIS Mash ups
GIS Representation
Social  
Networking
Wireless Networks
Formal 
Stakeholders
Informal  
Stakeholders
18
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
3.3 Benefits Economy and Research
CRICIS research has four major benefits to society. First, at the national level, it can provide the technology needed 
to save lives and preserve continuity of government, while accelerating economic recovery. Second, CRICIS goes 
beyond what government, either DHS or DoD, and industry can do alone and it addresses the inherent national 
security considerations that historically prevent inter-agency dissemination of data, expertise, and advances. Third, 
the focus on researcher-stakeholder partnerships creates the potential for new collaborations and new ways of 
thinking. Fourth, CRICIS offers the prospect of extending new discoveries in socio-technical systems for decision-
making to other domains. 
CRICIS has the right timing and scope to leverage the defense investment in information technologies in order to 
revitalizing public safety and emergency preparedness while creating new jobs for returning veterans, fostering 
new companies, and sustaining competitiveness in existing industries. The Department of Defense has created 
technologies such as unmanned systems, sensor networks, visualization tools, and situation awareness displays 
that have a high potential benefit for disaster response. However, most of the technologies are still in their infancy 
in terms of innovation and still need improvement in order to be adopted by the Public Sector. Additionally, public 
Figure 5.
Advances in data available to stakeholders.
Probabilistic 
Damage Models
Wireless 
Networks
Communication  
of Risk
Unmanned
Systmes GIS Mash ups
GIS Representation 
and Reasoning
Social  
Networking
Wireless Networks
Formal 
Stakeholders
Informal  
Stakeholders
Social Networking, 
People as Sensors
Computer Vision
Unmanned Systems
Computer Vision
Visualization
Optimization
Embedded 
Systems
Behavioral 
Models
Citizen Science/ 
People as Sensors
Secure Sharing
19
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
safety exhibits entirely different characteristics with respect to training, frequency of use, budget constraints, 
and socio-organizational inertia, and these have historically hampered the transfer of technology from defense to 
homeland security applications. CRICIS research will bridge this gap between core technological capabilities and 
the very different social and organizational ecologies.
CRICIS will contribute to understanding decision-making in socio-technical systems, which is expected to 
reverberate to other applications besides disasters. The new territory of Computing for Disaster brings national 
priority challenges that require researchers to broaden their perspectives beyond familiar topics to unchartered 
territories where new skills are required. They will have to shift their focus from working with small amounts of 
data or narrow capabilities to building models, testing hypotheses, identifying patterns, developing simulations, 
and conducting longitudinal and cross-disciplinary studies at enormous scales. The opportunity is large, but these 
new tasks require fresh thinking, novel research methods, and interdisciplinary collaborations.  Thus the broad 
perspective endowed by CRICIS is expected to lead to new solutions for complex socio-technical systems in 
general.  Advances in decision making for disasters might create new directions in healthcare during pandemics or 
in coordinating and optimizing critical infrastructure systems, such as power grids and transportation.
20
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
As seen in the previous sections, CRICIS requires a different type of research community, one in which 
researchers are engaged with stakeholders as much as they are with one another as they address extreme scales, 
complexity, and human-system integration. This focus on meaningful connections with stakeholders is shared 
with the bioinformatics and health IT communities which have coalesced and progressed due to programmatic 
shepherding. However, CRICIS is not just adding computing to a different discipline: working with computing at 
the unique interdependencies of extreme scales and complexity functioning within human-computing systems will 
challenge and grow basic research in computing that will have benefits beyond disaster management. 
Fostering such research requires a sustained, multi-phase effort to establish a roadmap and a balanced portfolio 
of research that will attract and introduce researchers, build partnerships between researchers and stakeholders, 
create testbeds and evaluation opportunities, and facilitate technology transfer. While history shows innovations 
rarely follow roadmaps [17], roadmaps can provide a common ground for stakeholders and researchers to 
envision desirable computing capabilities. Such roadmaps are valuable because they help lower the bar of entry 
in computing for disasters research. They also facilitate adoption of capabilities by agencies because the agencies 
can anticipate likely innovations and begin to plan for insertion, evaluation, and training. The National Academies 
study “Improving Disaster Management: The of IT in Mitigating, Preparedness, Response and Recovery” [18] 
recommended a living roadmap one that evolved continuously.
4 A Roadmap and Portfolio 
for Fostering CRICIS
21
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
4.1 A Living “Computing for Disasters” Roadmap 
The living research roadmap must reflect a consensus of stakeholders and researchers. One mechanism would be 
to i) hold a domain knowledge elucidation event to create a baseline, ii) advertise and refine the roadmap through 
technology-centric workshops or sessions at relevant conferences, and iii) host an annual workshop at NSF with 
stakeholders in conjunction with a demonstration similar to NSF Hazards Research Showcase held September 6-7, 
2011, at the Hart Senate Office Building (aka “Disasters on the Hill”). This roadmapping workshop could serve to 
encourage agency stakeholders to contribute to funding the research portfolio.
A domain knowledge elucidation workshop would convene formal and informal stakeholders with researchers 
to define the state of the practice, identify and codify information-intensive disaster scenarios, capture training and 
education goals and constraints, propose benchmarks, and to the degree possible, specify metrics, methods, 
and focus areas. The inclusion of multiple government agencies, such as NSF, NIST, NASA, and NOAA, would 
be desirable. Formal stakeholders would consist of federal and state government agencies (e.g., FEMA, USGS, 
National Geospatial Agency, Department of Transportation, Army Corps of Engineers, Centers for Disease Control, 
National Guard, etc.), and non-governmental organizations and industry associations with a formal role under the 
National Response Framework (e.g., American Red Cross, CHEMTREC, etc.). Informal stakeholders would include 
response-related industries (e.g., CrisisMappers, insurance companies, etc.) and industries with key technologies 
(e.g., telecommunications, networks, robotics, simulation, etc.).
22
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Workshops or sessions at relevant disaster-oriented computing conferences would help introduce 
researchers to the systems issues and opportunities and reinforce the distinct style of collaborative research. Any 
new NSF program in CRICIS should make a strong effort to work with these existing communities and benefit from 
their skills but help to expand their horizons and opportunities. The sessions would be expected to generate new 
ideas and possibilities as well. An effort should be made to cover the major conferences within two years, and it 
is expected that these sessions would become integral to many of the conferences. In addition, sessions at more 
mainstream conferences (e.g., ACM, CHI, IEEE, FedCSIS, etc.) may be appropriate; however, targeting researchers 
already pre-disposed to work in Public Safety may be more immediately productive. A partial list of conferences to 
be targeted includes: 
  • Conference on Earthquake Engineering
  •  Crisis, Tragedy, and Recovery Network associated with the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
  • IEEE Conference on Technologies for Homeland Security (IEEE HST)
  • IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security and Rescue Robots (IEEE SSRR)
  • Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM)
A two-day annual workshop/”Disasters on the Hill” event would reinforce the commitment of NSF to the formation 
of this vital research community, increase the visibility of the community to the larger research community 
and Congress, allow stakeholders to meet and interact with the technology and researchers, and create new 
stakeholder-research partnerships. The first day could consist of a “Disasters on the Hill” like event to introduce 
stakeholders and researchers, with the second day devoted to feedback from the stakeholders and collective 
envisioning. 
23
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
4.2 Funded Research Portfolio
In order to effectively advance the state of the art 
and practice in disaster management, the envisioned 
funded research program should be structured 
in parallel tracks that reinforce each other. The 
envisioned time frame for the program overall is 
15 years, with rapid response grants, traditional 
PI grants of 2 to 5 years, and centers having a 
minimum of 5 year duration, with the option to 
renew for another 5 years. Projects should be 
cognizant that stakeholders will not be able to make 
initial sizable infrastructure investments or change 
legally mandated procedures in order to accept 
new technology, instead the results of computing 
research must transform the system from within by 
giving stakeholders the tools that allow these experts 
to do a better job.
1.  Rapid response grants. It is essential that 
researchers be able to document and immediately 
engage in disasters to capture ephemeral data. 
While the NSF RAPID program has a strong 
track record of supporting disaster research as 
noted in a recent workshop synthesizing lessons 
learned from RAPIDs related to the New Zealand 
earthquake and the Tohoku Japan earthquake and 
tsunami [19], there are often delays of weeks and 
even months. This prevents comprehensive data 
collection and effective interventions in the critical 
first two weeks after a major disaster. Therefore 
a pool of funds and protocol for immediate 
distribution should be available to researchers 
who maintain readiness to act and collect data on 
behalf of the larger research community. 
2.  Traditional PI grants. Three sizes of grants 
provide a suitable investment and entry point for 
individual or groups of researchers as well as more 
mature teams of investigators or teams conducting 
extensive fieldwork: 
      Seedling Projects, in which a small group 
of researchers partners with a stakeholder to 
address a single topic within computing for 
24
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
disasters. Seedling projects would be of short duration, i.e., no more than two years, and would be expected 
to lead to a Medium or Large Project. These projects allow researchers to make connections with response 
professionals and identify their possible computational contributions.
      Medium Projects, in which a multi-disciplinary group of researchers partner with one or more stakeholders 
to address one or more topics and to evaluate the results within a systems context in appropriate physical 
exercises, testing of social science theories and hypotheses against huge archives of data and information, 
or computer simulations. The results should include some measure of human-computer interaction. These 
projects would last up to 5 years in duration, as field work with human subjects is often time-consuming and 
difficult to schedule. 
      Large Projects are more ambitious in scope or in implementation and testing than Medium projects. Large 
projects can range from the establishment of a testbed or simulation to projects that capture computing 
at scale. These projects are expected to have multiple stakeholders as partners; for example, a project on 
computing for nuclear disasters would be expected to have representatives from the nuclear power industry, 
the response community, and nuclear regulatory agencies. The Large projects would last up to 5 years, as field 
work with human subjects is often time-consuming and difficult to schedule. 
5.  Centers. Following [18], multiple, large multidisciplinary centers of universities, response organizations (local 
or federal), and other relevant participants should be established to focus on promising technologies that 
would advance disaster resilience or response. The centers would couple research with practice by developing 
testbeds and exercises in order to rapidly evaluate concepts and elicit stakeholder requirements for emerging 
technologies. It is expected that at least one center will be capable of large-scale physical simulation in order 
to understand issues that only emerge at scale. Centers would be expected to address simulation, both for 
evaluation and for training. These grants would support the development of new curriculum and build new 
degree programs, professional certification, and minors in disaster management. One approach is to consider 
centers organized around regional resources and disaster professionals so as to facilitate the close partnerships 
and rapid prototyping of ideas needed for successful systems research. Center grants would be expected to 
persist for 5 years, with renewal for another 5 years. The establishment of centers would be spread out over the 
first five years in order to reap the benefits of growing the community. 
To maximize the impact of the research conducted in this program, both through individual grants and through 
the multi-disciplinary institutes, the participants will be encouraged to utilize the testbeds and metrics to assess 
progress and convey to the stakeholder (e.g., eventual adopter communities) the value of their results. Regardless 
of size, projects should successfully integrate basic and applied, theoretical and practical, mission-driven and 
curiosity-driven research to advance both CRICIS and computing in general.
25
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Acknowledgments
The Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) Workshop was jointly sponsored by the 
National Science Foundation and the Computing Community Consortium (CCC; http://cra.org/ccc). We 
especially thank Dr. Erwin Gianchandani for his guidance and valuable feedback. 
This report was produced by the steering committee for the workshop, comprising:
• Robin Murphy, co-chair, Texas A&M University 
• Trevor Darrell, co-chair, University of California, Berkeley
• Hans-Werner Braun, University of California, San Diego
• K. Mani Chandy, California Institute of Technology
• Ed Fox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
• Susan Metros, University of Southern California
• Elena Messina, National Institute for Standards and Technology
• Paul Oh, Drexel University
• Leysia Palen, University of Colorado, Boulder
• Ramesh Rao, University of California, San Diego
• Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota
• Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland
It was informed and reviewed by the workshop participants:
• Anish Arora, Ohio State University
• David Boyd, Department of Homeland Security
• Tim Brown, University of Colorado, Boulder 
• Amy Bruckerman, Georgia Institute of Technology 
• James Caverlee, Texas A&M University
• Mani Chandy, California Institute of Technology 
• ChienHung Chen, Georgia Institute of Technology
• Sarita Chung, Harvard University 
• Ram Dantu, University of North Texas
• Trevor Darrell, University of California, Berkeley
• Daniel Fagbuyi, George Washington University 
• Scott Fahlman, Carnegie Mellon University 
26
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
• Ed Fox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
• Peter Freeman, Georgia Institute of Technology 
• Arif Ghafoor, Purdue University  
• Marc Hafner, California Fire 
• Milton Halem, University of Maryland 
• Jose Holguin-Veras, Rensselaer Polytechnic University 
• Andrea Kavanaugh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
• Eva Lee, Georgia Institute of Technology
• Alan MacEachren, Pennsylvania State University 
• Frank McKenna, University of California, Berkeley
• Sharad Mehrota, University of California, Irvine 
• Elena Messina, National Institute of Standards and Technology
• Susan Metros, University of Southern California
• David Millard, Georgia Institute of Technology
• Matt Minson, Texas Engineering Extension Service
• Alexander Morrison, Ohio State University
• Robin Murphy, Texas A&M University
• Paul Oh, Drexel University
• Leysia Palen, Colorado State University
• Rebecca Pierce, University of Pennsylvania
• David Pietrocola, National Science Foundation
• Ramesh Rao, California Institute of Technology
• Eric Rasmussen, San Diego State University
• Kate Saenko, University of California, Berkeley
• Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota
• Ben Schneiderman, University of Maryland
• Phil Smith, Ohio State University
• Richard Smith, Texas A&M, Corpus Christi
• Satoshi Tadokoro, Tohoku University
• R. Uthurusamy, Association for Computing Machinery
• Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
• Ning Zhang, University of California, Berkeley
27
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
1.  Blanchard, B.W.  2007.  Guide To Emergency Management And Related Terms, Definitions, Concepts, 
Acronyms, Organizations, Programs, Guidance, Executive Orders & Legislation.  FEMA Emergency Management 
Institute.  Retrieved from http://training.fema.gov/EMIWeb/edu/termdef.asp.
2.  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST).  2007.  NIT for Resilient Physical Systems.  
Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President, The White House.
3. Computing Research Association.  2003.  Grand Research Challenges in Information Systems.
4.  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST).  2003.  The Science and Technology of 
Combating Terrorism,  Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President, The White 
House.
5.  Committee on Environment and Natural Resources.  2008.  Grand Challenges for Disaster Reduction.  National 
Science and Technology Council, Executive Office of the President, The White House.
6.  Sircar, J., et al.  2009.  "Catastrophe Bonds for Transportation Assets Feasibility Analysis for Bridges,"  
Transportation Research Record:  Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2115:  12-19,  The National 
Academies.
7.  Mason, B., ed.  2007.  Citizen Engagement in Emergency Planning for a Flu Pandemic:  A Summary of the 
October 23, 2006 Workshop of the Disasters Roundtable.  National Research Council.  The National Academies.
8.  Mason, B., ed.  2006.  Community Disaster Resilience:  A Summary of the March 20, 2006 Workshop of the 
Disasters Roundtable.  National Research Council.  The National Academies.
9.  Kershaw, P.J. and B. Mason.  2006.  The Indian Ocean Tsunami Disaster:  Implications for U.S. and Global 
Disaster Reduction and Preparedness -- Summary of the June 21, 2005 Workshop of the Disasters Roundtable.  
National Research Council.  The National Academies.
10.  Committee on the Future of Emergency Care in the United States Health System.  2007.  Emergency Medical 
Services: At the Crossroads.  Board on Health Care Services (HCS) and the Institute of Medicine (IOM).  The 
National Academies.
11.  Committee on the Effective Use of Data Methodologies and Technologies to Estimate Subnational Populations 
at Risk.  2007.  Tools and Methods for Estimating Populations at Risk from Natural Disasters and Complex 
Humanitarian Crises.  Board on Earth Sciences and Resources.  The National Academies.
12.  Committee on Planning for Catastrophe:  A Blueprint for Improving Geospatial Data Tools and Infrastructure.  
2007.  Successful Response Starts with a Map: Improving Geospatial Support for Disaster Management.  
Board on Earth Sciences and Resources and Earth and Life Studies.  The National Academies.
13.  Committee on Disaster Research in the Social Sciences: Future Challenges and Opportunities.  2006.  Facing 
Hazards and Disasters: Understanding Human Dimensions.  Board on Earth and Life Studies.  The National 
Academies.
References
28
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
14.  McClean, D., ed.  2010.  World Disasters Report 2010:  Focus on urban risk.  International Federation of Red 
Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
15.  Adam, N.  2009.  Science & Technology Directorate U.S. Department of Homeland Security Workshop on 
Emergency Management:  Incident, Resource, and Supply Chain Management.  U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security.
16.  Andersson, K.P. and E. Ostrom.  2008.  "Analyzing decentralized resource regimes from a polycentric 
perspective."  Policy Science 41: 71-93.
17.  Rogers, E.M.  2003.  Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed.  Free Press.
18.  Rao, R.R., J. Eisenberg, and T. Schmitt, eds.  2007.  Improving Disaster Management:  The Role of IT in 
Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery.  Computer Science and Telecommunications Board and 
Engineering and Physical Sciences  The National Academies.
19.  Eguchi, R., et al., eds.  2012.  2010 Canterbury and 2011 Christchurch New Zealand Earthquakes and the 
2011 Tohoku Japan Earthquake:  Emerging Research Needs and Opportunities.  A report from a Workshop 
held February 9 and 10, 2012.  Earthquake Engineering Research Institute.
20.  Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction.  U.S. Department of Homeland Security.  Retrieved from 
http://www.sdr.gov.
21.  U.S. Department of Homeland Security.  2008.  Overview:  ESF and Support Annexes Coordinating Federal 
Assistance in Support of the National Response Framework.
22.  Committee on Science and Technology for Countering Terrorism.  2002.  Making the Nation Safer:  The Role of 
Science and Technology in Countering Terrorism.  National Research Council.  The National Academies.
29
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Critical Real-time Computing and Information Systems (CRICIS) requires efficient access to diverse information 
available from formal and informal stakeholders as well as a solid understanding of science and technology, 
rapid implementation of research information into disaster reduction programs and applications. A starting point 
for understanding the diversity of stakeholders is to consider the set of stakeholders in Table 1 identified by The 
Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction (SDR). While the list in Table 1 includes academics via funding from the 
NSF, it lacks direct engagement from industry partners, Citizens, and other informal stakeholders. Incorporating an 
industry liaison to various companies (e.g., CrisisMappers, Google, Twitter, etc.) could facilitate further cooperation 
with the tools that are frequently utilized during disasters and actively support emergency services.
The Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction (SDR) is an element of the White House Office of Science and 
Technology and Policy’s National Science and Technology Council. The Council facilitates national strategies for 
reducing disaster risks and losses that are based on effective use of science and technology [20]. Table 1 shows 
the members of this subcommittee, representing a broad collection of federal agencies responsible for various 
aspects of disaster management. 
Many of the key stakeholder agencies are also a component of the Department of Homeland Security/FEMA 
Emergency Support Function system [21] listed in Table 2 with the assigned support roles for emergency 
services. The Emergency Support Function system organizes the contribution of each stakeholder in reducing 
the harm disasters cause to society, the economy, and the lives of individuals and communities by function. Each 
of the 15 functions requires disaster managers to consider a different facet of the situation (e.g., transportation, 
communication, public works, public health, etc.) and to act within that scope to reduce uncertainty, to calculate 
and compare costs and benefits, and to manage resources, often on a much larger scale and at a much faster 
pace than are supported by methods and means for solving ordinary problems. 
CRICIS will provide capabilities that can help the decision-makers for each of these functions grasp the dynamic 
realities of a disaster more clearly and help them formulate better decisions more quickly; it can also help keep 
better track of the myriad details across in all phases of disaster management [18]. An important element of a 
research program will be designing protocols to provide emergency-response organizations with authoritative 
knowledge and support regarding adoption of new technologies. In addition, designated emergency response 
agencies should use existing technology to achieve short-term improvements in the telecommunications and 
computing infrastructure for first responders [22].
Appendix A: Key  
Stakeholders and Functions
30
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
FEMA Dept. of Transportation NOAA
US-DoD: Networks and 
Information
Economic Development 
Administration
US Public Health Services
Bureau of Land Manage-
ment
EPA US-AID
Centers for Disease  
Control
Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission
US Army Corps of  
Engineers
Dept. of Homeland  
Security
NASA Dept. of Agriculture
Dept. Housing and Urban 
Development
National  
Geospatial-Intelligence 
Agency
US Forest Service
Dept. of Energy National Guard Bureau US Geological Survey
Dept. of State
National Institutes of 
Health
NSF
Dept. of the Interior NIST  American Red Cross
Table 1.
Members of the Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction (SDR).
31
www.cra.org/ccc/
CRICIS:
Critical Real-time Computing 
and Information Systems
Table 2.
National Response Framework- Emergency Support Functions (ESF).
USDA u u u u u u ● ✚ u u ✚ u
USDA/FS u u u ● ✚ u u u u u u
DOC u u u u u u u u u u u u u u
DOD u u u u u u u u ✚ u u u u u u
DOD/USACE u ● ✚ u u u u u u u u u u
ED u u
DOE u u u u u u u ● ✚ u u u
HHS u u u u ● ✚ u u u u u
DHS u u u u u u u u u u u ✚ ●
DHS/FEMA u ✚ ✚ u ● ✚ ● ✚ u ● ✚ u ● ✚ u u ● ✚ ✚
DHS/NCS ● ✚ u u
DHS/USCG u u u u ✚ ✚ u
HUD u u ✚ u
DOI u u u u u u u u ✚ u ● ✚ u u u u
DOJ u u u u u u u ● ✚ u
DOL u u u u u u u u u u
DOS u u u u u u u u u
DOT ● ✚ u u u u u u u u u
TREAS u u u u u
VA u u u u u u u
EPA u u u u ● ✚ u u u u
FCC u u u
GSA u u u u u ● ✚ u u u u
NASA u u u u u
NRC u u u u u
OPM u u u
SBA u u ✚ u
SSA u u u
TVA u u u u
USAID u u u
USPS u u u u u u u
ACHP u
ARC u u u u u u
CNCS u u u
DRA u
HENTF u
NARA u
NVOAD u
Tr
an
sp
or
ta
tio
n
Agency Co
m
m
un
ic
at
io
ns
Pu
bl
ic
 W
or
ks
 a
nd
 E
ng
in
ee
rin
g
Fi
re
fig
ht
in
g
Em
er
ge
nc
y 
M
an
ag
em
en
t
M
as
s 
Ca
re
, E
m
er
ge
nc
y 
As
si
st
an
ce
,  
Ho
us
in
g,
 a
nd
 H
um
an
 S
er
vi
ce
s
Lo
gi
st
ic
s 
M
an
ag
em
en
t  
an
d 
Re
so
ur
ce
 S
up
po
rt
Pu
bl
ic
 H
ea
lth
 a
nd
  
M
ed
ic
al
 S
er
vi
ce
s
Se
ar
ch
 a
nd
 R
es
cu
e
Oi
l a
nd
 H
az
ar
do
us
  
M
at
er
ia
ls
 R
es
po
ns
e
Ag
ric
ul
tu
re
 a
nd
  
Na
tu
ra
l R
es
ou
rc
es
En
er
gy
Pu
bl
ic
 S
af
et
y 
an
d 
Se
cu
rit
y
Lo
ng
-T
er
m
 C
om
m
un
ity
 R
ec
ov
er
y
Ex
te
rn
al
 A
ffa
irs
Emergency Support Functions
●=ESF coordinator ✚=Primary agency u=Support Agency
www.cra.org/ccc/
The Computing Community Consortium 
Established in 2006 through a Cooperative Agreement between the National Science Foundation 
(NSF) and the Computing Research Association (CRA), the CCC serves as a catalyst and enabler 
for the computing research community. Its goals are to unite the community to contribute to 
shaping the future of the field; provide leadership for the community, encouraging revolutionary, 
high-impact research; encourage the alignment of computing research with pressing national 
priorities and national challenges (many of which cross disciplines); give voice to the community, 
communicating to a broad audience the many ways in which advances in computing will create a 
brighter future; and grow new leaders for the computing research community. 

