 
National Science Foundation 
Enhancing Our LivEs 
ThrOugh cOmpuTing 
Computer & Information Science & Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transforming Our World
Through Computing 
Advances in computer, communication and information science and engineering (S&E) have profoundly
transformed our lives. Research supported by the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) at the National Science Foundation (NSF) has enabled innovations such as the Internet, Web
browsers and smart devices including robotic and assistive technologies and driverless cars—just to name a few
examples. Essentially all practical applications of information technology are based on ideas and concepts that
emerged from investments in basic computing research. 
Innovations in computing serve as key drivers of U.S. competitiveness
and sustainable economic growth. Since 1995, networking and
information technology industries accounted for 25 percent of U.S.
economic development. In 2010 alone, information technology
industries grew 16 percent and contributed 5 percent to the overall
U.S. gross domestic product. 
Beyond contributing to economic growth, computing accelerates the
pace of discovery and innovation in nearly all fields of S&E inquiry,
opening new windows into phenomena as vast as the universe and as
small as nanoparticles. Further, computing provides solutions to some
of society’s most pressing challenges—from improving human health
and well-being to mitigating natural disasters. 
The support of fundamental computing research and infrastructure 
by NSF has returned exceptional dividends to the nation. Through 
investments in ambitious research and infrastructure by CISE, one of
NSF’s seven research funding arms, the agency continues to ensure that 
the U.S. remains at the forefront of cutting-edge computing. 
CISE’s Impact 
By employing NSF’s gold standard merit review process, CISE distributes
more than 1,600 awards annually to over 17,000 researchers, of
which nearly half are undergraduate and graduate students. CISE
supports all areas of computer and information S&E and fosters
broad interdisciplinary collaborations. The directorate develops and
maintains cutting-edge national computing and information infrastructure
for furthering research and education. CISE also contributes to the
development of a computer and information technology workforce with
skills essential for success in the new era of computation and data. These
efforts include a special emphasis on educating teachers as well as
recruiting and retaining underrepresented groups in computing. 
As our reliance on computationally enabled technologies and knowledge grows, computing will continue to have
broad and significant implications for society and enhance our everyday lives. 
Researchers are using advanced computing 
infrastructure to improve the quality of brain tumor 
imaging. Advanced tools allow doctors to make 
more informed decisions about treatment options 
and perform more successful surgeries. 
CISE is committed to increasing the number and
diversity of students in computing, including
attracting and retaining females whose
participation in computing is very low. 
Cover caption: NSF-funded researchers create secure, easy-to-use interfaces to link scientists to instruments, data, computing systems, networks, applications and analysis and visualization tools
in order to drive discovery. Here, a researcher from the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) interacts with an advanced visualization display. Credits: (cover) Blake Harvey,
NCSA; (page 1 top) Thinkstock; (page 1 bottom) “Georgia Computes!” Georgia Tech 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expanding the Frontiers of Computing 
The mission of CISE is to promote the progress of computer and information S&E research and education and advance
the development and use of cyberinfrastructure; promote understanding of the principles and uses of advanced
computer, communication and information systems in support of societal priorities; and contribute to universal, transparent
and affordable participation in a knowledge-based society. CISE accomplishes this through four divisions. 
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure supports and coordinates the development, acquisition and
provision of state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure resources, tools and services essential to
the advancement and transformation of S&E. 
Computing and Communication Foundations advances computing and communication
theory, algorithms for computer and computational sciences and architecture and the
design of computers and software. 
Computer and Network Systems invents new computing and networking technologies, while
ensuring their security and privacy, and finds new ways to make use of current technologies. 
Information and Intelligent Systems studies the interrelated roles of people, computers
and information to increase the ability to understand data, as well as mimic the hallmarks
of intelligence in computational systems. 
CISE by the Numbers (FY 2013) 
$858 million 
Total Appropriations 
7,821 
Number of proposals 
1,616 
Competitive awards funded 
21% 
Success rate of proposals 
17,227 
Total number of people directly supported 
8,313 
Number of senior researchers, professionals and postdoctoral
associates 
8,914 
Number of graduate and undergraduate students 
Credits: (top to bottom) Texas Advanced Computing Center; Computer Science and Engineering Division of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, The University of Michigan;
 
UWW ResNET, Creative Commons license; Mary Knox Merrill, Northeastern University
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting National and Societal Needs 
The CISE directorate supports fundamental research in all fields of computing and deploys cutting-edge infrastructure 
to support S&E across all disciplines. CISE investments lead to discoveries and services essential to achieving national 
and societal priorities—from human health, transportation and environmental sustainability to education and workforce 
development. These pages contain a few examples of the impact of CISE on these priorities. 
Expanding the Internet 
NSF helped make the Internet a reality and continues to make
it safer, faster and more accessible. In 1985, NSF initiated
NSFNET, the first large-scale use of Internet technologies,
which linked researchers to the nation’s supercomputing
centers. Since then, CISE has helped shape the growth and
operation of the modern Internet, fostered international
network connections and funded the development of the
world’s first freely-available Web browser, Mosaic. Along the
way, NSF helped transition the network into the self-governing
and commercially viable Internet we know today. 
Credits: (left top to bottom) © Google; NSF; Alan Norton, Mel Shapiro, Tom Galarneau, Perry Domingo (National Center for Atmospheric Research), Peter Johnsen (Cray Inc.) and Mark Straka 
(NCSA, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign); (right top to bottom) Donna Cox and Robert Patterson, courtesy of NCSA and the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois; Thinkstock 
Combining Human and Computer Intelligence 
Any time you are required to decipher a set of graphically distorted alphanumeric characters on a
website, you are likely encountering a reCAPTCHA, a technology initially supported by CISE. One
set of characters is used as a security measure to ensure user authenticity, while the other is an image
that optical character recognition software could not decipher. By entering both, reCAPTCHA helped
digitize 20 years of The New York Times in less than three months. 
Into the Eye of a Storm 
Researchers used NSF-supported advanced computing
resources to develop a new, high-resolution hurricane
forecasting system that incorporates Doppler radar data
from planes flying into storms. The forecasts improve storm
intensity predictions by an average of 20 to 40 percent
over standard official forecasts. This prediction system may
become part of the operational forecasting system used
by the National Hurricane Center in future emergencies. 
Powering Mobile Devices 
With support from CISE, researchers developed
a novel approach to power mobile devices
that reduces battery usage by 20 percent. The
technology optimizes how a battery powers the
chips inside a phone, converting high-voltage
current to a lower voltage at the exact location
where it is consumed. 
Just “Google” It 
During the Internet’s infancy, NSF recognized the need for 
searchable interfaces for the growing collection of online 
information and supported the Stanford Integrated Digital 
Library Project. Two graduate students, Larry Page and 
Sergey Brin, working on this project developed a new 
way to search the Web by using page ranking. Today, this 
methodology is at the core of the search engine used by 
Google, which is worth more than $300 billion and employs 
over 45,000 people. 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Credits: (left top to bottom) all Thinkstock; (right top to bottom) Theoretical and Computational Biophysics Group, Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign; Texas A&M University 
Self-driving Cars 
The development of real-time sensors, smart algorithms and verification tools,
supported by CISE over the years, are enabling self-driving cars to effectively
sense their surroundings and act in complex, dynamic environments. The
deployment of autonomous vehicles could prevent thousands of automobile-
related fatalities and injuries resulting from the almost 11 million traffic collisions
occurring in the U.S. each year.
Computer Models Target HIV 
More than 35 million people around the
world live with HIV. Using state-of-the-art,
NSF-funded supercomputers, researchers
determined the precise atomic structure of
the protein shell of the virus. The simulations
revealed a new attractive target for drugs that
suppress the HIV virus and stop the progression
of AIDS. 
Computing Education for the 21st Century 
Sixty-two percent of all projected job growth in S&E over the next decade will be in information
technology, yet there are only enough graduates to fill two-thirds of the job openings each year. To
address this shortfall, NSF aims to train 10,000 teachers who will provide rigorous, academic computing
courses in 10,000 high schools across the country. 
Search-and-rescue Robots 
CISE-funded search-and-rescue robots were on-site at Ground
Zero within 24 hours of the September 11 attacks to search for
survivors. Since then, the robots have evolved to include caterpillar-
like crawlers slinking through rubble, mini-helicopters hovering above
wreckage and small boats inspecting structures in water. To date,
rescue robots have been deployed in more than 30 disasters. 
The Sky’s the Limit 
Cloud computing provides on-demand access to data, 
storage, software and other computing utilities over the 
Internet. Applications that use this methodology include 
Gmail and Dropbox, which cumulatively have more 
than 600 million users. The virtualization software that 
enables cloud computing resulted from the work of a 
CISE-funded researcher, who also co-founded VMware, 
Inc. The company, which provides cloud software and 
services, is now worth more than $35 billion. 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More Ways
CISE Impacts Our Lives
 
Discoveries and innovations supported by CISE enrich our lives and result in widespread
economic benefit. As CISE continues to invest responsibly in cutting-edge research and
infrastructure, the directorate will expand the possibilities in computing. Below are more
ways CISE research is impacting our daily lives. 
Accelerating the pace of discovery 
Advancing sustainable technologies 
Augmenting human capabilities 
Creating smart systems 
Cultivating computer scientists and engineers 
Designing the next-generation Internet 
Driving the future of robotics 
Expanding the limits of computation 
Envisioning the future of learning 
Extracting knowledge from large datasets 
Forecasting and mitigating natural disasters 
Harnessing the power of parallel processing 
Improving energy and transportation systems 
Innovating manufacturing methods 
Optimizing wireless networks 
Modeling the brain 
Motivating well-being through technology 
Protecting personal information 
Recruiting women and minorities to computing 
Safeguarding cyberspace 
Securing critical infrastructure 
Sensing the world around us 
Simulating natural phenomenon 
Transforming health care 
An NSF-supported graduate research fellow 
developed a multi-touch keyboard, which 
was acquired and incorporated by Apple 
Inc. into their touchscreen products, including 
iPhones and iPads. 
CISE-funded researchers have revolution-
ized micro-manufacturing by printing
delicate robotic bee bodies. The printed
sheets “pop up” like children’s picture
books, creating functional flying robots. 
CISE-supported researchers are
developing WIFIRE, an end-to-end
cyberinfrastructure that uses real-time,
data-driven assessment to predict a
wildfire’s rate of spread. 
Credits: (top to bottom) Thinkstock; Pratheev Sreetharan (photographer) and School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University; 

HPWREN/University of California, San Diego
 
5 
 
 
 
CISE:
Leading the Nation 
National Initiatives 
The National Big Data Research and Development Initiative coordinates efforts to manage, 
visualize and extract useful information from large, diverse, distributed and heterogeneous datasets. 
US Ignite promotes U.S. leadership in the development and deployment of next-generation, end-
user applications that leverage ultra-fast, programmable networks with the potential for significant 
societal impact. 
The National Robotics Initiative is a federally coordinated cross-agency program to develop the 
next generation of collaborative robots, or co-robots, that work beside and cooperatively with people 
to increase their productivity and safety. 
The Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative aims to 
revolutionize understanding of the brain by integrating research across multiple scales ranging from 
molecular to behavioral levels. 
Infrastructure for Discovery 
The Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) is the most advanced, 
powerful and robust collection of advanced digital resources and services in the world. It is a single 
virtual system that scientists can use to interactively share computing resources, data and expertise. 
Blue Waters is one of the world’s most powerful supercomputers, accelerating the pace of scientific 
progress across multiple disciplines and enabling previously impossible discoveries. 
The Global Environment for Networking Innovations (GENI) is a unique virtual laboratory for 
exploring future internets at scale and is transforming research at the frontiers of networking S&E. 
GENI serves as the technical foundation for US Ignite. 
Credits: (top to bottom) Thinkstock; City of San Leandro; Thinkstock; Thomas Deerinck and Mark Ellisman; Thinkstock; NCSA, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Nicolle Rager Fuller, NSF 
6 
NSF 14-807 
www.nsf.gov 
4201 Wilson Boulevard | Arlington | Virginia 22230 
February 2014 

