	 	 					
Spring/Summer	2006
Department	of	
Electrical	Engineering	
and	Computer	Science
N
ew
s
V i s i o n a r y  I m a g i n g
Emmett Leith
TH
E	
UN
IV
ER
SI
TY
	O
F	
M
IC
HI
GA
N
2
In
 T
hi
s 
Is
su
e A Message from the Chair
Memorial Tribute
 Emmett Leith (1927-2005): Inventor of Practical Holography
Featured Research
 Kang Shin: Making Things Work in Real Time
 
Department News
 ENIAC Finds a Permanent Home 
 Faculty Honors and Awards
 Betty Cummings Retires After 40 Years
 
Student News
 Research Experience for Undergraduate Students
 2005 CSE Honors Competition
 U-M Team Wins CADathlon
 HKN Receives Outstanding Chapter Award
 Student Honors and Awards 
 Bill Gates Says There Will Be Jobs!
Alumni News
 Alumni Society President’s Message
 Alumni Awards: Fred Leonberger, John Sanguinetti, Jennifer Rexford
Alumni Notes
 Focus on our Alumni: David Pennock (PhD, CSE ‘99)
 Alumni Notes
 In Memoriam: Sushila Subramanian, Louis Frank Kazda
 Amateur Radio Club Needs Alumni Help!
The Regents of the University of Michigan
David A. Brandon, Ann Arbor
Laurence B. Deitch, Bingham Farms
Olivia P. Maynard, Goodrich
Rebecca McGowan, Ann Arbor
Andrea Fischer Newman, Ann Arbor
Andrew C. Richner, Grosse Pointe Park
S. Martin Taylor, Grosse Pointe Farms
Katherine E. White,  Ann Arbor  
Mary Sue Coleman, (ex officio)
The University of Michigan, as an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer, complies with 
all applicable federal and state laws regarding nondiscrimination and affirmative action, including 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 
The University of Michigan is committed to a policy of nondiscrimination and equal opportunity for 
all persons regardless of race, sex, color, religion, creed, national origin or ancestry, age, marital 
status, sexual orientation, disability, or Vietnam-era veteran status in employment, educational 
programs and activities, and admissions. Inquiries or complaints may be addressed to the Senior 
Director for Institutional Equity and Title IX/Section 504 Coordinator, Office of Institutional Equity, 
2072 Administrative Services Building, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1432, 734-763-0235, TTY 734-
647-1388. For other University of Michigan information call 734-764-1817.
Electrical Engineering 
and Computer Science
1301 Beal Avenue
Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-2122
PH  734 764-2390
FX  734 763-1503
www.eecs.umich.edu
Editor: Catharine June
Design: Liene Karels

This issue of the Newsletter features the research of two of our 
most distinguished faculty.  Kang Shin is a pioneer in real-time 
computing and control.  After his early work in robotics and airplane 
control, he gravitated toward problems related to computer and 
communication networks.  In addition to founding the Real-Time 
Computing Laboratory at U-M, Kang is credited with building the 
software group within the CSE Division of EECS.  It is a tribute to 
Kang that today this group has strengths in networks, databases, 
security, and programming languages.  Please read more about 
Kang and his seminal contributions, beginning on page 9.
The second faculty member featured in this issue is Emmett 
Leith, who is pictured on the cover.  Emmett was slated to retire 
on December 31, 2005, but sadly he passed away just before 
Christmas.  We had held his retirement reception only weeks 
earlier.  There we celebrated his achievements in the development 
of both synthetic aperture radar and holography.  In my estimation, 
Emmett came within a whisker of winning a Nobel Prize.  He 
was a phenomenal thinker, as evidenced in the description of 
his career, beginning on p. 4.  The department has custody of 
Emmett’s early holograms and plans to display them in the EECS 
atrium.  Smithsonian, eat your heart out!  Emmett had a sense of 
humor that matched his scientific genius.  A colleague had recently 
remarked to Emmett that he was surprised that Emmett was still 
coming in to work everyday.  Emmett was asked whether there 
was anything else he enjoyed as much as coming in to work. 
Emmett replied, “Yes, I enjoy going home.  But, I can’t go home 
unless I first come in!”  Another story relates to Emmett’s habit of 
driving very old automobiles.  In one instance, he was driving his 
auto across the country to attend a technical conference.  This 
car leaked oil badly, so Emmett rigged up a pan underneath the 
engine to catch the oil. He then would stop every 50 miles or so to 
empty the pan back into the crankcase!  There are many similar 
stories about Emmett, demonstrating his frugality, his sense of 
humor, and his resourcefulness.
Outside of his scientific accomplishments, Emmett is perhaps best 
known for growing an orange tree in his yard in Michigan.  He built 
a large enclosure for the tree to shelter it from Michigan winters, 
and he and his wife, June, gathered large numbers of oranges 
from the tree each year.  That tree grew and grew and grew.  Given 
the setting, it seemed bigger than life.  So was Emmett.  We shall 
miss him dearly.
 
David C. Munson, Jr.
   
I write this near the end of 
another academic year.  Seniors 
will graduate soon, some taking 
positions in industry and others 
planning for graduate school. 
Underclassmen will take summer 
jobs, and faculty will more fully 
engage with their research and 
graduate students.  Summer will 
be busy!
Our CSE faculty have moved into 
their new building.  The interior 
truly is spectacular – full of natural 
light, even on a cloudy Michigan 
winter day.  The large, multistory atrium, complete with a spiral 
staircase, is busy with students studying, but also will host major 
events.  Conference rooms and student spaces abound for group 
work.  You are invited to stop by the next time you are on campus! 
In other construction news, just a few days ago we received the 
go-ahead from the State to begin work on the renovation and 
expansion of our cleanroom and related labs, now known as the 
Michigan Nanofabrication Facility (MNF).  The price tag on this 
project has climbed past $40M, funded by alumni and industry. 
It is anticipated that the construction will require two years to 
complete.  In another project, we’ll begin other renovations in the 
EECS Building late this summer.  Most of the initial construction 
will occur on the first floor, with classroom renovations and a 
major redesign of the atrium to accommodate a student-faculty 
commons, computer lab, and improved space for student groups. 
One of the real pleasures I experienced earlier this semester was 
an extended visit to meet with EECS alumni in California, both in 
the Bay Area and in Los Angeles.  I can report that our alumni are 
successful in their careers, interesting to speak with, and intensely 
loyal to U-M.  At one dinner I attended, the alumnus to my left 
proudly stated that he had 15 family members who had attended 
Michigan.  The alumnus to my right replied, “Oh that’s nothing,” 
and proceeded to announce an even longer list of family members 
who had Michigan degrees!  In this Newsletter, you can read notes 
about some of our alumni.  
Likewise, I invite you to read about activities of our current 
students.  Our student groups are involved in a phenomenal range 
of activities each year.  It was gratifying to see our HKN chapter 
(ECE honor society) win a national Outstanding Chapter Award 
once again.  This is becoming an annual affair!  On the CS side of 
our department, the CSE Scholars group is equally impressive.
   
A Message from the Chair

Emmett Leith (1927 - 2005)
Inventor of Practical Holography
M
em
or
ia
l T
ri
bu
te
Emmett Leith passed away December 23, 2005, 
at the age of 78. This came just five weeks after 
a retirement reception held in his honor, attended 
by former and current students, colleagues, and 
friends. We now celebrate the life and career of a 
remarkable individual – a brilliant innovator, vision-
ary researcher, remarkable teacher, and very unas-
suming gentle friend.
Emmett’s worldwide reputation rests primarily on 
his research in holography, which grew out of his 
work on synthetic aperture radar (SAR) at the Uni-
versity of Michigan Willow Run Laboratories. For 
many years shrouded under cover of highly clas-
sified research, his early work in SAR created the 
foundation for major breakthroughs in holography, 
and provided principles that he would rely on even 
in his most recent research.
A Vision of the Future:
Synthetic Aperture Radar to Holography
Leith joined the U-M Radar Laboratory of Willow 
Run Laboratories in 1952, with a Master’s degree in 
Physics. In later writings about his work, Leith said 
he was in the right place at the right time because of 
the very interesting work being done in the area of 
synthetic aperture radar (SAR). The Army wanted 
to achieve a high-quality imaging radar system – a 
goal thought to be impractical due to the size an 
antenna would need to be to achieve high resolu-
tion. No airplane could carry such a large antenna. 
However, if the antenna could be synthesized, such 
that a five-foot antenna could act like an antenna 
the size of a football field, perhaps such imaging 
could be accomplished. To simulate a larger anten-
na, radar returns were mixed with a local signal. For 
each transmitted pulse the returns were recorded 
on a photograhic film as a single line. This process 
continued as the airplane flew, which resulted in a 
film strip that contained no recognizable image, just 
like a hologram. This radar data then needed to be 
processed.
In the 1950’s, when the major developments in 
SAR occurred, computers were in their infancy and 
could not handle the gigantic computing task that 
was required to process the radar data. Based on 
discussions with R. Varian, one of the inventors of 

the kystron, two U-M scientists, Lou Cutrona and 
Wes Vivian, decided to accomplish the task using 
optical processing. When it came time to build the 
radar system, Emmett chose to work on the optical 
processor.
Within a couple years, Leith developed a complete-
ly new theory of SAR, based on physical optics. 
Leith stated, “this new way of describing SAR in 
combination with optical processing is what today 
would be called a holographic viewpoint.” Until it 
was proved, however, many scientists did not give 
the theory much credit.
The new radar system was ready to be tested 
in 1957. Eight flights yielded no images – which 
seemed to vindicate the critics of the new method 
and threaten continuation of the project. Flight nin, 
however, stated Leith, “produced some startling 
results. The terrain was beautifully mapped. The 
Michigan SAR system became famous.”  Devel-
oped as part of Project Michigan, the new radar 
system allowed for high-quality mapping of enemy 
territory from a safe distance, penetrating even fog 
and darkness at longer distances than previously 
possible.
Making Holography a Reality
By 1960, Leith had turned his attention to hologra-
phy, a technique that was first described in 1947 
by Dennis Gabor. The concept was to record a 
wavefield on photographic film and then regener-
ate the wavefield at a later time by shining a beam 
of light through the photographic record, called a 
hologram. At first the technique was simply called 
wavefront reconstruction. 
Gabor’s goal was to improve the resolution of an 
electron microscope. While moderately success-
ful, the resulting images by Gabor were quite fuzzy, 
and had a twin image. Gabor could not correct this, 
and many scientists deemed the problem unsolv-
able. After 1955, holography went into a period of 
hibernation.
During this period, Emmett became intrigued with 
the principles of holography, which related to his 
own data processing work with synthetic aperture 
radar. He approached Juris Upatnieks, a scientist 
who had just joined the Willow Run lab in 1960, 
to get him interested in this new area. Upatnieks 
recalled that he was not initially impressed by 
Emmett’s description of wanting to take a transpar-
ency, record an out-of-focus image, and then take 
that recording and get a focused image back. How-
ever, after being shown a description of this pro-
cess in the book, Principles of Optics by Born and 
Wolf (1959, now in its 7th edition), in which Gabor’s 
experiment was outlined, he was convinced.
The problem inherent in Gabor’s method seemed 
insurmountable, yet a moment of inspiration led to a 
unique approach, called carrier-frequency, or more 
popularly, off-axis holography. Key to this approach 
was the introduction of a second beam, called a 
reference beam, which passed around the object 
and impinged obliquely on the recording medium.
With this method, Leith recalled, “The image from 
the hologram was indistinguishable from the origi-
nal object itself, and the process required no more 
coherence of the light than the original Gabor pro-
cess. In fact, in further refinement, we devised a 
system that achieved carrier frequency holography, 
with coherence requirements that were about 15% 
less than required for Gabor’s original method.” 
This groundbreaking work, accomplished early 
in 1961, was published in 1962 in the Journal of 
the Optical Society of America (vol. 52). The basic 
problem was solved, yet further refinements and 
advances were needed before the technique would 
capture worldwide attention.
Lensless and 3D Photography
Emmett and Juris introduced display holography to 
the world in Fall 1963. It was publicized as lensless 
photography because a lens was not used between 
the object and the photographic plate. In the first 
step of this 2-step process, a negative is generated 
by splitting light into two beams: one beam, called 
the reference beam, travels directly to the photo-
graphic plate, while the other beam, called the ob-
ject beam, first hits the object to be photographed 
before the reflected light waves reach the plate. 
Both beams meet at the photographic plate, cre-
ating a phenomenon known as interference. The 
result is an unrecognizable negative, described 
by Leith as “a hodgepodge of specks, blobs and 
whorls.” This is the hologram. In the second step, 
which is the reconstruction stage, the hologram is 
illuminated with a replica of the reference beam. 
Two images are formed:  a virtual image behind the 
plate on one side of the illuminating beam, and a 
real image on the opposite side of the illuminating 
beam in front of the hologram that forms a sharp 
image on a screen.  For the first time, holograms 
could now be made of arbitrary objects, not just 
photographic transparencies. 
Eager for additional refinements, researchers 
called for a high-quality 3-dimensional display holo-
gram, which had not yet been achieved (though the 
“The Michigan SAR 
system became 
famous.”
“The image from 
the hologram was 
indistinguishable 
from the original 
object itself.”
6
information to create the objects in 3D was present 
in the existing holograms). Emmett and Juris went 
to work making improvements on their technique, 
which would require use of the newly available 
laser to get the desired coherence of light. They 
presented their work at the Spring 1964 meeting of 
the Optical Society of America in Washington, DC. 
As recalled by Stephen Benton in the book, The 
Art and Science of Holography: A Tribute to Em-
mett Leith and Yuri Denisyuk (ed. H. John Caul-
field), “Leith and Upatnieks gave a short oral paper 
on their 3D holograms, and invited the attendees 
to view a hologram in the hotel suite used by the 
Spectra-Physics company, who made most of the 
early holography-capable lasers. A line of optical 
scientists and engineers wound down the hallways 
of the hotel as they patiently waited to see the 3D 
images that were absolutely unprecedented in their 
realism and accuracy.” 
The appearance of a crystal-clear 3-dimensional 
train completely transfixed the optical community, 
and led to press releases all over the world. Em-
mett and the hologram were featured in Life Maga-
zine, and there were articles in Scientific American 
about the work.
These holograms had all of the usual properties 
of actual objects, including parallax. In fact, it was 
possible to peer behind obscuring structures to see 
what was hidden behind, just as if one were view-
ing the actual objects. Interestingly, the holograms 
were created such that by having even just a por-
tion of the whole, the complete picture could still be 
generated. 
Holography Becomes Practical
The startlingly realistic clarity of the three-dimen-
sional holograms gave holography an appeal that 
reached outside the domain of the specialists, and 
called worldwide attention to this formerly esoteric 
subject. Whereas interest in holography had dwin-
dled to just a few by 1960, by 1970, hundreds of 
worldwide research groups had turned their atten-
tion to coherent optics and holography. Improved 
techniques, new holographic materials and new 
application areas were explored by researchers 
around the world. The field quickly became multi-
disciplinary as applications in non-destructive 
testing of materials, medical imaging, display and 
entertainment, holographic optical elements, and 
optical data storage, drew in researchers from ar-
eas outside the traditional optics arena.
As affirmed by Gabor himself in his Nobel Prize 
lecture, the success of Leith and Upatnieks “was 
due not only to the laser, but to the long theoretical 
preparation of Emmett Leith, which started in 1955. 
This was unknown to me and to the world, because 
Leith, with his collaborators Cutrona, Palermo, Por-
cello, and Vivian applied his ideas first to the prob-
lem of the “side-looking radar” which at that time 
was classified… This was in fact two-dimensional 
holography with electro-magnetic waves... Their 
results were brilliant.”
Leith received numerous awards for his work, in-
cluding the National Medal of Science in 1979, 
awarded by President Carter. Leith and Upatnieks 
were the first recipients of the R.W. Wood Prize, 
both were awarded the Inventor of the Year Award 
– presented by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce, 
and they received the ASME (American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers) Holley Medal. Leith was a 
member of the National Academy of Engineering, 
and was awarded the Frederick Ives Medal of the 
Optical Society of America, the IEEE Morris N. Li-
ebmann Award, and The International Society for 
Optical Engineering (SPIE) Gold Medal. He was a 
fellow of the IEEE and Optical Society of America.
Leith earned more than 14 patents, including the 
first patent on holography, owned jointly with Upat-
nieks. This patent, filed April 23, 1964, was called, 
“Wavefront Reconstruction Using a Coherent Ref-
erence Beam.”
This	train,	created	April	196,	is	one	of	the	earliest	three-
dimensional	holographic	images.

Expanding Uses for Imaging
The unifying principle between SAR and hologra-
phy was coherent optics. Leith was a leader in the 
development of applications of coherent optics, 
and continued to work in areas having to do with 
imaging throughout his life. He maintained long-
standing research relationships and friendships 
with several individuals who relied on his vast 
knowledge of the field to inform the progress of 
their research projects.
Dr. David Dilworth (MSE, EE and PhD, EE in ’83 
and ’89), Director, Advanced Imaging Systems, of 
Argon ST, Inc., [formerly Daedalus Enterprises, 
Inc.], started working with Emmett as a PhD stu-
dent in 1987, and through last December main-
tained weekly lab meetings with him. Their re-
search focused on coherent optics, always with 
the goal of creating better images, particularly in 
the area of biomedical imaging. Dilworth and Leith 
own a patent that is related to the early detection 
of breast cancer. 
This process of imaging through highly scatter-
ing media, especially biological tissue, is known 
as photon migration, and has grown into an entire 
area of optics. Leith worked in this area since the 
early days in the late 1980’s. Using holographic 
methods, Leith stated that his goal was to “allow 
the seemingly impossible to happen – ideally, ren-
dering biological tissue that was once impossible to 
see through to be as transparent as window glass. 
With such a technique, we could look into living 
tissue and discern anomalies such as malignant 
tumors. This ultimate goal is quite visionary; none-
theless, what has been achieved is encouraging.” 
A method potentially useful for detecting these and 
other anomalies, such as an increased blood sup-
ply to areas that might become cancerous later, 
was found to be effective up to a thickness of a 
few millimeters. 
Emmett also worked with Dr. Brian Athey, Asso-
ciate Professor of Psychiatry, Director, Michigan 
Center for Biological Information, and Director of 
the U-M Visible Human Project, on a variety of 
projects since the early 1990’s. In The Visible Hu-
man Project, Athey’s goal was to float a 3-dimen-
sional image in front of a viewer, so that one could 
view it without any 3D glasses, and to replace ana-
tomical with virtual dissections. “We are starting to 
use it in experimental classroom settings, and also 
for virtual surgery,” said Athey, who expects this to 
be in widespread use in 10-20 years. 
Joy of Teaching and Love of Light
Emmett had a passion for optics that could per-
haps only be matched by his love for teaching. He 
was instrumental in creating an optics program in 
the department during the 1960s, and took great 
joy in teaching the students. His graduate students 
often took part in Leith’s preparations. Marian Shi, 
a graduate student of Leith’s who is now a pro-
fessor at Saginaw Valley State University, stated, 
“The students in his lectures could almost hear the 
air crackle in his excitement, spreading his love of 
optics and reveling in the joy of scientific learning. 
Every Friday he spent hours preparing demonstra-
tions that visually illustrated some of the more dif-
ficult concepts that he covered in class. I saw first 
hand what a thrill it can be to teach optics.”
His devotion to his students was expressed this 
past year when he underwent emergency surgery, 
yet the very next day asked to have his students’ 
exams brought to him to grade. He didn’t want the 
students to receive incompletes on their report 
cards. 
Dick Zeck, who was a student, colleague, and 
friend of his for nearly 40 years, recalled that Leith 
refused to stay longer than 2 days at conferences 
because he wanted to return to his students. He 
also echoed the statements of many others pres-
“The students in 
his lectures could 
almost hear the 
air crackle in his 
excitement.”

ent at Leith’s retirement reception when he said, 
“I am aware of no person or opportunity that ever 
compromised his integrity or professionalism. I 
learned much about proper thought and behavior 
by my association with him.”
Former student Jin Chang, now COE and presi-
dent of General Scientific Corporation (parent 
company, Surgitel) in Ann Arbor, said that “Emmett 
really taught me how to live my life.” Chang now 
tries to help others, as Emmett helped him as a 
poor graduate student.
Rod Alferness, a student of Emmett’s who is cur-
rently Senior Vice President for Research at Bell 
Labs, has done pioneering research in the area 
of wavelength switched optical networks. He in-
vented devices that form the basis for many of 
today’s wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) 
optical networking systems, and holds more than 
35 patents. He said that by working with Emmett, 
he learned, “It’s about ideas. It’s about coming up 
with great, true ideas. I learned the joy of inventing 
and innovation, which has been valuable through-
out my career.” Alferness echoed many other stu-
dent comments in their appreciation for Emmett’s 
excitement and amazement at what he was able 
to do with light. “Emmett was always apprecia-
tive of the exciting phenomenon of light. He took 
a fundamental understanding of light and from it 
invented ways to use light as, for example,  a com-
puter  to process complex radar signals to produce 
spectacular surface images and, much more easily 
appreciated by the public, invented practical holog-
raphy that allows three-dimensional images to be 
stored on film and recreated.  His ideas and the 
things that he made possible from them were very 
powerful.”
Prof. Duncan Steel, Robert J. Hiller Professor of 
Engineering and Director of the Optics Laboratory 
at U-M, credits Leith with making Michigan the 
home of innovation in optics, which has since es-
tablished new frontiers in the ultra-fast science and 
high-power laser areas.
Farewell to a Friend
Emmett loved his work, and he happily brought his 
accumulated knowledge to bear on any topic being 
discussed. He also brought the fruits of his garden-
ing to many of these discussions. His students and 
colleagues recall fondly the delicious tomatoes and 
fruit he would bring to the weekly group meetings. 
He may have been the only Michigander to grow an 
orange tree in his backyard, which he kept alive for 
many years through the winter by building a unique 
greenhouse around it – a house that he expanded 
each year as the tree continued to grow.
Emmett was a remarkably unassuming gentleman, 
who was known for his quiet ways, sense of hu-
mor, cheerfulness, and by the select few who could 
truly appreciate it, his brilliant mind.  His students 
and colleagues were privileged to have caught a 
glimpse into aspects of both his personality and 
intellect. For some, it changed the course of their 
lives. In solving the problem of practical hologra-
phy, he changed the future of imaging technology, 
and affected millions of lives.
The Electrical Engineering and Computer Sci-
ence department expresses heartfelt condolences 
to June Leith, Emmett’s wife of 49 years, to his 
daughters, Pam Wilder and Kim Leith, and to all 
of his family and friends. We remember him fondly, 
and salute his remarkable legacy.
“It’s about ideas. 
It’s about coming 
up with great, true 
ideas.”
Coherent Radiation on Tap
Emmett was known for his 
pervasive yet subtle humor. 
One of his favorite memories 
was the time he and his 
graduate students produced 
coherent radiation on tap, 
an event captured on film.
Prof. Leith contemplates the valves 
recently installed in the laboratory.
A trickle of He-Ne radiation amazes 
Prof. Leith.
With both valves open, an astonished 
Prof. Leith sees the full output of the 
He-Ne and Argon ion lasers on tap.
9
Fe
at
ur
ed
 R
es
ea
rc
h
Prof. Kang G. Shin, Kevin & Nancy O’Connor Pro-
fessor of Computer Science, is founding director of 
the Real-Time Computing Laboratory. Shin was a 
pioneer in the field of real-time control and comput-
ing, and remains at the top of his field. From his 
early work with robots and aircraft, to more recent 
work in wireless networks, he has made fundamen-
tal research contributions, and seen them impact 
industry practices.
Computing systems that work in real time are those 
that must respond within a specific timeframe to an 
active process. Real-time systems are often used 
as embedded systems to control a wide variety of 
operations that relate to personal safety, such as 
automobiles, airplanes, ships, high-speed trains, 
power generation and distribution, and medical de-
vices. For example, space flight computers must 
respond to changing conditions to keep a rocket 
ship headed in the right direction. In automobiles 
with a real-time embedded system, changing driv-
ing conditions and lighting situations will cause 
brakes to adjust and lights to come on to keep pas-
sengers safe. 
Throughout his career, Kang has led highly suc-
cessful research programs in a variety of related 
areas, including: real-time systems, fault-tolerant 
computing, networking and manufacturing automa-
tion, automotive manufacturing, in-vehicle control 
and computing, embedded systems, avionics, and 
internet services and applications. His significant 
work in fault-tolerance allows mission-critical sys-
tems to continue to perform in a timely fashion de-
spite equipment failures. He is continuing to forge 
new trails, particularly in the areas of computer 
networks, and Quality-of-Service issues in wireless 
networks.
Establishing the field through Robots and Air-
planes
Computer science was a fledgling field when Kang 
was working on his PhD thesis in control theory. By 
the time he graduated from Cornell, it had taken hold 
of his imagination. At his first position at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute (RPI), he combined his back-
ground in control with his new interest in the com-
puter, and established the Robotics and Automation 
Lab. His work in robotics culminated in his being 
able to solve a long-standing minimum-time robot 
path-planning problem. The published research re-
sulted in an outstanding paper award from the IEEE 
Transactions on Automatic Control in 1987. 
Prof. Shin became interested in aircraft control 
systems at a time when few others considered this 
important. He was concerned about a worst-case 
scenario, when all operating computers, including 
backup computers, were rendered useless, perhaps 
through a bolt of lightning. He determined at what 
point the airplane would become unstable from the 
resulting delay in information being returned to the 
feedback controller, and presented a paper based 
on his work at the first real-time systems sympo-
sium in 1980. However, at this time he was not able 
to interest funding agencies in this work.
A break came when he met Billy Dove at NASA 
Langley, who was looking to make air flight more 
reliable. At that time, individuals were approaching 
the solution from either a hardware or a software 
perspective. Kang added the missing piece with his 
interest in control performance. His early work with 
C. M. Krishna attracted the interest of NASA and led 
to a relationship that lasted 14 years. Kang states, 
“during these years I was able to build a foundation 
for real-time computing – it was real-time control 
that combined timeliness with reliability.”
Kang	G.	Shin,	Kevin	&	Nancy	O’Connor	Professor
of	Computer	Science
Kang Shin: Making things work in real time
10
HARTS at the Center
Kang moved from RPI to Michigan in 1982, in 
search of a more diverse University environment. 
Michigan also offered the best environment to con-
tinue his studies in robotics and real-time comput-
ing. During the 1980s, he and his colleagues at 
other institutions helped establish the field of real-
time systems by “selling” this field of research to 
the Office of Naval Research, which subsequently 
established a research initiative to fund research in 
the field. Said Shin, “It was small, about $5M, but 
it had an important impact on developing human 
resources, and solving important problems.” 
Kang’s research program began to grow, along with 
the number of his students, which typically rests at 
about 20 active students. He was inspired to tackle 
a large system-building project, which he called 
HARTS, for Hexagonal Architecture for Real-Time 
Systems.
The goal of this project was to build a distributed re-
liable real-time system, starting from hardware, all 
the way through application software. The project 
began with chip design, fabrication and testing, and 
construction of a communication processor board. 
The next stage involved building a multiprocessor 
system and creating an operating system for it, fol-
lowed by a network protocol, and finally, applica-
tions. It was a massive undertaking, and while Shin 
said in retrospect it was too ambitious, it proved to 
be excellent training for the more than 10 PhD stu-
dents who worked on the project in various stages. 
HARTS was the common ancestor of all of Kang’s 
current projects. Once completed, however, he 
knew he had to focus on either the hardware or the 
software, not both. He chose to concentrate primar-
ily on software.
Solving Problems in Information Technology
Prof. Shin’s recent work resides in the general area 
of information technology, which is the art and sci-
ence of creating the technology necessary for in-
formation delivery and processing. Though he nar-
rowed his field to software, his interests continue to 
be very broad within the field, encompassing em-
bedded real-time systems, computer networking, 
Quality-of-Service issues, and computation and 
networking security.
In the area of embedded real-time systems, he de-
veloped a real-time operating system for devices 
such as cell phones, PDAs, smart machines, and 
automotive electronics components. The project, 
called EMERALDS (Extensible Microkernel for 
Embedded, ReAL-time, Distributed Systems), has 
been tested by Ford Motor Company and the Hita-
chi Automotive Research Division in Japan. Shin 
received a copyright for the EMERALDS software 
in 1996. Work is continuing in the area of energy 
conservation, allowing battery-backed mobile sys-
tems (e.g., laptops and cell phones) to use batter-
ies more efficiently.
Shin is also investigating Quality-of-Service (QoS) 
issues in computer networking. QoS calls into play 
timeliness, fault tolerance, security and fairness. 
QoS mechanisms are designed to ensure ade-
quate performance in a data communications sys-
tem. Shin developed a method for providing QoS 
guarantees in Internet applications that require reli-
ability and service, such as Internet phones, video, 
remote medical services, and distance learning. 
His protocol guarantees a sufficiently high level of 
end-to-end network level performance over wide-
area networks such as the Internet.
Mobile and wireless networks have attracted 
Shin’s interest, in particular QoS issues related to 
multi-hop wireless mesh networks (WMNs). These 
WMNs are promising technologies that provide 
high-capacity wireless networks over large areas, 
such as a campus, an apartment complex, or a 
city. Since this technology does not require the use 
of cables, it is easily deployed. The principal chal-
lenge lies in maintaining the quality of the wireless 
link. Having made significant progress in this area, 
Shin plans to extend QoS-aware wireless networks 
to support emerging communication technologies 
such as cognitive radio.
As part of his work with high-end web and multi-
media servers, Shin and his former students devel-
oped a novel network congestion control method, 
called BLUE, for the Internet. BLUE reduces traffic 
HARTS	chip	layout
Fabricated	chip,	
with	HARTS	chip	at	
the	center
11
loss by an order of magnitude over the best ex-
isting solution, known as Random Early Drop, or 
RED. The paper which describes this work, “Blue: 
Active Queue Management Algorithms,” received 
the 2003 IEEE Communications Society William R. 
Bennett Prize.
One of Shin’s newest, and most rapidly expand-
ing areas of research is computation and network-
ing security. He is investigating three broad areas 
within this topic: sensor networks, attack contain-
ment or service-oriented quarantine, and mobile 
worms. In the first area, he has a project called 
LiSP: Lightweight Security Protocols for Wireless 
Sensor Networks, which aims to achieve a funda-
mental advancement of secure networking technol-
ogy that meets the requirements of both high-level 
security and energy-efficiency. The sensor devices 
are designed to be low-cost, networked, and highly 
energy-efficient, for use in military & homeland se-
curity and other applications.
The second area involves the detection and con-
tainment of malicious code, or worm, attacks, 
where a computer network interruption leads to a 
loss of connectivity or functionality on an individual 
computer. The goal is to contain the attack without 
sacrificing many of the other services that are pres-
ent in the network. He is also attempting to develop 
an agent-based simulation to model a virus spread-
ing on both wireless and wired networks.
The third area in security is the detection and pre-
vention of mobile worms. These worms can attack 
cell phones and PDAs, among other devices. Shin 
is currently talking to a company about being an 
industrial partner for the project. 
Working in the area of network security, Abhijit 
Bose joined the group with a PhD in Mechanical 
Engineering and helps lead the efforts in network 
security. “Kang is one of the hardest working peo-
ple I’ve ever met,” said Bose. “He has 15-20 proj-
ects going on at the same time.” This activity has 
spawned more than 630 technical papers and book 
chapters. Shin works with a steady cadre of gradu-
ate students, who become leaders in their own right 
upon graduation. 
Educating the Next Generation
Kang’s care in training his students has led to a 
generation of excellent scholars in academia and 
industry. Tarek Abdelzaher (PhD, CSE ’99), a fac-
ulty member at the University of Illinois at Urba-
na-Champaign, said, “I am now well aware of the 
difficulty of the job Professor Shin was able to un-
dertake so perfectly and effortlessly, advising not 
only me but close to twenty other students, all of 
whom later embarked on high-profile career paths. 
He cultivates in his students not only strong techni-
cal skills but also the independence and motivation 
to continuously better themselves professionally.” 
Dilip Kandlur (MS, CSE ’87; PhD, CSE ’91) leads 
the Storage Systems Group at the IBM Almaden 
Research Center. He worked on the project BLUE 
with Prof. Shin, sharing the 2003 William R. Bennett 
Award. He is an expert in QoS and performance for 
networks and network servers, and has hired many 
of Shin’s students as summer interns and full-time 
employees to IBM. Kandlur said, “I continue to be 
amazed at the breadth and depth of Prof. Shin’s 
research interests and accomplishments.”
Shin co-authored the book Real-Time Systems 
(McGraw Hill, 1997) with former student C. M. 
Krishna, to support a new course he developed in 
real-time systems (EECS 571). Krishna is a pro-
fessor at the University of Massachusetts, who ap-
preciated the manner in which Prof. Shin guided 
his students through their research, encouraging 
creativity while providing the guidance needed to 
succeed. “Thanks to the education I received at his 
hands, I had no difficulty in making the transition 
from being a graduate student to a faculty mem-
ber,” said Prof. Krishna.
Jennifer Rexford, a professor at Princeton Univer-
sity who is featured in the Alumni News section of 
this newsletter as the recipient of the College of 
Engineering Recent Graduate Award, said, “I was 
drawn to Kang’s group by the opportunity to pursue 
cutting-edge research at the boundary of theory 
and practice. Working with Kang, I knew I would 
be able to conduct thesis research that spanned 
hardware, software, and mathematical modeling.”
Shin’s research has led to several important best 
paper awards, and a variety of prestigious awards 
within the University. He is a fellow of both IEEE 
and ACM, and a member of the Koren Academy of 
Engineering. He has recently been honored with 
the 2006 HOAM Prize in Engineering.
Prof. Shin has graduated 54 PhD students. “I still 
remember each and every PhD student I’ve ever 
supervised. That’s something I cherish more than 
papers or awards,” emphasizes Shin. “The field of 
computer science moves so quickly, most people 
don’t even cite papers if they are more than five 
years old. But the students I work with, and the 
faculty I collaborate with, these relationships will 
last forever.”
“I continue to 
be amazed at 
the breadth and 
depth of Prof. 
Shin’s research 
interests and 
accomplishments.”
12
D
ep
ar
tm
en
t N
ew
s ENIAC FINdS A PErmANENt HomE
Emeritus professor Arthur Burks visited the newly 
occupied Computer Science and Engineering 
Building recently to view the new home for the por-
tion of the ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator 
and Computer) that he brought to the University 
of Michigan in 1964.  This is one of two remaining 
collections of parts from the world’s first general-
purpose electronic computer, the computer that 
launched the modern computer revolution. The 
other collection resides at the Smithsonian Institu-
tion.  The specific parts were especially selected 
and assembled to capture the core function of the 
ENIAC, namely, the computation of artillery firing 
tables for the U.S. Army.  Prof. Burks, one of the 
principal designers of the ENIAC, met with gradu-
ate students and faculty - who are today designing 
ever faster, more efficient computers.
Burks conducted the first public demonstrations 
of the ENIAC during its unveiling at the University 
of Pennsylvania in February 1946.  Army Ordnance 
officers present were astounded to see that the 
ENIAC could calculate a 30-second shell trajectory 
in 20 seconds, 16 seconds of which were taken to 
punch out the results on cards.  Previous methods 
took about 12 hours for an individual with the desk 
calculator (at that time, called a human computer), 
or 15 minutes for an analog differential analyzer. 
The ENIAC moved to Aberdeen Proving Ground 
later that year to assist the army in their ballistics 
calculations. It came to be used for other scientific 
uses, such as weather prediction, atomic-energy 
calculations, thermal ignition, and wind-tunnel de-
sign. Changing the setup of the computer to solve 
a different type of problem required hours or even 
days of adjustments - but even then, the ENIAC was 
a tremendous time-saver over previous methods of 
computation. Burks worked on all of the ENIAC’s 
units, but his most important contribution was as 
designer of the Master Programmer.
Alice	and	Arthur	Burks	stand	in	front	of	the	ENIAC,	showing	some	of	the	original	
1,000	vacuum	tubes.
Original	ENIAC	in	196.	The	entire	room	of	equipment	
comprised	the	ENIAC.
This	 portion	 of	 the	 ENIAC	 that	 Professor	
Burks	brought	to	Michigan	is	displayed	in	
the	entrance	to	the	new	Computer	Science	
and	Engineering	Building.
1
Prof. Burks joined the U-M faculty in the fall of 
1964. The parts of the ENIAC that he brought to 
Michigan later that year were four of the comput-
er’s original 40 panels: one from the Master Pro-
grammer, two from Accumulators, and one from 
the High-Speed Multiplier.  The task of cleaning 
the ENIAC was accomplished by driving it through 
a carwash (including resistors, capacitors, wiring, 
and neon bulbs), followed by sandblasting away 
rust, and finished with enameling and baking – af-
ter which all modules still worked!
The completed ENIAC was 80 feet long, shaped in 
a U along three walls of a room.  It was 8 feet tall, 
used 18,000 vacuum tubes, and weighed 50 tons. 
Transistors, invented in 1947, gradually replaced 
vacuum tubes; they were smaller, faster, and more 
reliable than their predecessors.  Integrated cir-
cuits would provide the next major leap in design 
technology in the 60s and 70s.  The ENIAC, as the 
first programmable electronic computer, launched 
the modern computer revolution.
Today, students learn how to fabricate their own 
integrated circuits in the Michigan Nanofabrica-
tion Facility (MNF), housed in the EECS Building.
FACULtY HoNorS ANd AWArdS
departmental Awards
2005 EECS Outstanding Achievement 
Award
 Michael Flynn
 H. V. Jagadish
 Greg Wakefield
Student Society Award
HKN Professor of the Year
 Peter Chen
College of Engineering Awards
Education Excellence Award
 Dennis Sylvester
Service Excellence Award
 John Laird
 Fred Terry
Outstanding Research Scientist Award
 John Nees
Michigan Emerging Industry Pioneer 
Award
Kensall D. Wise, “In Recognition of Outstanding 
Leadership to the MEMS, MicroSystems, and 
Nano Technology Community.”
National Honors and Awards
2006 IEEE Edison Medal
FAWWAZ ULABY, “for 
pioneering research 
in microwave and ra-
dar remote sensing 
technology and their 
environmental and in-
dustrial applications.” 
Ulaby, the R. Jamison 
and Betty Williams 
Professor, is a mem-
ber of the Radiation 
Laboratory. His cur-
rent research interests 
include development of: millimeter-wave imaging 
radar systems; terrain classifiers using ERS-1/J-
ERS-1 orbiting radars; SIR-C radar classification 
and biomass mapping algorithms; and bistatic 
scattering models.
The	spiral	staircase	is	a	favorite	feature	of	the	spectacular	
new	CSE	building.
1
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) Fellow
JEFFREY FESSLER, 
“for his contributions to 
theory and practice of 
image reconstruction.” 
Fessler is a member of 
the Systems Labora-
tory. His research 
interests include 
medical imaging, 
tomography, nonpara-
metric estimation, and 
inverse problems, with 
current projects in 
PET, SPECT, X-ray CT, MRI, microscopy, radiation 
therapy, and biomedical signal detection. 
AMIR MORTAZAWI, 
“for contributions to 
quasi-optical and 
circuit based power 
generation techniques.” 
Mortazawi is a member 
of the Radiation Labo-
ratory. His research 
interests include RF 
and microwave circuits, 
specifically:  microwave 
and millimeter-wave 
power amplifiers, 
spatial power combining and thin film ferroelectric 
based frequency agile circuits.
Association for Computing machinery
 (ACm) Fellow
MICHAEL WELLMAN, 
“for contributions to 
market-based and 
decentralized compu-
tation.” Wellman is a 
member of the Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory. 
His recent research has 
focused on computa-
tional market mecha-
nisms for distributed 
decision making and 
electronic commerce. 
American Physical Society (APS) Fellow
THEODORE B. NORRIS, 
“for contributions to ultrafast 
lasers and their application 
to semiconductor physics 
and optoelectronics.” Norris 
is interim director of the 
Center for Ultrafast Optical 
Science. His research in-
terests include the applica-
tion of femtosecond optical 
techniques to the physics of 
semiconductor structures, 
the development of new ul-
trafast optical and electronic 
probes with high spatial resolution for applications to 
semiconductor nanostructures and biological imaging, 
and the development of new laser sources for applica-
tions in femtosecond spectroscopy and the generation 
of THz radiation.
American Institute for medical and Biological 
Engineering (AImBE) Fellow
KHALIL NAJAFI is Deputy 
Director of the NSF Center 
for Wireless Integrated 
MicroSystems (WIMS), 
and Director of the NSF 
National Nanotechnology 
Infrastructure Network 
(NNIN). His research 
interests lie in the areas 
of solid-state integrated 
sensors and circuits, 
analog and mixed-mode 
integrated circuit design 
and fabrication, fabrication 
technologies for silicon 
microactuators and three-dimensional micromechanical 
systems, integrated implantable sensors for biomedi-
cal applications, packaging techniques for protection of 
integrated circuits and sensors for long-term implanta-
tion in biological environments, miniature implantable 
wireless microtelemetry systems, and design of mi-
croinstrumentation systems for sensing environmental 
parameters.
1
NSF CArEEr Award
Lee Markosian, for his proposal, “3D Sketchpad,” 
in the NSF Graphics and Visualization Program.
Association for Computing machinery/Special 
Interest Group on design Automation technical 
Leadership Award
 Igor L. Markov
Best Paper Awards
(EECS Faculty names in bold, EECS Student 
names in italics)
Samuel T. King, George W. Dunlap, and Peter M. 
Chen, “Debugging operating systems with time-
traveling virtual machines,” Proceedings of the 
2005 Annual USENIX Technical Conference.
S. Krishnaswamy, G. F. Viamontes, I. L. Markov, 
and J. P. Hayes, “Accurate reliablity evaluation 
and enhancement via probabilistic transfer matri-
ces,” 2005 Proceedings Design Automation and 
Test in Europe (DATE).
Sami Yehia, Nathan Clark, Scott Mahlke, and 
Krisztian Flautner, “Exploring the design space of 
LUT-based transparent accelerators,” 2005 Inter-
national Conference on Compilers, Architecture, 
and Synthesis for Embedded Systems (CASES).
Jeffrey Cox, Thomas Bartold, and Edmund 
Durfee, “A distributed framework for solving the 
multiagen plan coordination problem,” The Fourth 
International Conference on Autonomous Agents 
and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS05).
Clark T.-C. Nguyen and J. Kitching, “Towards 
chip-scale atomic clocks,” 2005 IEEE Internation-
al Solid-State Circuits Conference.
Betty Cummings retires After 40 Years
Betty Cummings, Solid-State Electronics Labora-
tory (SSEL) Senior Research Administrator, retires 
April 2006 after 40 years of dedicated and out-
standing service to the University and the Depart-
ment. 
Betty joined the University in 1996, as secretary 
to the Assistant Director of the Electron Physics 
Laboratory (later changed to SSEL). When Prof. 
George Haddad became lab director, she worked 
for him, beginning a long-standing partnership. 
Betty continued to work for Prof. Haddad when 
he became Chair of the department, at which time 
her own responsibilities greatly expanded to earn 
her the title of administrative manager for the de-
partment. She agreed to manage the SSEL when 
Prof. Haddad left the Chair’s office the first time 
in 1986.
Betty saw the annual research funding grow in the 
SSEL from $815K in 1966, to $11.5M at the pres-
ent time, and has been responsible for managing 
this growth since 1987, a formidable task she ac-
complished with precision and much care. She 
knew all of the students, and even kept photos 
of each in case they were to return to the depart-
ment, so they could be welcomed as remembered 
friends.
The Department, and especially the faculty of the 
SSEL, are grateful for her many years of devoted 
service, and wish her much happiness in her re-
tirement.
16
St
ud
en
t N
ew
s rESEArCH ExPErIENCE For UNdErGrAdUAtE StUdENtS
Undergraduate EECS students experience the 
thrill, hard work, and occasional setbacks involved 
in conducting research through a variety of op-
portunities on campus.  They may participate in a 
summer Research Experience for Undergraduates 
(REU) through the EECS Department, or take ad-
vantage of one of the special programs offered by
the Center for Wireless Integrated Microsystems 
(WIMS), or they may participate in the University-
wide program, Undergraduate Research Opportu-
nity for Undergraduates (UROP). Some students 
continue working with faculty after participating 
in one of these programs, or become involved in 
a faculty member’s research after distinguishing 
themselves through their coursework. Here are 
some of our students and their projects.
Lawrence McAfee worked with Prof. Kensell Wise 
and graduate student Jianbai Wang on the project, 
“A Tip Sensor and Its Noise Analysis in a Contact 
Sensing System for Cochlear Prosthesis.” As a 
participant in the WIMS Undergraduate Research 
Program, Lawrence worked closely with Wang to 
develop a system based on the program LabVIEW 
for providing feedback information during testing 
of a cochlear electrode array while being inserted 
into the cochlea. Lawrence plans to attend gradu-
ate school in electrical engineering after graduating 
this term.
Four undergraduate students, Anshuman Bhuy-
an, Brandon Gregory, Howard Lei, and Seow 
Yuen Yee, worked with Prof. Yogesh Gianchandani 
on the project, “Pulse and DC Electropolishing of 
Stainless Steel for Stents and other Devices,” as 
participants in the WIMS Undergraduate Research 
Program. Stainless steel stents have important bio-
medical applications for cardiac patients. Gregory 
presented the research at the IEEE Sensors 2005 
international conference last November, followed 
by presentations by Bhuyan and Yee as part of the 
WIMS seminar series. Yee (see photo) attended the 
conference, and said, 
“I was very impressed 
with the research from 
other universities and 
countries. I am proud to 
be a Michigan student.” 
She is a junior studying 
electrical engineering, 
with a minor in physics. 
Anshuman Bhuyan will 
graduate this year, and 
plans to pursue gradu-
ate studies in electrical 
engineering. Lei gradu-
ated last term with his 
degree in electrical 
engineering. Gregory 
graduated last term, and is currently a graduate 
student in Circuits & Microsystems in the EECS 
Department. 
David Madigan worked with Prof. Satinder Baveja 
and his research group to develop algorithms and 
software to allow a Sony AIBO robotic dog to do 
two new tasks. First, with the help of infrared sen-
sors and touch pads on the feet of the dog, and the 
use of heuristic algorithms and software code, the 
dog was able to navigate a cluttered environment. 
Second, the robotic dog was placed in a specially 
built, artificial, maze-like environment in which the 
dog had to find a ball placed in another room and 
Prof.	Satinder	Singh,	Vishal	Soni,	David	Madigan,	
Nicholas	Gorski
1
then push it into a target room. Madigan plans 
to graduate this year with a degree in computer 
science. Speaking of the project, Madigan said, 
“I made friends and have kept in touch with the 
people I worked with on the project. It was a great 
experience.”
Jason Miller worked 
with Prof. Michael 
Wellman and his re-
search group as they 
prepared for the 2005 
Trading Agent Com-
petition, Supply Chain 
Management game 
(TAC/SCM). Wellman 
said that Miller played 
a crucial role on the 
“Deep Maize” team, 
which placed fourth in 
the finals. Jason de-
veloped a module for predicting product prices, 
based on historical data, using a machine learning 
approach. He employed sophisticated and state-
of-the-art methods, and according to Wellman, 
produced a prediction module that was likely the 
better or equal of any other TAC/SCM entrant. Ja-
son is continuing to work with Wellman’s research 
group (funded by an NSF grant) on analyzing and 
improving the methods he developed during the 
summer REU project.
Scott Boehmer 
worked with Prof. 
Kang Shin and Dr. Ab-
hijit Bose on a sum-
mer REU research 
project examining the 
problem of topologi-
cal worms spreading 
over wireless net-
works on a variety 
of devices, including 
mobile phones, PDAs, 
and laptop comput-
ers. In order to gather 
information on the behavior of such worms, they 
designed an agent-based simulation that incorpo-
rated different mobility and propagation models. 
Scott performed much of the C++ and MatLab 
programming for the simulation and contributed 
to the overall design. Boehmer said he appreci-
ated the opportunity to do self-directed design, 
and was happy to be invited to continue work 
on the project. “I have learned a great deal about 
network security, worm propagation, and wireless 
networking,” said Boehmer, who plans to graduate 
this year with a degree in computer science and is 
currently interviewing with several companies.
Vinay Alexander 
worked with Prof. Ja-
mie Phillips on the 
project, “Pulsed Laser 
Deposition of Oxide 
Thin Films for Inte-
grated Optics and Thin 
Film Capacitors.” “The 
summer research pro-
gram provided valu-
able hands on expe-
rience in the field of 
solid-state electronics and optics,” said Alexander. 
“I learned about the integration of oxide thin films 
for integrated optics and the working principle be-
hind optical modulators.” The photo shows the 
process of Pulsed Laser Deposition , where a target 
containing a specific material is blasted with a laser 
onto a substrate under different growth conditions 
(temperature, oxygen pressure etc). Alexander 
graduated this past December 2005 with a degree 
in electrical engineering, and is currently working 
on a project with Prof. Mohammed Islam in the Op-
tical Science Laboratory. He plans to attend gradu-
ate school in electrical engineering.
Patrick Macnamara 
worked with Profes-
sors Stéphane Lafor-
tune and Demosthe-
nis Teneketzis on the 
project, “Correlation 
and Classification of 
Internet Traffic Anoma-
lies.” He developed a 
program in C++ to ex-
tract information from 
raw Cisco NetFlow 
files, and analyzed the 
performance of a hier-
archical approach to monitor and classify a large 
number of alerts generated by anomaly-based in-
trusion detection systems at spatially distributed 
sites on the Internet. “I learned much about the In-
ternet and network security through this REU,” said 
Macnamara, who plans to graduate this semester 
with a degree in computer engineering, and then 
pursue a graduate degree in economics.
1
2005 CSE Honors Competition
The 2nd Annual Computer Science & Engineering 
(CSE) Honors Competition was held November 11, 
2005. Four graduate student finalists, representing 
different research areas in CSE, presented papers 
before a panel of judges, faculty, and fellow stu-
dents. The finalists were selected by faculty in their 
respective areas, and approved by the CSE gradu-
ate committee, chaired by Prof. John Hayes.
With their winning papers, Julia Lipman represent-
ed Theory, Leyla Nazhandali - Hardware, Michael 
Moffitt - Artificial Intelligence, and Ed Nightingale 
- Software. The overall winner was Leyla Nazhan-
dali, for her paper, “Architectural Optimization for 
Performance- and Energy-constrained Sensor 
Processors.” 
Google sponsored the competition, and was repre-
sented by three U-M alumni: Marius Eriksen (BSE 
CE, ’04), Eric Pollmann (BSE CE, ’97), and Clay 
Wood (BSE CE, ’02 and MSE CE, ’03). Eriksen as-
sisted in the judging, and said, “The papers were 
extremely strong. Overall, this was much better 
than any conference I have been to in recent times, 
both in terms of innovation and impact of work. It 
was very difficult to select one winner.” Nazhandali 
was awarded $1,000, Moffitt took 2nd place and 
$500, and Lipman and Nightingale received honor-
able mentions and $250.
U-m team Wins the 2005 CAdathlon
Matthew Guthaus and Jarrod Roy took first place 
in the 2005 ACM SIGDA programming contest, 
CADathlon, held at ICCAD in San Jose, CA, No-
vember 6, 2005. Their team name was named “Un-
derdogs,” perhaps a bit deceptive since Matthew 
Guthaus was a member of the winning team in the 
2003 CADathlon, and Jarrod Roy was a member of 
the winning team in the 2004 CADathlon.
Guthaus is a PhD candidate in electrical engineer-
ing. His dissertation topic is design automation of 
robust clock networks using parametric statistical 
STA. Other research interests include physical de-
sign automation, low-power architecture for em-
bedded systems, and algorithm specific micropro-
cessors. Jarrod is a Ph.D. candidate in Computer 
Science & Engineering. His research interests in-
clude VLSI physical design as well as SAT and QBF 
solving.
Left:	Julia	Lipman,	Leyla	
Nazhandali, Michael Moffitt, 
Prof.	John	Hayes.	
Ed	Nightingale	not	available	
for	photo
Team	Members:	Jarrod	Roy	 					Matthew	Guthaus
Advisors:	 Igor	Markov												Richard	Brown,	Dennis	Sylvester
HKN receives outstanding Chapter 
Award
The Beta Epsilon chapter of Eta Kappa Nu, U-M’s 
student chapter of the national Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering Honor Society, is a recipient of 
the Outstanding Chapter Award for 2004-05. The 
plaque was awarded at the ECEDHA (Electrical 
and Computer Engineering Department Heads As-
sociation) Annual Meeting, March 2006. Shown be-
low are the officers for the Winter 2006 term. 
Left:	Shaun	Cox	(Treasurer),	Jon	Cable	(Activities	Chair),	Nan	Li	(Projects	Chair),	Eric	Wucherer	(Vice	President),	Alex	Rutkowski	(Bridge	Correspondent),	
Andrew	Myrick	(President),	Steve	Stergar	(Corresponding	Secretary),	Matthew	Pizzimenti	(Newsletter	Chair),	Kevin	Borders	(Recording	Secretary)
19
Bill Gates Says there will be Jobs!!!
Bill Gates visited campus October 12, 2005 to deliver an important message 
to students interested in the field of computer science – there will be many 
jobs in the field for the foreseeable future. In fact, the creation of jobs is ex-
pected to outpace the number of trained individuals available to fill them, 
ensuring excellent salaries.
Gates first met with a small group of computer science and engineering fac-
ulty during his visit. He wanted them to spread the message to students that 
computer science careers involve a significant amount of personal interaction; 
they are not jobs of cubicle isolation. In fact, Mr. Gates stated that for coders 
and software developers, 60% of the job is people skills, and for program 
managers, the percentage rises to about 80%. 
With a background of loud pulsating rock, prospective students from around 
the state, current undergraduate students, and some fortunate graduate stu-
dents, faculty, and staff, sat in anticipation of what Gates might say at the 
lecture.
“This is an amazing field,” said Gates in his talk. “This is the field that is revolu-
tionizing the world more than any other. I was excited to find out that Microsoft 
hires about 30 people a year from The University of Michigan, and a lot of our 
top people come from here. So let me thank you for that.” 
StUdENt HoNorS ANd AWArdS
College of Engineering Awards
Distinguished Achievement Awards
     Undergraduate Students
 Patrick Macnamara, CE
 Dinkar Jain, CS
 Song Chua, EE
     Graduate Students
 Hai Huang, CSE
 DaHan Liao, EE
 Doron Blatt, EE-Systems
Marian Sarah Parker Award
 Nupur Srivastava, EE undergraduate
 Ruba Borno, EE graduate student
Mildred and Steele Bailey Prize
 Chee Keong Tee, EE undergraduate
Charles Barth Jr. Distinguished Class Prize
 Jacky Lo, CE Undergraduate
Undergraduate Distinguished Leadership
 Cody Hartwig, CS/CE
Tau Beta Pi Award
 Jack Li, EE undergraduate
EECS department Awards
Senior Outstanding Achievement Award
 Cody Hartwig, CE
 Robert Gaunt, CS
 Albert Chen, EE
Undergraduate Outstanding Research Award
 Daniela Marquez, EE
 Tee Chee Keong, EE
Undergraduate Outstanding Service Award
 Jack Li, EE 
 Nupur Srivastava, EE
Graduate Student Instructor Award
 Ganesh Dasika, CSE
 Marcial Lapp, CSE *
 Anthony Nicholson, CSE
 Scott Wright, EE
*Lapp was an undergraduate student majoring in 
computer science and German when he received 
this award.
Student Paper Awards
(Student names are in bold, faculty advisor names 
are in italics)
Kevin Buell, “Electromagnetic MetaMaterial Insulator to Eliminate Substrate Surface Waves,” 2005 IEEE International Antennas and 
Propagation Symposium (AP-S). Buell received first prize among the Best Paper Awards for his paper. He graduated with a PhD in 
Electrical Engineering, December 2005.
Christine K. Eun, R. Gharpurey, and Yogesh B. Gianchandani, “Broadband Wireless Sensing of Radioactive Chemicals Utilizing In-
herent RF Transmissions from Pulse Discharges,” 2005 IEEE Conference on Sensors. Eun is a graduate student in EE.
DaHan Liao and Kamal Sarabandi, “Modeling and Simulation of Near-Earth Propagation in Presence of a Truncated Vegetation Layer,” 
2006 International Union of Radio Science, National Radio Science meeting (USNC/URSI). Liao is a graduate student in EE.
Dan Ruan, J. Balter, M. Roberson, Jeff Fessler, and M. Kessler, “Non-rigid Registration using Regularization that Accommodates Lo-
cal Tissue Rigidity,” Young Investigators’ Symposium of the Great Lakes Chapter of the AAPM (American Association of Physicists in 
Medicine). Ruan is a graduate student in EE:Systems.
20
Alumni Society President’s Message
 Well, as good as our sports teams are, our academics 
are even better – and we’re recruiting just as earnestly in that 
department. Now, although ‘Coach Munson’, our department 
chair, may make personal calls on top candidates, he needs help 
from his staff to cover all worthwhile recruits. And, in case you 
haven’t noticed, we don’t draw 100,000+ paying fans, or have 
commercial sponsors, so the term ‘staff’ is quickly stretched to 
include volunteers, like, well, like you!
 The College of Engineering, and our beloved department, 
has an official, well-organized volunteer recruiting program. They 
know what needs to be done and when, and are happy to accept 
your volunteered time. They can tell you exactly what you can 
do and when you need to do it. You merely make two or three 
phone calls to those top high school candidates who have been 
admitted, but have not yet accepted – those candidates who are 
on the fence.
 Your mission, and I encourage you to accept it, is to make 
yourself available to a few students, answer their questions, let 
them know what Michigan meant to you. You can help them 
make the right decision for their needs.
 To become a recruiter for the College of Engineering 
(remember, high school students apply to the college, not the 
department), please contact:
 Sharon Burch
 Director of the Office of Recruitment and Admissions
 University of Michigan College of Engineering
 (734) 647-7101
 sharbu@umich.edu
 If you become a volunteer recruiter it may surprise you that 
you never end up speaking directly to your recruit – they have 
very busy lives. Nevertheless, simply leaving the message that 
Michigan cares enough to call them may tip the balance in their 
decision.
 Finally, if you think we might already have enough recruiters, 
consider this: it means much more to a student to hear from a 
local alumni than it does to hear from someone far away. This 
means we need recruiters all over the country and around the 
globe. You may be just the person we need to reach out to that 
next gifted student at Michigan, and to continue the tradition that 
keeps Michigan world class.
     Stay true and go blue!
   
  
     Steve Schwartz, President 
     EECS Dept. Alumni Society 
     stevschw@umich.edu
Some of the most successful and 
interesting people have come 
through the halls of Michigan’s 
department of Electrical 
Engineering and Computer 
Science. It’s not possible to name 
them all in such a small space 
but a few you may or may not 
know include Larry Page (co-
founded Google), Tony Fadell 
(masterminded the iPod), Kevin 
O’Connor (founded DoubleClick), 
Claude Shannon (considered the 
Father of Information Theory), and 
Bill Joy (co-founded Sun Microsystems, created Java). Many 
of our award-winning alumni tell us that their experiences at 
Michigan prepared them well for success. It’s also certain they 
brought a wealth of potential and aptitude with them when they 
walked through the door. But why did they walk through this 
door? Why did they choose to attend Michigan?
 Michigan is certainly a fantastic university that attracts top 
notch undergraduates, but think of all the things high school 
students have on their mind when selecting their choice for 
college. This can include:
     •   Which school has the best academic program
     •   Which school has the right student body size
     •   Which school is close enough to home 
          (or far enough away from home!)
     •   Which school has the right ‘culture’
     •   Which school is affordable
 By some measures Michigan is clearly on top. By others, it 
depends on the student. 
 Seeing all these criteria, you may be reminded about your 
own decision to attend Michigan. Was it an easy choice? Did 
the difficulty only increase when you received acceptances to 
multiple schools? In the book The Paradox of Choice by Barry 
Schwartz, it’s shown that decision stress only increases when we 
have more options – because if we don’t make the right choice 
we have only ourselves to blame. So what it comes down to is 
making the right choice for each student.
 When you were making your decision, did you get a call 
from a person representing the University or College? Did you 
get a ‘warm fuzzy’ feeling that this place was just right?
 One unmistakable reason why Michigan is great (and by 
consequence the college and our department) is that it attracts 
the best people. In fact, it’s our ability to recruit students that 
matters most, and recruit is the operative word here. Would our 
University’s sports teams have such a draw on top players if 
those athletes didn’t receive a visit from the coach? You may be 
surprised how that little but crucial touch can make the difference 
in a player’s decision.
Recruiting	for	class	of	‘2
21
A
lu
m
ni
 N
ew
s 2005 CoLLEGE oF ENGINEErING ALUmNI SoCIEtY mErIt AWArdS
Fred Leonberger, (BSE EE ‘69; also SM and PhD 
degrees from Massachusetts Institute of Technolo-
gy in electrical engineering), founder and principal, 
EOvation Technologies LLC
Fred Leonberger founded the technology advisory 
firm EOvation Technologies in 2003, after retir-
ing from JDS Uniphase (JDSU) as Senior Vice 
President and Chief Technology Officer. At JDSU, 
he was responsible for strategic technology, and 
his focal areas spanned product development, 
strategic planning, OEM customer requirements, 
and assessment of worldwide market trends and 
technical advances. He previously served as co-
founder and general manager of UTP, a supplier 
of optical modulators, and in a variety of manage-
ment and staff positions at MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
and United Technologies Research Center. He has 
worked in the area of photonics throughout his 
career, and his work in integrated optical devices, 
which focused on high-speed analog and digital 
modulation, has long been recognized as signifi-
cantly advancing the field.
Dr. Leonberger recently received the IEEE Pho-
tonics Award, sponsored by the IEEE Lasers and 
Electro-Optics Society for, “technical leadership, 
commercialization and practical deployment of 
photonic component technologies for optical com-
munications.” He is a recipient of the IEEE Quantum 
Electronics Award and Millenium Medal, and the 
United Technologies Corporation George Meade 
Award. He has served as President of the IEEE 
Lasers and Electro-Optics Society. He is a fellow of 
IEEE and OSA (Optical Society of America), and a 
member of the National Academy of Engineering. 
He currently serves on the Board of Directors of 
RF MicroDevices, Inc. and Alphion.
After his recent visit to Ann Arbor during alumni 
weekend, Leonberger said, “I have a lot of great 
memories of my undergraduate years at Michigan. 
I met my wife Jan at Michigan, and we have been 
married for 35 years.” By the time Dr. Leonberger 
graduated, he was convinced he wanted to work 
in semiconductors and microelectronics. “I am 
very grateful to have had the opportunity to attend 
Michigan, major in EE, and find my career path.”
Computer Science and Engineering
John Sanguinetti, (BS Applied Math ‘70, PhD, 
Computer and Communication Science ‘77), co-
founder and chief technology officer, Forte Design 
Systems
John Sanguinetti has been a pioneer in the field 
of computer science, particularly in the areas of 
computer architecture, performance analysis, and 
design verification. Upon receiving his PhD from 
U-M in 1977, he began working for a succession 
of computer manufacturers as a performance ana-
lyst, computer architect, and design verification 
engineer. After working for DEC, Amdahl, ELXSI, 
Ardent, and NeXT, he founded Chronologic Simu-
lation in 1991 and was President until 1995. He 
was the principal architect of VCS, the Verilog 
Compiled Simulator, which greatly contributed to 
a resurgence in the use of Verilog in the design 
community. VCS is still the leading simulator for 
electronic design. Dr. Sanguinetti served on the 
Open Verilog International Board of Directors from 
1992 to 1995, and was a major contributor to the 
working group, which drafted the specification for 
the IEEE 1364 Verilog standard.
Ron	Gibala	(Interim	Dean,	CoE),	Fred	Leonberger,	Dave	Munson	
(Chair,	EECS)	 	Photograph by Dwight Cendrowski
Ron	Gibala	(Interim	Dean,	CoE),	John	Sanguinetti,	Dave	Munson	
(Chair,	EECS)	 		Photograph by Dwight Cendrowski
Electrical and Computer Engineering
22
In 1998, Sanguinetti co-founded CynApps, now 
Forte Design Systems, to produce high-level 
synthesis technology for electronic design. He is 
currently the Chief Technology Officer of the com-
pany. Dr. Sanguinetti has been active as an angel 
investor in the Electronic Design Automation com-
munity, and serves on the Board of Directors of 
several Electronic Design Automation companies. 
In addition, he is on the Board of Directors of the 
Myeloma Research Fund as well as the Peninsula 
Symphony, where he has served as principal trom-
bone for 20 years. John plays trombone in the U-M 
Homecoming Band when he is in town.
John reflected on his days at Michigan, and his 
plunge into the world of Silicon Valley:
“A dominant theme of my experience at U-M was 
the pursuit of excellence. I first encountered this 
in the Marching Band under Dr. Revelli, and then 
at the Computing Center. Embracing this attitude 
changes one’s life. I had to stretch myself to keep 
up in that environment. There were symbols of ex-
cellence throughout the university then, as there 
still are. Bo Schembechler was one of the more vis-
ible ones. Dr. Revelli was another. Michigan foot-
ball represented the pursuit of excellence, and you 
could measure it on the scoreboard. The Marching 
Band did, too, and you could hear it on the field. 
Leaders and Best is not just an empty slogan.
When I moved to Silicon Valley in 1982, it was a 
hotbed of entrepreneurship. Those who started 
companies and got rich were celebrated and ad-
mired for creating products and businesses, and 
measured by the IPO numbers. In a very real 
sense, the stock listings were the scoreboard. I 
had the self-confidence that I could fit in to that 
world, though it took me a long time to come up 
with an idea that was good enough for me to take 
the plunge. In the end, self-confidence, ambition, 
and the intellectual foundation to make a reason-
able judgment about what to do and how to do it 
will allow you to make an impact on the world. I got 
all those things at Michigan.”
2005 College of Engineering Alumni 
Society recent Engineering Graduate 
Award
Jennifer Rexford (MSE, PhD, CSE ’93, ’96) re-
ceived the 2005 Alumni Society Recent Engineer-
ing Graduate Award for her remarkable record of 
groundbreaking research and intellectual achieve-
ment in the relatively short period of time in which 
she has been working in the field of data networks. 
She joined the Computer Science Department at 
Princeton University as a professor in 2005, follow-
ing more than 8 years at AT&T Labs-Research as 
Technology Leader in the IP Network Management 
and Performance department.
Rexford is a leading thinker in the field of data net-
works. Her research focuses on Internet routing, 
network measurement and network management. 
She aims to make data networks easier to design, 
understand and manage. She is recognized for 
her pioneering work on Internet traffic engineering 
and Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) analysis and 
configuration. Rexford co-authored the book Web 
Protocols and Practice, an all-in-one reference text 
about the core technologies underlying the web, in-
cluding a detailed evolution and explanation of its 
building blocks. She holds six patents.
In 2004, Technology Review magazine named Prof. 
Rexford to its annual TR-100 list of top innovators 
under the age of 35. That same year, the Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery recognized her with 
the Grace Murray Hopper Award as the outstand-
ing young computer professional of the year for her 
work on assuring stable and efficient Internet rout-
ing.
Rexford is chair of the Association for Computing 
Machinery’s Special Interest Group on Data Com-
munications. She is also a member of the ACM 
Council and the Computing Research Association 
Board of Directors.
Jennifer	Rexford,	Ron	
Gibala	(Interim	Dean)
Photograph by Dwight 
Cendrowski
Credit:	CoE	Media	and	Mar-
keting	for	background	and	
summary	information	about	
the	CoE	award	recipients.
2
A
lu
m
ni
 N
ot
es
DAVID PENNOCK (PhD, CSE ’99), Principal Re-
search Scientist at Yahoo! Research, was recently 
named to MIT Technology Review’s list of 35 “top 
technology innovators under age 35” for 2005. 
Pennock is one of a growing vanguard of economi-
cally literate computer scientists who are teaming 
with computationally-literate economists to create 
the trading bazaars of the digital age. To Pennock, 
nearly everything is tradeable - from traditional 
goods (think eBay) to more ephemeral objects like 
user’s clicks on a web page (sponsored search 
auctions) or speculative bits of information (finan-
cial futures, derivatives, and gambling markets).
Pennock’s most notable work is in the area of in-
formation markets. He and his colleagues have 
examined the computational process and speed 
of information propagation in an information mar-
ket, and the computational complexity and algo-
rithms required for an auctioneer to simultaneously 
match-up opposing speculative wagers expressed 
as arbitrary Boolean logic formulas. Pennock has 
analyzed a number of real online information mar-
kets, and shown that even fake-money Internet 
games can have a surprising ability to predict the 
future success of whatever is being bartered.
Pennock’s most recent invention is the dynamic 
parimutuel market, a new financial auction mecha-
nism good for low-liquidity environments found in 
derivatives trading and information markets. The 
dynamic parimutuel is featured in Yahoo!’s Tech 
Buzz Game, a high-tech fantasy market used to 
gauge traders’ collective wisdom about technology 
trends. Players try to predict what technologies will 
be popular with web searchers. To find out more 
about this game, and begin to play yourself, go to: 
http://buzz.research.yahoo.com.
David	Pennock,	Principal	Research	Scientist,	Yahoo!	Research
Pennock has three patents in progress in the area 
of electronic commerce and the WWW, including 
a new financial framework for web search adver-
tising, where impressions and clicks aren’t simply 
sold by search engines to advertisers, but are ac-
tively traded back and forth in analogy to today’s 
commodity futures exchanges. Pennock says that 
such “search futures” might “open up a whole new 
world of hedging and speculating.” Pennock has 
over 50 academic publications in conferences and 
journals. His work has been featured by Discov-
er Magazine, New Scientist, CNN, the New York 
Times, the Economist, and several other publica-
tions.
Prior to his current position at Yahoo!, Pennock 
worked as a research scientist at NEC Research, 
and in 2001 served as an adjunct professor at 
Pennsylvania State University. At Michigan, Pen-
nock worked with Michael Wellman, a professor 
in the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Wellman 
describes Pennock as, “an extremely innovative 
researcher, well positioned to exert continuing 
technical impact on prediction markets, sponsored 
search, and other areas of Internet life.”
Pennock is program co-chair of the 2006 ACM 
Conference on Electronic Commerce (EC’06), 
which will be held June 11-15 in Ann Arbor, MI. 
This conference is sponsored by the ACM Special 
Interest Group on Electronic Commerce (SIGe-
com), chaired by Prof. Wellman.
2006 ACm Conference on 
Electronic Commerce
June 11-15, 2006
Ann Arbor, mI
http://stiet.si.umich.edu/ec06
FoCUS oN oUr ALUmNI
2
1940s
RUSS YOUNGDAHL (BSE EE ’46) was glad to 
hear about the mentoring opportunity for students, 
and for alumni. Having recently retired for the fourth 
time, he has a wealth of experiences to share. At 
Consumer’s Energy, where he spent 38 years, he 
started as a junior engineer and retired as Execu-
tive Vice President and board member. He then 
was President and board member of Long Island 
Lighting, retired, and opened his own consulting 
company back in Michigan. His fourth career was 
as an elected official, Township Supervisor, for 
eight years. He tells students:
 “Being an engineer is an interesting job and 
you can make a career out of it. But I also 
think you’ll find that you can spread that 
background, that knowledge, into other fields. 
That’s why I branched into management, I’ve 
been in civic clubs, and served on several 
national committees that dealt with a variety 
of issues, including nuclear power, licensing 
plants, building, and operating plants. When 
I got out of one of my last retirements, I de-
cided to get into local politics. These are the 
kinds of things engineering students can do. 
They can contribute to their society. It’s chal-
lenging, sometimes a little frustrating, but re-
warding.”
1970s
RICHARD DAVIDSON 
(BSE EE ’70) received 
the 2004 American 
Radio Relay League 
(ARRL) Herb S. Brier 
(W9AD) Instructor of 
the Year Award. David-
son has taught license 
classes to those want-
ing to receive their 
Amateur Radio license 
since 1994, while being education director and 
ham class instructor for the North Shore Radio 
Club. He was active in the U-M ham radio club, 
W8UM, during his years as a student. He tells us, 
“I still have a QSL card in my collection that I saved 
from the times when we operated the station on 
the top floor of the East Engineering Building.”
1980s
STEPHEN FENWICK (BSE EE ’88) is a senior soft-
ware engineer in the Applied Technology depart-
ment of Motorola, Inc. Upon graduation from U-M, 
he went to Motorola, developing software in CGISS 
for the new generation of all-digital two-way police 
radios, both hand-held and mobile. He then moved 
to the Applied Technology department, where he 
has developed systems and software on several 
wireless products for government customers. Out-
side of work, Fenwick and a co-worker have been 
working to enhance an Internet-connected display 
box they developed, which won an honorable men-
tion in a 2004 contest in Circuit Cellar magazine. 
On weekends, he volunteers his time at Chicago 
Canine Rescue helping dogs find owners to adopt 
them, and Vital Bridges, an organization which pro-
vides food and health counseling for people with 
AIDS.  He received his MSEE from the Illinois Insti-
tute of Technology in 2005.
HOSSEIN JADVAR (MSE CICE ’86) went on to 
earn a PhD in bioengineering (1988) from Michi-
gan, an MD degree from the University of Chicago 
in 1993 and a MPH degree from Harvard University 
in 2005.  He completed post-graduate medical train-
ing with an internship in internal medicine at UCSF 
(1993-94), a residency in diagnostic radiology and 
nuclear medicine at Stanford University (1994-98), 
and a fellowship in positron emission tomography 
and nuclear oncology at Harvard Medical School 
(1998-99).  He is also currently pursuing a MBA 
degree (Class of 2007) in the Executive Program 
of the Marshall School of Business at the Univer-
sity of Southern California.  He joined the faculty 
of the University of Southern California in Los An-
2
geles in 1999, and is a tenured Associate Professor 
in the Department of Radiology with a joint appoint-
ment in the Department of Biomedical Engineering. 
He is also a Visiting Associate in Bioengineering at 
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.  His 
research is currently supported by the NIH and is 
focused on the imaging evaluation of cancer.  He 
is married and has two daughters (3.5 years and 5 
month old), and lives at the foothills of Mount Wilson 
in the beautiful “city of roses,” Pasadena, CA.
RICHARD P. (RICK) 
WALLACE (BSE EE ’82) 
has been named chief 
executive officer (CEO) 
of KLA-Tencor Corpora-
tion. Wallace joined KLA-
Tencor in 1988 as an ap-
plications engineer, and 
most recently was Presi-
dent and COO of the 
company. During his time 
at KLA-Tencor, Wallace 
has been responsible 
for the Wafer Inspection 
Group, Reticle and Photomask Inspection Division, 
Films and Surface Technology Division, Software 
and Customer Groups, and the Lithography Control 
Group. Wallace has been credited in a recent press 
release with playing an important role in KLA-Ten-
cor’s strong market and technology position. After 
his undergraduate degree at U-M, Wallace earned 
a master’s degree in engineering management from 
Santa Clara University.
1990s
JEFF ABRAMSON 
(BSE CE ’89, MSE CSE 
’91) and his wife, Nicole, 
welcome Trevor Douglas 
Abramson to their family, 
born January 17, 2006. 
Jeff is a General Man-
ager at Intel Corporation 
and also owns his own 
business, Rainy Day 
Games. Trevor has an 
older brother Mitchell (28 
months old). The family 
lives in Beaverton, OR. 
AMIR A. AMINI (PhD EE 
’90). After 10 years at 
Washington University 
School of Medicine (past 5 
years as Associate Profes-
sor and Director of Cardio-
vascular Image Analysis 
Lab), Amini will be moving 
to the University of Lou-
isville in August 2006 where he will hold an en-
dowed chair in bioimaging as a full professor of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering. He will also 
have a lead role at the Cardiovascular Innovations 
Institute directed by Laman Gray, M.D. (the heart 
surgeon who performed the first totally artificial 
heart implant in the world). Until August, he can 
be reached at amini@wustl.edu, URL: http://www-
cv.wustl.edu
SVEN G. BILÉN (MSE EE ’93; PhD EE ’98) is pro-
fessor of Engineering Design and Electrical Engi-
neering, and Chief Technologist at the Center for 
Space Research Programs at The Pennsylvania 
State University. He was on campus recently as 
a panel member with the College of Engineering 
Career Path Series, where U-M students can learn 
from alumni how they chose their current careers. 
JAMES A. D’ANTONIO (BSE, CE ’99) started 
working for Anderson Consulting, now Accenture, 
upon graduation.  He is currently an M2 (2nd year 
manager).  His specialization is the IT Asset Man-
agement group within the Data Center Operations 
organization.  He is serving in his 5th year as head 
coach for the University of Michigan Roller Hockey 
team.
MATTHEW GERLACH (MSE EE ’98) worked 
at SandCraft Inc. (Santa Clara, CA) for close to 
6 years before leaving for Nvidia Corp. (also of 
Santa Clara, CA).  His job focuses on circuit and 
cad design for Nvidia’s next generation graphics 
processors. He recently moved from the bay area 
back to Michigan to be closer to family and friends, 
and telecommutes for Nvidia out of his home.  Go 
Blue!
2000s
TIMOTHY BRANDT (BSE CE ’02) stayed at U-
M after graduation to take a graduate course in 
‘Geometric Modeling’ while working on a computer 
animation project. That led to a short gig with CIS: 
Hollywood, working on visual effects for the movie 
‘The Core’. He then worked for Warner Bros. Ani-
mation, a small post house called ‘Ring of Fire’, and 
since May 2004 has been at Sony Pictures Image-
26
works. He worked as Look Development Technical 
Director on their first CGI feature, ‘Open Season,’ 
and will be moving into the software department 
to help with the new proprietary lighting / compos-
iting tool, Katana. Using Katana, he will help the 
current shows (Spiderman 3 / Beowulf / Surfs Up) 
find a good workflow, and help write specific tools 
that they need. Next Fall, he will start work on the 
third Sony Pictures Animation film, ‘Cloudy, With 
a Chance of Meatballs,’ as a shader writer. Timo-
thy tells us, “after being put on academic probation 
my sophmore year, I became very serious about 
school and realized all the wonderful opportunities 
available at The University of Michigan. I am eter-
nally grateful for how well the University prepared 
me for my career. Thank You and Go Blue!”
TUCKER DEAN BERCKMANN (BSE CE ’05) 
received a Fulbright Scholarship to work with the 
FORBIAS project at the Technical University of 
Munich (TUM), where he is studying computer 
systems in self-guided automobiles. Tucker has 
been interested in Germany even as a youth, and 
spent a year in Munich at TUM during his junior 
year at U-M. The photo shows Tucker in front of the 
Rathaus (City Hall) on Marienplatz (Main Square) 
in Munich.
JOANNA [BORDERS] 
BONJOUR (BSE CS 
’05) married Andy Bon-
jour May 28, 2005. 
They live in Steuben-
ville, OH. Joanna is 
currently doing free-
lance web develop-
ment. They are expect-
ing their first child.
JILL DIMOND (BSE CS ’05) 
is working at a usability firm in 
Seattle working as a user in-
terface designer (designing the 
look and flow of software and 
websites) and as a usability en-
gineer (testing the software with 
actual users). She has been 
working with clients such as Mi-
crosoft, Amazon, and small dot 
com startups.
SURAJ MANSUKHANI (BSE 
EE ’02) and PREMA KUMAR 
(BSE CE ‘03) tied the knot No-
vember 25, 2005 in Dearborn, 
MI.  They both work for the Boe-
ing Company in Houston, TX.
CARMELA [BARNES] YOUNG (BSE CE ‘03) is an 
embedded software engineer at Smiths Aerospace 
in Grand Rapids, Michigan. She tells us, “It will be 3 
years in May since I’ve been at Smiths and I really 
enjoy my position!  In May, 2004 I was married, and 
my husband, Eann, and I reside in Grand Rapids. 
I enjoy my field so much that I am planning to fur-
ther my education by obtaining a Masters degree in 
Electrical and Computer Engineering with an em-
phasis in Computer Architecture/Embedded Sys-
tems from Michigan State University beginning this 
summer of 2006.  I will continue to work full-time to 
take advantage of my company’s tuition-assistance 
program. I’m really excited about my Master’s op-
portunity and I am thankful to the U-M EECS De-
partment for helping me to obtain a solid Computer 
Engineering foundation to do well within my career, 
and to God for blessing me with the opportunity 
to attend.  I would like to extend special thanks to 
Prof. Martha Pollack, Prof. Toby Teorey, and Prof. 
Todd Austin who have been great mentors and pro-
vided excellent guidance and support of my goals 
and aspirations while I was at U-M and beyond.
2
AmAtEUr rAdIo CLUB NEEdS 
ALUmNI HELP!
Founded in 1913, the University of Michigan 
Amateur Radio Club (UM-ARC) has been pursu-
ing an ambitious revitalization program since the 
new shack was dedicated last year.  Included in 
the station is a new Omni-VI donated by alumnus 
and Ten-Tec president Jack Burchfield, K4JU.  A 
satellite station is being developed with the help of 
the EECS 430 class and an ARRL Education and 
Technology Development Grant.  A donated SB-
220 2 kW amplifier is also being rebuilt to power 
the club’s signal all over the Earth.  The club has 
been granted approval for a 40 foot HF tower to be 
installed on the EECS building, which will allow the 
tower to be above the noise generated by industrial 
equipment on the top floor.  Valued at over $3,500, 
a Tennadyne T12 log periodic antenna and a Telex 
Tail Twister rotator have already been donated to 
support the “Sponsor a Foot” campaign.  With the 
total cost of the tower estimated at $10,000 the 
club needs the support of alumni and amateur ra-
dio enthusiasts everywhere to meet the funding 
requirement and complete the club’s revitalization. 
With the new tower, amplifier and satellite station, 
UM-ARC will become the envy of college radio 
clubs all over the Big Ten.  Only with your help can 
UM-ARC realize its ambitious goals of establishing 
a fully capable amateur station to knock the socks 
off MSU in the next Michigan QSO party.  Check 
out UM-ARC’s website at www.umich.edu/~umarc 
to see how you can help, 73!
IN mEmorIAm
SUSHILA (SUSHI) RAJALAKSHMI SUBRAMANIAN (MSE, CSE ’91) passed 
away peacefully at her home June 21st, 2005 after a difficult struggle with 
cancer.  After graduating from U-M, she consulted for several companies in 
the software systems area.  She worked at U-M’s CITI (Center for Informa-
tion Technology Integration) between 1991-93, at the School of Information 
on the UARC (Upper Atmospheric Research Collaboratory) project from 1996-
98, and for Professor Farnam Jahanian from 1998-99. Sushi was known for 
her love of art and music, and she enjoyed playing guitar.  She will be greatly 
missed. Her husband, Daniel Kiskis, is an Assistant Research Scientist in the 
Real-Time Computing Lab of the EECS Department.
Memorial donations can be sent to:
 The Sushila R. Subramanian Memorial Fund
 c/o The University of Michigan Women in Engineering Office
 1240 LEC
 1221 Beal Ave.
 Ann Arbor, MI  48109
LOUIS FRANK KAzDA, emeritus professor of electri-
cal engineering, passed away peacefully in his home in 
Las Cruces, New Mexico, January 15, 2006. Prof. Kazda 
joined the faculty of the University of Michigan as an in-
structor in 1947, achieved the rank of full Professor in 
1960, and retired in 1985.
Professor Kazda worked at U-M’s Willow Run research 
facility, and participated in research that contributed to 
the department’s development of a major graduate pro-
gram in the control and communication systems area.  He later turned his at-
tention to energy systems, and served as Director of the Power Systems and 
Energy Conversion Laboratory during the period 1975 to 1980.
Professor Kazda graduated twenty-two Ph.D. students, published in major 
technical journals, and received a number of professional honors, including 
the IEEE Centennial Medal and Certificate in 1984 in recognition of his excep-
tional service to the profession.  He was a Fellow of the IEEE. 
Following his retirement from U-M in 1985, he and his wife, Jane, moved to 
Las Cruces, New Mexico, where he continued to inspire students, teaching for 
many years at New Mexico State University.  Professor Kazda is survived by 
two of his daughters —  Sally Stites of Norman, Oklahoma, and Joan Kazda of 
Las Cruces, New Mexico; and by four grandchildren and seven great-grand-
children.  His wife Jane, and his third daughter, Judith Ann, both predeceased 
him.  
The Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science offers its 
sincere condolences to the family and friends of Louis Kazda and expresses 
its gratitude for his many years of dedication and service to his students, col-
leagues and the University.  He was a dedicated and thoughtful individual 
whose contributions will be appreciated for many years to come. Christopher	Galbraith,	John	Suen,	and	Noah	Liebman	on	the	
roof	of	the	EECS	Building.	
2
Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
tHE UNIVErSItY oF mICHIGAN
1301 Beal Avenue
Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-2122
NONPROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE 
PAID 
ANN ARBOR, MI 
PERMIT NO. 144
Contribute to the EECS Alumni Society Fund
Name(s)_____________________________________    I have enclosed my employer’s matching gift form
  Please don’t publish my name      My check is payable to the University of Michigan
          Charge to  MC   VISA   AMEX   Discover
Address _____________________________________  Account Number ______________________________
  _____________________________________  Signature _____________________________________
  _____________________________________  Expiration Date _______________________________
Phone   _____________________________________  E-mail ________________________________________
        Mail To:  ATTN:  Catharine June
          EECS Alumni Society   
 $500    $250     $100     $50     Other _____    1301 Beal Avenue
          Ann Arbor, MI  48109-2122
     
EID#                                        317930      AGG      BAA06    EN04Thank You!
Enclosed is my gift of:
Support your alumni society efforts in mentoring, networking, recruiting, scholarships, and alumni events.   
   
   

