The capacity to visualize and study the three-dimensional
structures of molecules is of central importance in many
areas of science, including chemistry, biochemistry,
molecular biology and pharmacology. In the 20th century,
a variety of graphical and physical means to represent
these structures was developed for this purpose1. Over the
past three decades, scientists have increasingly relied on
computer graphics to create dynamic representations of
molecular structures, using a technique known as inter-
active molecular graphics. The advantages of this tech-
nique revolve not only around the capacity to display the
structure of molecules, but also around the capacity to
interact with and transform this display to gain different
perspectives on a given structure, highlight specific 
features or occlude others. Whereas some molecular
graphics packages are simple aids to the visualization of 
molecular structures, others act as a ‘front-end’ for 
molecular dynamics simulation systems – as an interface
between the user and the simulation algorithms. There are
currently dozens of molecular graphics packages avail-
able, catering to all levels of user and types of computer
platform, and some of the more popular packages are
available for free2.
The earliest efforts to combine the representation of
molecular structures with the dynamic properties of a
computer display can be traced back to the high-tech
environment of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) in the mid-1960s. This is where Cyrus Levinthal,
professor of biophysics, and his collaborators took
advantage of one of the earliest interactive graphics 
systems to develop a visually oriented, computer-based
‘molecular-model building system’.
This peculiar development, in which cutting-edge
computer technology and the particular problems of
visualizing and modeling the enormous structure of 
proteins intersected to give rise to a solution, which in 
a few years became a field of scientific practice in its
own right.
Interactive computing at MIT in the early 1960s
In the 1960s, MIT was a frontrunner in the development
of computer technology. In 1963, it became the host site
of Project MAC (‘Machine-Aided Cognition’ or ‘Man-
and-Computer’), a unique time-shared computer system,
which for the first time provided a community of
researchers with the possibility of real-time interactive
computing, mainly through a series of teletype terminals
scattered around the campus3.
MIT was also at the forefront of computer graphics
technology, thanks largely to a Computer-Aided Design
research program sponsored by the Air Force4. This 
program notably gave rise to Sketchpad, the first and
archetypal computer drawing system, designed by Ivan
Sutherland5, and to the Electronic Systems Laboratory
Display Console, otherwise known as the ‘Kluge’6. The
Kluge was the first computer terminal able to show 
three-dimensional objects on a cathode-ray tube, through
axonometric projection. Three-dimensional perception
was achieved by rotating the displayed object on the
screen, with the user controlling the rate of rotation of the
image through a trackball-like device known as the
‘globe’. The user could interact with the displayed objects
through a variety of interfaces, notably buttons and a
light-pen. A vector-based display, it could only represent
white lines on a black background. Although limited by
today’s standards, it had the familiar trappings of a 
graphics workstation and eventually became one of the
terminals available to Project MAC users. One of those
users, Cyrus Levinthal, would put the Kluge to tasks that
nobody had foreseen.
0160-9327/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII:S0160-9327(00)01428-9 Endeavour Vol. 26(4) 2002 127
Cyrus Levinthal, the Kluge 
and the origins of interactive
molecular graphics
Eric Francoeur
In the mid-1960s, a group of scientists at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, led by Cyrus Levinthal,
took hold of one of the early interactive graphics terminals and used it to visualize, study and model the
structure of proteins and nucleic acids. From this encounter between cutting-edge computer technology
and molecular biology emerged the crucial elements for the development of a research-technology field
known today as interactive molecular graphics. The following account is not only about how computer
graphics technology has literally changed the way scientists view the molecular realm, but also a look at
how an epistemic and institutional space was created to integrate this technology into scientific research.
Eric Francoeur
Holds a PhD in Sociology from McGill University and is
currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Max-Planck Institute for
the History of Science in Berlin. He specializes in the study of
visualization and modeling practices in the sciences,
particularly chemistry, biochemistry and molecular biology.
He is currently working on a book on the design and use of
molecular models in chemistry.
e-mail: efranc65@yahoo.com
Cyrus Levinthal meets the Kluge
Levinthal was not, at first glance, the dream user for
Project MAC. Although originally trained as a physicist
and reportedly adept at mathematical modeling, the
molecular biologist nevertheless later admitted that he
‘started with a rather strong distaste for computers and
computing; at that time it did not seem that they could be
useful to biology’7. In late 1963, Robert Fano, the direc-
tor of Project MAC, introduced Levinthal to the Kluge.
Its capacity to produce images changed Levinthal’s mind.
He became, in his own words, immediately enthused at
the idea of employing this system to create models of
protein structures.
To make sense of Levinthal’s enthusiasm, it helps to
understand the state of the art in the representation of
macromolecular structures at the time. Although various
forms of symbolic and graphical representations were in
use, the study of macromolecular structures often required
the use of molecular models (i.e. physical structures
assembled from modular components which ‘map out’ in
three-dimensions the structure of a given molecule). By
the 1960s, the use of such models was well-established in
the chemical and biochemical sciences.
Molecular models were suitable for small molecules,
but building the physical model of a macromolecular
structure, which might contain hundreds or thousands of
atoms, let alone exploring its various possible conforma-
tions, was at best very difficult. The models had to be
supported by metal rods (Figure 1) or suspended by wires
(Figure 2), and even then could easily be displaced (or sag
out of place), greatly reducing the accuracy of the result-
ing structure. Collapsing models were a common occur-
rence, and the suggestion of building space-filling models
underwater to reduce or cancel the effects of gravity
was floated once or twice. The problem was widely 
recognized8 and in the early 1960s, the National Institutes
of Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation and the
American Society of Biological Chemists were involved
in developing space-filling models more suitable for
macromolecular structures. The result of this work, the
Corey–Pauling–Koltun (CPK) models, made macro-
molecular modeling marginally easier9. Levinthal had
first-hand experience of the problem: ‘At that time several
MIT associates and I were trying to do molecular 
modeling as an aid in thinking about intracistronic genetic
complementation. Our models kept falling down and we
were having all the usual problems associated with mod-
els’10. In the Kluge, Levinthal saw a possible solution to
what was perceived at best as an annoyance and at worst
as a serious hindrance to research. 
Molecular model building by computer
Assisted by Project MAC personnel, Levinthal set out to
learn programming, and within a few months was able to
develop a set of programs to construct, display and ana-
lyze macromolecular structures in real time on the Kluge.
The result was described as a new, exciting way of look-
ing at molecular structures; Levinthal and some of his
collaborators ‘went on to study proteins, protein crystals
and whatever structural data we could get our hands on’11.
The representation of the structures was very schematic,
composed uniquely of white lines representing the bond
between the atoms (Figure 3). The light-pen and buttons
were used to interact with the displayed structure. The
Kluge was hardwired to the Project MAC computer 
(a modified IBM 7904), which took care of all the calcu-
lations. This original set-up was changed in 1966 when
the Kluge was replaced by a DEC 340 display – a com-
mercial product it had inspired – connected to a ‘satellite’
128 Endeavour Vol. 26(4) 2002
Figure 1. Skeletal model of the structure of the protein lysozyme, attached to a
framework of vertical rods (courtesy of C. David Barry).
Figure 2. Space-filling model of the structure of the protein
myoglobin. The model is hanging from wires that can be
barely distinguished against the background. Photograph
under the model, in the lower-right corner, gives an idea of
the size of the model (courtesy of C. David Barry).
PDP-7 mini-computer, which took over some of the com-
putational tasks from the IBM 7904 (Figure 4).
Over the next few years, a dozen researchers, postdocs
and graduate students gravitated around the computer-
based molecular model building system, working on 
specific projects or contributing to its maintenance and
improvement. These collaborators included Martin Zwick,
a graduate student in biology with a background in
physics; Robert Langridge (then at the Harvard Medical
School and the Children’s Cancer Research Foundation),
an x-ray crystallographer with computing experience; 
C. David Barry and Edgar F. Meyer, postdoctoral fellows
with backgrounds in physics and x-ray crystallography,
respectively; and Stephen A. Ward, William R. Brody
and David E. Avrin, all graduate students in Electrical
Engineering. 
The visual and the numeric were closely intertwined in
the combination of real-time computing and graphic
interface: the user was able not only to witness but also,
through the display, to interact with the computations,
and if necessary to control, correct and tweak them.
Although this approach to computing is common now, it
was radically new at a time when batch processing was
still by far the norm12. The display was particularly use-
ful for debugging: a single glance at the display could
reveal a badly programmed structure, which would 
have been hard to detect in a list of numbers. For Robert
Langridge, who used the system to refine crystallographic
data of DNA structures, it meant faster processing times
and doing away with cumbersome models to visualize
the resulting structures13.
The combination of numeric and the visual in the study
of molecular structures comes forth clearly in Levinthal’s
project of using the interactive graphic display to address
the problem of protein folding14. In the early 1960s, it had
become widely accepted that the linear sequence of amino
acids in a protein was sufficient to predict its native (func-
tional) three-dimensional structure. The prediction of pro-
tein structure from amino-acid sequence was conceived as
a potentially interesting alternative to determining these
structures by x-ray crystallography, then a long and com-
plex process. The thermodynamic hypothesis of protein
folding held that of all the possible conformations of its
polypeptide chain, the native structure of a protein had the
lowest internal energy. Checking systematically for all the
possible conformations of the polypeptide chain of a 
protein to find the one with the lowest energy term was
not an option, as the number of such possible conforma-
tions was (and still is) simply beyond the means of any 
available computing power. By the mid-1960s, some
researchers had started to devise computer programs in
which short virtual polypeptide chains were submitted to
energy minimization algorithms15. Such algorithms pro-
duced conformations with lower total energy, but they
could only be expected to alter the structure to the bottom
of a local energy minimum, rather than reach the global
energy minimum corresponding to the conformation of
the protein in its native state. Levinthal believed that using
the graphic display to combine the skills and knowledge
of a user with the analytical capacity of the computer
might provide a solution to this specific problem. The 
key was to have the user identify why the conformation
was stuck at a particular local minimum and make alter-
ations to the structure so as to return the algorithm to a
‘downhill’ path. Levinthal characterized this interactive
work as a combination of ‘manual manipulation and energy
minimization’16. He attempted to predict the structure 
of cytochrome C, a protein whose structure Richard
Dickerson was in the process of determining crystallo-
graphically at the California Institute of Technology. 
Endeavour Vol. 26(4) 2002 129
Figure 3. Photograph of the Kluge display showing a detail of
the myoglobin structure, namely the heme group of 
myoglobin viewed sideways with portions of the surrounding
polypeptide chain. Such photographs (mainly Polaroid
snapshots) were the principal means of obtaining a ‘hard
copy’ of the displayed image (courtesy of Martin Zwick).
Figure 4. The second generation of hardware for Levinthal’s molecular model
building system: in the back, the PDP-7 mini-computer; in the middle, the standard
teletype programming console; in the foreground, the DEC 340 graphics display
console, with the ‘globe’ that served to control the direction and rate of rotation of
the image. The space-filling model of an unspecified molecule stands next to the
globe (courtesy of Martin Zwick).
This prediction attempt failed completely. A ‘plausible’
structure was proposed, but it did not prove to be unique
– several equally plausible structures could be postulated,
rendering the whole process dubious. When Dickerson
finally solved the structure of cytochrome C, it became
clear that the predicted structure was completely wrong.
In retrospect, one can point to many reasons for this 
failure, not least the fact that Levinthal (like many of his
peers) had underestimated by a wide margin the com-
plexity of the problem. Although some progress has been
made, the results of protein-structure prediction methods
are today still far from the accuracy provided by experi-
mental methods17. Yet, all this work was not in vain:
from Levinthal’s cogitations on protein folding came 
two short and very influential notes on the concept of 
‘folding pathways’, the idea that specific local interac-
tions between atomic groups guide the folding process of 
proteins18.
Interactive molecular graphics after MIT
In 1967, Levinthal left MIT to become chair of the
Department of Biology at Columbia University. At that
point, any effort to use the computer graphics resources 
of MIT for macromolecular analysis effectively ceased. 
At the time of the move, Levinthal abandoned his work 
on protein structure, because, as he commented later, 
‘it seemed to me that most of the activities which were
directed at predicting structure from sequence data were,
at the time, more game playing than serious science’19.
This particular failure did not dampen his enthusiasm for
the application of computer graphics to scientific research.
It would, on the contrary, become his main center of interest
in the following years.
There could be several reasons for this. First, the simple
capacity to visualize macromolecular structures with an
ease and flexibility that other means did not afford was 
in itself an achievement, which, in the eyes of many, 
warranted further development. Second, although it had
failed in the ambitious project of protein-folding predic-
tion, the molecular model building system had proved
useful in more mundane and straightforward analytical
tasks. Third, molecular graphics held many promises, the
most prominent of which was to make the whole process
of structure refinement in protein x-ray crystallography
much easier, by providing a means for virtual model
building. The fourth, and perhaps most important reason,
was simply the availability of research funding for molec-
ular graphics work.
As the work at MIT was taking place, at the NIH
William Raub was in charge of developing what eventu-
ally became the PROPHET system – a time-shared, inter-
active, graphics-oriented database-management system
for laboratory and clinical scientists studying the relation-
ship between molecular structure and biological func-
tion20. Told of Levinthal’s work, Raub paid him a visit at
MIT. After a demonstration of the molecular graphics sys-
tem, Raub became ‘entranced’ with the technology21, and
the idea of including the capacity to display molecular
structures to the nascent PROPHET system was formed.
The NIH entered into a contract with Levinthal to extend
the capabilities for three-dimensional representation and
display of macromolecules. The contract financed the
acquisition of an Adage interactive graphics terminal22,
which formed the core of Levinthal’s computer graphics
facility at Columbia, a facility that eventually became a
NIH-sponsored National Research Resource. By the early
1970s, Levinthal had put aside ‘wet’ molecular biology to
focus on the application of computer graphics to scientific
research. He continued his work on molecular graphics23,
and went on to develop a computer graphics system for
the three-dimensional reconstruction of biological struc-
tures from serial section microphotography24. 
Many of those who collaborated with Levinthal at MIT
maintained an interest in computer graphics. In 1969,
Robert Langridge established, with Todd Wipke, the
Computer Graphics Laboratory at Princeton as another
NIH National Research Resource Facility. The initial
grant of over US$1 million allowed the acquisition of 
an Evans and Sutherland LDS-1 graphic terminal, by far 
the most powerful equipment of its kind at the time.
Langridge moved this facility to the University of
California in San Francisco in 1976, and managed its
operations until his retirement in 1994. C. David Barry
brought the experience he had acquired at MIT to
Washington University and Oxford, UK, where he helped
to develop molecular graphics facilities25. Edgar Meyer
took on a faculty position at Texas A & M and became a
research collaborator at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory, where he used the Brookhaven Raster Display
to produce three-dimensional images of molecular struc-
tures and contributed to the development of the Protein
Data Bank26. He later established the Biographics
Laboratory at Texas A & M.
Molecular graphics activity was also spreading outside
this inner circle. William V. Wright, a PhD student at 
the Department of Computer Science at the University 
of North Carolina (Chapel Hill), developed, in the early
1970s, an interactive computer graphics system for
molecular studies27, and spent the subsequent years at
UNC directing a NIH-funded project for the development
of computer graphics systems to study molecular struc-
tures. By 1971, the NIH had its own molecular graphics
facility, developed by Richard Feldmann, from its
Division of Computer Research and Training28.
From the association of molecular biology and cutting-
edge computer technology at MIT in the 1960s emerged
a new research technology, along with a group of scien-
tists who in various institutions played a key role in estab-
lishing and developing interactive computer graphics as
an approach to the study of molecular structures – pio-
neers of a field now known as ‘scientific visualization’29.
For them, molecular graphics was not simply a means to
an end, but had become a field of research and develop-
ment in its own right. The subsequent development of the
field was by no means spectacular, but was nevertheless
steady. By 1974, 19 computer modeling systems with
molecular graphics had been described in the literature30,
a fair achievement considering the cost of each of these
facilities, not only simply in terms of hardware, but 
also in terms of software development – there was no
130 Endeavour Vol. 26(4) 2002
off-the-shelf molecular graphics software, and basic hard-
ware incompatibilities made it difficult to ‘export’ soft-
ware from one platform to another. By then, the field was
gaining a certain autonomy: it had its practitioners; its
centers, funding sources – the nucleus of a culture cen-
tered around computers and computer graphics technolo-
gy. Research funding agencies, not surprisingly, were a
key factor in this development. The NIH, in particular,
financed the creation and maintenance of many early
molecular graphics and modeling facilities. 
The development of a computer graphics industry,
which provided the necessary hardware, also proved cru-
cial. The nascent molecular graphics community was not
involved directly in the technological and commercial
development of computer graphics technology, but consti-
tuted a group of software developers and ‘power users’
who sought the state-of-the-art – whenever they could
afford it – and pushed the available technology to its limit.
The interpretation and display of x-ray crystallographic
data (in particular for elucidating protein structure)
remained the principal area of research and application for
interactive molecular graphics throughout the 1970s31. By
the early 1980s, the sustainable use of color had been
introduced in the field32 and drug design had become
another prominent application33. The Molecular Graphics
Society was created in 1982 and its journal, the Journal of
Molecular Graphics, first appeared in 1983, marking a
turning point in the institutionalization of the field34. By
the late 1980s, developments in computing had reached a
stage that made molecular graphics available on the desk-
top of every researcher who could afford a PC. By the
1990s, molecular graphics had come of age, a widespread,
polyvalent and taken-for-granted research technology.
The digitized version of a 16mm film showing the graph-
ic capacity of Levinthal’s molecular-model building sys-
tem at MIT can be seen on the Web, at the Early Molecular
Graphics Movie Gallery (http://purl.org/efranc65/movie).
References and notes
1 Francoeur, E. (1997) The forgotten tool: the design and use
of molecular models. Social Studies of Science 27, 7–40
2 See, for example, Protein Explorer, a web-based protein-
structure visualization system
(http://molvis.sdsc.edu/protexpl/index.htm) and DeepView,
a package developed and maintained by researchers for
GlaxoSmithKline (http://www.expasy.ch/spdbv/)
3 Fano, M. and Corbató, F.J. (1966) Time-sharing on
computers. Sci. Am. 215, 128–140
4 Coons, S.A. (1963) An outline of the requirements for a
computer-aided design system. AFIPS Conference
Proceedings 23, 299–304
5 Sutherland, I.E. (1963) Sketchpad: a man-machine graphical
communication system. AFIPS Conference Proceedings 23,
329–346
6 Stotz, R. (1963) Man-machine console facilities for
computer-aided design. AFIPS Conference Proceedings 23,
323–328. In hacker culture, the term ‘kluge’ refers to an
inelegant yet effective solution to a software or hardware
problem. It is not clear how this epithet became attached to
the Electronic Systems Laboratory Display Console.
7 Levinthal, C. (1976) Introduction: a brief history of computer
graphics. In Workshop on Computer Graphics in Biology,
pp. 1–5, Verve Research Corporation
8 Platt, J.R. (1960) The need for better macromolecular
models. Science 131, 1309–1310
9 Koltun, W.L. (1965) Precision space-filling atomic models.
Biopolymers 3, 665–679
10 Levinthal, C. op. cit. note 7
11 Levinthal, C. (ca. 1989) The Beginnings of Interactive
Molecular Graphics, unpublished manuscript
12 It was possible to produce ‘non-interactive’ drawings of
molecular structures using off-line computing, as
demonstrated by Carroll K. Johnsons’ popular ORTEP
program, created in the same period. See Johnson, C.K.
(1965) ORTEP: A FORTRAN Thermal Ellipsoid Plot
Program for Crystal Structure Illustrations, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory
13 Langridge, R.A. and MacEwan, A.W. (1965) The
refinement of nucleic acid structure. In IBM Scientific 
Computing Symposium on Computer Aided
Experimentation, IBM
14 Levinthal, C. (1966) Molecular model-building by
computer. Sci. Am. 214, 42–52
15 Scheraga, H.A. et al. (1967) Calculations of polypeptide
structures from amino acid sequence. In Conformation of
Biopolymers (Vol. 1) (Ramachandran, G.N., ed.), pp. 43–60,
Academic Press
16 Levinthal, C. (1966) Computer construction and display of
molecular models. In IBM Scientific Computing Symposium
on Computer Aided Experimentation, IBM
17 Baker, D. and Sali, A. (2001) Protein structure prediction
and structural genomics. Science 294, 93–96
18 Levinthal, C. (1968) Are there pathways for protein folding?
Journal de Chimie Physique 65, 44–45. Levinthal
postulated the folding pathways in view of the fact that
proteins fold relatively rapidly into their native state, despite
the astronomical number of possible conformations that
their polypeptide chains could theoretically take. This
discrepancy became rapidly and widely known as the
‘Levinthal paradox’ in the protein-folding literature, a
formulation which Levinthal did not particularly care for.
19 Levinthal, C. (ca. 1989) op. cit. note 11
20 Raub, W.F. (1975) The prophet system. In Computers in
Life Science Research (Siler, W. and Lindberg, W.A.B.,
eds), pp. 189–194, FASEB and Plenum Press
21 William Raub, interview with the author, 
20 June 2001
22 The Adage graphics terminal was one of the many
commercial interactive graphics systems that appeared on
the market in the mid-to-late-1960s. See Machover, C.
(1978) A brief, personal history of computer graphics.
Computer 11, 38–45
23 Katz, L. and Levinthal, C. (1972) Interactive computer
graphics and the representation of complex biological
structures. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 1, 465–504
24 Levinthal, C. et al. (1974) Computer-aided reconstruction
from serial sections. Fed. Proc. 33, 2336–2340
25 Barry, C.D. and North, A.C.T. (1971) The use of a
computer-controlled display system in the study of
molecular conformations. Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
Quant. Biol. 36, 577–584
26 Meyer, E.F. (1997) The first years of the Protein Data Bank.
Protein Sci. 6, 1–7
27 Wright, W.V. (1972) An interactive computer graphics
system for molecular studies, PhD Thesis, University of
North Carolina-Chapel Hill
28 Feldmann, R.J. et al. (1972) An interactive, versatile, three-
dimensional display, manipulation and plotting system for
biomedical research. Journal of Chemical Documentation
12, 234–236
29 McCormick, B. et al. (1987) Visualization in scientific 
computing. Computer Graphics 21, 1–15
30 Marshall, G.R. et al. (1974) Computer modeling of chemical
structures: applications in crystallography, conformational
analysis, and drug design. In Computer Representation and
Manipulation of Chemical Information (Wipke, W.T. et al.,
eds), pp. 203–237, John Wiley & Sons
31 Jones, A.T. (1978) A graphic model building and 
refinement system for macromolecules. J. Appl. Crystallogr.
11, 268
32 Langridge, R.A. et al. (1981) Real-time color graphics 
in studies of molecular-interactions. Science 211, 
661–666
33 Hopfinger, A.J. (1984) Computational chemistry, molecular
graphics and drug design. Pharmacy International 5,
224–228
34 Morffew, A.J. (1983) Editorial. J. Mol. Graph. 1, 3–4
Endeavour Vol. 26(4) 2002 131

