   
 
Radhakisan Baheti and Helen Gill 
Introduction 
The term cyber-physical systems (CPS) refers to a new generation of systems with integrated 
computational and physical capabilities that can interact with humans through many new modalities. 
The ability to interact with, and expand the capabilities of, the physical world through computation, 
communication, and control is a key enabler for future technology developments. Opportunities and 
research challenges include the design and development of next-generation airplanes and space 
vehicles, hybrid gas-electric vehicles, fully autonomous urban driving, and prostheses that allow brain 
signals to control physical objects.  
Over the years, systems and control researchers have pioneered the development of powerful system 
science and engineering methods and tools, such as time and frequency domain methods, state space 
analysis, system identification, filtering, prediction, optimization, robust control, and stochastic control. 
At the same time, computer science researchers have made major breakthroughs in new programming 
languages, real-time computing techniques, visualization methods, compiler designs, embedded 
systems architectures and systems software, and innovative approaches to ensure computer system 
reliability, cyber security, and fault tolerance. Computer science researchers have also developed a 
variety of powerful modeling formalisms and verification tools. Cyber-physical systems research aims to 
integrate knowledge and engineering principles across the computational and engineering disciplines 
(networking, control, software, human interaction, learning theory, as well as electrical, mechanical, 
chemical, biomedical, material science, and other engineering disciplines) to develop new CPS science 
and supporting technology.  
In industrial practice, many engineering systems have been designed by decoupling the control system 
design from the hardware/software implementation details. After the control system is designed and 
verified by extensive simulation, ad hoc tuning methods have been used to address modeling 
uncertainty and random disturbances. However, the integration of various subsystems, while keeping 
the system functional and operational, has been time-consuming and costly. For example, in the 
automotive industry, a vehicle control system relies on system components manufactured by different 
vendors with their own software and hardware. A major challenge for original equipment manufacturers 
(OEMs) that provide parts to a supply chain is to hold down costs by developing components that can be 
integrated into different vehicles.  
The increasing complexity of components and the use of more advanced technologies for sensors and 
actuators, wireless communication, and multicore processors pose a major challenge for building next-
generation vehicle control systems. Both the supplier and integrator need new systems science that 
enables reliable and cost-effective integration of independently developed system components. In 
particular, theory and tools are needed for developing cost-effective methods to: (1) design, analyze, 
and verify components at various levels of abstraction, including the system and software architecture 
levels, subject to constraints from other levels; (2) analyze and understand interactions between the 
vehicle control systems and other subsystems (engine, transmission, steering, wheel, brake, and 
suspension); and (3) ensure safety, stability, and performance while minimizing vehicle cost to the 
Cyber-physical Systems 
From: The Impact of Control Technology, T. Samad and A.M. Annaswamy (eds.), 2011. Available at www.ieeecss.org. 
   
Although the diversity of models and 
formalisms supports a component-
based “divide and conquer” approach 
to CPS development, it poses a 
serious problem for verifying the 
overall correctness and safety of 
designs at the system level. 
consumer. Increasingly, new functionality and the cost of vehicle control systems are major differ-
entiating factors for business viability in automobile manufacturing.  
Need for CPS Research  
CPS research is still in its infancy. Professional and institutional barrier have resulted in narrowly 
defined, discipline-specific research and education venues in academia for the science and engineering 
disciplines. Research is partitioned into isolated subdisciplines such as sensors, communications and 
networking, control theory, mathematics, software engineering, and computer science. For example, 
systems are designed and analyzed using a 
variety of modeling formalisms and tools. Each 
representation highlights certain features and 
disregards others to make analysis tractable. 
Typically, a particular formalism represents either 
the cyber or the physical process well, but not 
both. Whereas differential equations are used for 
modeling physical processes, frameworks such as 
Petri nets and automata are used to represent 
discrete behavior and control flows. Workforce 
expertise is similarly partitioned, to the detriment 
of productivity, safety, and efficiency. Although 
this approach to modeling and formalisms may suffice to support a component-based “divide and 
conquer” approach to CPS development, it poses a serious problem for verifying the overall correctness 
and safety of designs at the system level and component-to-component physical and behavioral 
interactions [1]. In the following paragraphs, research needs in CPS are briefly discussed. 
Abstraction and Architectures 
Innovative approaches to abstraction and architectures that enable seamless integration of control, 
communication, and computation must be developed for rapid design and deployment of CPS. For 
example, in communication networks, interfaces have been standardized between different layers. 
Once these interfaces have been established, the modularity allows specialized developments in each 
layer. The overall design allows heterogeneous systems to be composed in plug-and-play fashion, 
opening opportunities for innovation and massive proliferation of technology and the development of 
the Internet. However, the existing science and engineering base does not support routine, efficient, 
robust, modular design and development of CPS. Standardized abstractions and architectures are 
urgently needed to fully support integration and interoperability and spur similar innovations in cyber-
physical systems [2].  
Distributed Computations and Networked Control 
The design and implementation of networked control systems pose several challenges related to time-
and event-driven computing, software, variable time delays, failures, reconfiguration, and distributed 
decision support systems. Protocol design for real-time quality-of-service guarantees over wireless 
networks, tradeoffs between control law design and real-time-implementation complexity, bridging the 
gap between continuous and discrete-time systems, and robustness of large systems are some of the 
challenges for CPS research. Frameworks, algorithms, methods, and tools are needed to satisfy the high 
reliability and security requirements for heterogeneous cooperating components that interact through a 
complex, coupled physical environment operating over many spatial and temporal scales.  
   
The U.S. National Academy of Engi-
neers has listed 14 grand challenges 
that relate environmental, health, 
and societal issues; these issues will 
clearly benefit from advances 
achieved in cyber-physical systems. 
Verification and Validation 
Hardware and software components, middleware, and operating systems need to be developed that go 
beyond existing technologies. The hardware and software must be highly dependable, reconfigurable, 
and, where required, certifiable, from components to fully integrated systems. Such complex systems 
must possess a trustworthiness that is lacking in many of today’s cyber infrastructures. For example, 
certification is estimated to consume more than 50% of the resources required to develop new, safety-
critical systems in the aviation industry. Similar efforts are needed in the medical, automotive, energy 
systems, and other application domains. Overdesign is currently the only path to safe and successful 
system certification and deployment. Yet this approach is rapidly becoming intractable for complex 
designs and for systems where interoperability is needed. Testing “until the money runs out” is not a 
viable strategy, and science- and evidence-based methods are needed for reasoning about system 
reliability. New models, algorithms, methods, and tools are needed that will incorporate verification and 
validation of software and systems at the control design stage.  
Challenges and Opportunities: Industry-Academia 
Advances in CPS research can be accelerated by indentifying needs, challenges, and opportunities in 
several industrial sectors and by encouraging multidisciplinary collaborative research between academia 
and industry. The objective is to develop new systems science and engineering methods for building 
high-confidence systems in which cyber and physical designs are compatible, synergistic, and integrated 
at all scales. Current and past industry investments in CPS technology research have been significant but 
focused on shorter-term, quicker-payoff proprietary technologies. Recently, governments and some 
industry sectors are investing in longer-term, precompetitive technologies and innovative testbeds. For 
example, the European Union has initiated a major joint technology initiative with public-private funding 
by European nations and industry called Advanced Research and Technology for Embedded Intelligence 
Systems (ARTEMIS). Similarly, based on recommendations in the August 2007 report of the U.S. 
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), the U.S. National Science 
Foundation has been funding fundamental CPS research and education [3]. Related initiatives are being 
pursued in other countries, including Japan, China, South Korea, and Germany. 
CPS grand challenges are being articulated in many 
industry sectors. The U.S. National Academy of 
Engineering has listed 14 grand challenges that 
relate environmental, health, and societal issues; 
these issues will clearly benefit from advances 
achieved in cyber-physical systems. The control 
engineering research community can play a 
leading role in the development of cyber-physical 
systems. Some of the opportunities are described 
below. 
Biomedical and Healthcare Systems 
CPS research is revealing numerous opportunities and challenges in medicine and biomedical 
engineering. These include intelligent operating rooms and hospitals, image-guided surgery and therapy, 
fluid flow control for medicine and biological assays, and the development of physical and neural 
prostheses. Healthcare increasingly relies on medical devices and systems that are networked and need 
to match the needs of patients with special circumstances. Thus, medical devices and systems will be 
   
needed that are dynamically reconfigured, distributed, and can interact with patients and caregivers in 
complex environments. For example, devices such as infusion pumps for sedation, ventilators and 
oxygen delivery systems for respiration support, and a variety of sensors for monitoring patient 
condition are used in many operating rooms. Often, these devices must be assembled into a new system 
configuration to match specific patient or procedural needs. The challenge is to develop systems and 
control methodologies for designing and operating these systems that are certifiable, safe, secure, and 
reliable.  
Research challenges in medical technology and healthcare were considered in a series of workshops that 
are summarized in a U.S. National Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) report 
[4]. The report recommends research for new system science and engineering with the following goals: 
 Interoperable and open medical systems; 
 Distributed monitoring, distributed control, and real-time wireless networks for hospital 
intensive-care facilities; 
 Certification methods for medical device software and systems and networked patient 
monitoring and assistance; 
 Model-based frameworks that support component-based modeling, design, testing, and 
certification using patient-specific models. 
Another challenging area for CPS research is cognition and neuroscience for understanding the 
fundamental principles of human motor functions and exploiting this understanding in engineered 
systems. Examples include brain-machine interfaces, therapeutic and entertainment robotics, orthotics 
and exoskeletons, and prosthetics. Humans and animals seamlessly integrate sensing, computing, and 
motor control functions. These highly coupled systems do not satisfy simple modularity principles, but 
are composed of multifunctional elements, computation, and feedback loops at different time and 
length scales, noisy signals, parallel processing, and redundant fault-tolerant architectures. Recent 
research has suggested that animals use some form of optimal filtering, stochastic control algorithms, 
and large-scale probabilistic computing structures in dealing with uncertainty. Control researchers 
working with biologists, neurophysiologists, and computer scientists may be able to make further 
progress. 
Next-Generation Air Transportation Systems (NextGen) 
Cyber-physical systems research is likely to have an impact on the design of future aircraft and air traffic 
management systems, as well as on aviation safety. Specific research areas include (1) new functionality 
to achieve higher capacity, greater safety, and more efficiency, as well as the interplay and tradeoffs 
among these performance goals; (2) integrated flight deck systems, moving from displays and concepts 
for pilots to future (semi)autonomous systems; (3) vehicle health monitoring and vehicle health 
management; and (4) safety research relative to aircraft control systems. One of the key technical 
challenges to realizing NextGen involves verification and validation of complex flight-critical systems 
with a focus on promoting reliable, secure, and safe use for NextGen operations. As the complexity of 
systems increases, costs related to verification and validation and safety assurance will likely increase 
the cost of designing and building next-generation vehicles. The broader aeronautics community has 
identified verification and validation methodologies and concepts as a critical research area [5]. 
   
The goals of research in verification and validation of aviation flight-critical systems include providing 
methods for rigorous and systematic high-level validation of system safety properties and requirements, 
from initial design through implementation, maintenance, and modification, as well as understanding 
tradeoffs between complexity and verification methods for supporting robustness and fault tolerance. 
Some of the control engineering challenges include: 
 Large-scale, real-time, deterministic robust or stochastic optimization algorithms; 
 Multiple-objective, multiple-stakeholder optimization frameworks; 
 Design of automation with graceful degradation modes; 
 Safety diagnosis/health monitoring methods; 
 System architectures that facilitate distributed decision making; 
 Data fusion from heterogeneous sensors and assessment of the value of the derived 
information. 
Smart Grid and Renewable Energy  
Smart grid and renewable energy research and development has been in the forefront of public interest 
and is therefore a high priority for policy makers. The goal is to improve energy efficiency by investing in 
modernization of the energy infrastructure. The geopolitical drivers for renewable energy and smart 
grids are that (1) electricity demand is expected to increase more than 75% by 2030; (2) generation of 
electricity contributes to more than 40% of greenhouse gas emissions; (3) the cost of generating 1 KWh 
is four times greater than the cost of saving 1 KWh. Government funding agencies have partnered with 
industry, utilities, and local government in technology development and demonstration projects dealing 
with smart grids. For example, “Energy Smart Florida” is a groundbreaking public/private alliance of the 
City of Miami, Florida Power and Light, General Electric, Silver Spring Networks, and Cisco. This project is 
using federal economic stimulus funds as part of an $800 million investment in smart grid technology 
and renewable energy over the next two years. An estimated 4.5 million smart meters will be installed in 
U.S. homes and businesses to develop and demonstrate technology for demand management, 
distribution automation, substation intelligence, distributed generation, and information technology. 
The goal is to demonstrate the increase in energy efficiency through demand optimization and 
distributed automation by significantly reducing peak load.  
Advances in flexible AC transmission devices (FACTS) and phasor measurement units (PMUs) have 
opened new opportunities for wide-area control of smart grids. The U.S. Department of Energy-
sponsored North American SynchroPhasor Initiative (NASPI) has been heavily investing in PMU 
hardware. Future efforts will be needed to focus on data fusion and analysis for real-time dynamics 
monitoring, prediction, and system control. With increased reliance on wide-area communications and 
control to improve system operation, tight coupling is needed between cyber systems and the 
components of physical systems in smart grids. Critical gaps and shared challenges pertain to advances 
in system science, particularly hybrid digital-analog systems, complex emergent systems, and advanced 
software systems for large-scale, time-varying, geographically distributed systems. Advances in 
optimization of multiscale stochastic dynamic systems as well as in distributed control are necessary to 
improve smart grid performance with respect to security, efficiency, reliability, and economics. These 
issues have been identified by the research community in several workshops dealing with information 
technology and smart grids. 
   
Selected recommendations for research in cyber-physical systems: 
 Standardized abstractions and architectures that permit modular design and development 
of cyber-physical systems are urgently needed. 
 CPS applications involve components that interact through a complex, coupled physical 
environment. Reliability and security pose particular challenges in this context—new 
frameworks, algorithms, and tools are required. 
 Future cyber-physical systems will require hardware and software components that are 
highly dependable, reconfigurable, and in many applications, certifiable . . . and trust-
worthiness must also extend to the system level. 
Conclusions 
Cyber-physical systems are expected to play a major role in the design and development of future 
engineering systems with new capabilities that far exceed today’s levels of autonomy, functionality, 
usability, reliability, and cyber security. Advances in CPS research can be accelerated by close 
collaborations between academic disciplines in computation, communication, control, and other 
engineering and computer science disciplines, coupled with grand challenge applications. 
References 
[1] A. Rajhans, S.W. Cheng, B. Schmerl, B.H. Krogh, C. Aghi, and A. Bhave, “An Architectural Approach to the 
Design and Analysis of Cyber-Physical Systems,” Third International Workshop on Multi-Paradigm Modeling, 
Denver, CO, October 2009. 
[2] S. Graham, G. Baliga, and P.R. Kumar, “Abstractions, Architecture, Mechanism, and Middleware for Networked 
Contro,l” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1490-1503, July 2009. 
[3] President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. Leadership Under Challenge: Information 
Technology R&D in a Competitive World [Online], Aug. 2007. Available at 
http://www.nitrd.gov/Pcast/reports/PCAST-NIT-FINAL.pdf. 
[4] Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program. High-Confidence Medical 
Devices: Cyber-Physical Systems for 21st Century Health Care [Online], Feb. 2009. Available at 
http://www.nitrd.gov/About/MedDevice-FINAL1-web.pdf 
[5] National Science and Technology Council. National Aeronautics Research and Development Plan [Online], Feb. 
2010. Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/aero-rdplan-2010.pdf. 
Note: Any opinion, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the 
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 

