Real-Time Battery Thermal Management for Electric
Vehicles
Eugene Kim, Jinkyu Lee and Kang G. Shin
Real-Time Computing Laboratory
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2121, U.S.A.
{kimsun, jinkyul, kgshin}@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
Electric vehicles (EVs) are powered by a large number
of battery cells, requiring an effective battery manage-
ment system (BMS) to maintain the battery cells in
an operational condition while providing the necessary
power efficiently. Temperature is one of the most impor-
tant factors for battery operation, and existing BMSes
have thus employed simple thermal management poli-
cies so as to prevent battery cells from very high and
low temperatures which may likely cause their explo-
sion and malfunction, respectively. In this paper, we
study thermo-physical characteristics of battery cells,
and design a battery thermal management system that
achieves efficiency and reliability by active thermal con-
trols.
We first analyze the effect of a temperature change on
the basic operation of a battery cell. We then show how
it can cause thermal and general problems, e.g., a ther-
mal runaway that results in explosion of battery cells,
and unbalanced state of charge (SoC) that degrades bat-
tery cells’ performance. Based on this understanding
of thermal behavior, we finally develop temperature-
control approaches which are then used to design a bat-
tery thermal management system. Our simulation re-
sults demonstrate that the proposed thermal manage-
ment system improves battery performance by up to
58.4% without compromising reliability over the exist-
ing simple thermal management.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
ICCPS’14, April 14–17, 2014, Berlin, Germany.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-1996-6/13/04 ...$5.00.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.3 [Special-Purpose and Application-Based Sys-
tems]: Real-time and embedded systems; I.6.3 [Simulation
and Modeling]: Applications
1. INTRODUCTION
While electric vehicles (EVs) become popular for their
environmental friendliness and low fuel cost, they have
not fully replaced internal combustion engine vehicles
due to the risk of explosion of battery cells, the high
price for the large number of battery cells required, and
the limited availability of charging stations. As many
researchers pointed out [1, 4, 14, 23], temperature is one
of the most critical factors in designing and operating
EVs. For example, an extremely high temperature may
lead to explosion or performance degradation of battery
cells. In contrast, a battery system operating at a very
low temperature might be dysfunctional or have a low
capacity due to low reaction rates with freezing elec-
trolytes. In addition, the discharge rate of cells varies
with temperature, altering their capacity.
To address the challenges related to temperature, most
automotive manufacturers have developed their own ther-
mal management systems for their EVs [9, 10]. That
is, a BMS (Battery Management System) monitors the
temperature of battery cells, and triggers the thermal
control when temperature deviates from the normal op-
erational range. This control includes both cooling and
heating, and existing controls are all or nothing—whether
or not they cool/heat all the battery cells connected in
parallel. However, such coarse-grained controls result
in a large safety margin and hence inefficiency. More
importantly, they do not exploit temperature for more
efficient management, in that more sophisticated con-
trols of temperature even within the normal operational
range may yield better battery performance.
The goal of this paper is to develop thermal man-
agement for an efficient and reliable BMS. Efficiency is
defined by “the ratio of the useful energy delivered by
a dynamic system to the energy supplied to it” [26]; we
achieve efficiency by maximizing operation-time [18], or
the cumulative time for a BMS to provide the required
power after a full charge. We achieve reliability by
guaranteeing that a BMS provides the required power
throughout the given battery warranty period without
an explosion or malfunction, while letting its cells un-
dergo charge-and-discharge cycles.
To improve efficiency without compromising reliabil-
ity, we need a cyber-physical perspective of battery ther-
mal management, integrating and coordinating between
cyber and physical parts. For physical parts, we should
understand thermo-physical characteristics of battery
cells and external thermal stress conditions, as they have
significant impact on battery performance. By care-
fully accounting for these non-linear physical properties
and abstracting the characteristics in the cyber space
as shown in Fig. 1, we can develop desirable thermal
management that reduces the safety margin, thereby
increasing the efficiency of the entire battery system in
EVs.
To achieve this goal, we use temperature as a control
knob; beyond a simple temperature control only for the
normal operational range, we design a battery thermal
management system, which actively controls tempera-
ture for more efficient and reliable operations. This re-
quires understanding the thermal and general issues of
batteries that affect the efficiency and reliability. There-
fore, we analyze the issues based on battery thermo-
physical characteristics and their impact on the electri-
cal state of battery cells. Based on this analysis, we de-
rive strategies in achieving the goal, and then propose
a battery thermal management system with cell-level
thermal controls. Our policy boosts the performance
of cells temporarily when high power is required, while
resting cells otherwise to reduce stresses; we will present
details of our policy along with their underlying princi-
ples. To evaluate the proposed BMS, we adopt realis-
tic workloads based on real driving patterns, and sim-
ulate them with a widely-used battery simulator. Our
simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed battery thermal management, improving the
operation-time up to 58.4%, without sacrificing reliabil-
ity, over the existing BMS.
This paper makes the following three main contribu-
tions:
• Abstraction of thermo-physical characteristics in
the cyber-space to address the issues associated
with efficient and reliable thermal management;
• Design of a battery thermal management system
with a new architecture, which is, to our best knowl-
edge, the first comprehensive study to exploit tem-
perature as a control knob for BMSes; and
• In-depth evaluation of the proposed thermal man-
agement, demonstrating its significant improvement
of efficiency without compromising reliability.
Abstraction Models 
Channel control 
 
 
Charging channel 
Battery Manager 
Energy 
sources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Battery array 
 
 
Discharging channel 
Electric 
loads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cyber 
space 
Physical 
space 
Cooling channel 
Figure 1: Cyber-physical perspective for a BMS
    
 Itotal 
I2 
→ 
-               Vo           + 
Cell 
2 
- 
Vo_tot 
+ 
Cell 
1 
Cell 
3 
Cell 
8 
Cell 
7 
Cell 
9 
Cell 
5 
Cell 
4 
Cell 
6 
Cell 
11 
Cell 
10 
Cell 
12 
Cell 
14 
Cell 
13 
Cell 
15 
Cell 
17 
Cell 
16 
Cell 
18 
Cell 
20 
Cell 
19 
Cell 
21 
Cell 
23 
Cell 
22 
Cell 
24 Cell3 
I3 
→ 
 
Cell2 
Cell1 
I1 
→ 
Battery pack ∋ {Module1, … , Module8} Battery module1 ∋ {Cell1, Cell2 , Cell3} 
Module1 Module2 Module3 Module4 Module5 Module6 Module7 Module8 
Figure 2: A battery pack with modules and cells
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
general and thermal management approaches in existing
BMSes, and Section 3 formally states the problem we
want to solve via thermal management. Section 4 de-
scribes physical characteristics related to thermal and
general issues of large-scale battery systems, and Sec-
tion 5 presents our battery thermal management sys-
tem. Section 6 evaluates our system via realistic simu-
lations, and finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. BACKGROUND
As illustrated in Fig. 2, a battery pack consists of some
interfaces (e.g., electrodes) and several battery modules,
each of which is composed of several battery cells. In
a battery module, all the battery cells are connected
in parallel, reducing the possibility of battery failure
caused by a cell-level failure. The modules in a pack are
usually connected in series, enabling the battery pack
to provide a high voltage and power.
A BMS is responsible for powering EVs while protect-
ing hundreds/thousands of battery cells from damage
and keeping them in an operational condition. For a
BMS to perform these functions, battery cells should
be properly controlled because their safety and perfor-
mance depend on stress conditions around them. In
this section, we discuss the battery properties and the
related work thereof.
2.1 Battery Scheduling for Efficient Battery Man-
agement
Rate-capacity and recovery effects are the most promi-
nent physical properties for efficient battery manage-
ment. The rate-capacity effect means that the higher
the discharge rate, the lower the deliverable capacity.
The recovery effect means that a rest restores the output
voltage temporarily dropped by large discharge current.
Therefore, we can increase the capacity of batteries, by
minimizing the discharge rate per cell and resting bat-
tery cells.
State-of-Charge (SoC) represents percentage of deliv-
erable charge, from 0% with no charge, to 100% with
full, and balancing SoC is one of the most critical issues
affecting the performance of large-scale battery systems
because the performance of a large battery pack depends
on the electrical state of the most worn battery cell in
the pack.
To achieve better battery performance, a line of work
has focused on battery scheduling that equalizes SoC
and/or reduces the discharge rate [2, 11, 12, 17, 18].
They control switches to draw energy from battery cells
at a proper discharge rate. For example, when an elec-
tric motor needs high power, a battery manager con-
nects all the cells to the electric load to improve battery
efficiency. In contrast, when the motor demands low
power from the battery, the battery manager discon-
nects some cells with low SoC, achieving recovery of the
output voltage and equalization of SoC.
2.2 Thermal Management of Large-scale Bat-
teries
Besides discharge behaviors and SoC balancing, bat-
tery thermal characteristics are also important to their
efficiency, operation and safety. Of many characteris-
tics, we will focus on the following two major charac-
teristics. First, battery efficiency improves temporar-
ily at “instant high temperature” due to the increased
chemical reaction rate and ion mobility. However, the
“cumulative exposure to high temperature” causes the
permanent lifetime to decline because of its accelera-
tion of irreversible side reaction. Therefore, most BM-
Ses are required to restrict each cell within a certain
temperature range to achieve reasonable performance.
Every EV must thus be equipped with a thermal man-
agement system that keeps cell temperature within the
operational range, requiring both cooling and heating.
Whenever the temperature of a battery pack deviates
from an operational temperature range, thermal man-
agement is activated to guarantee thermal stability of
batteries [9, 10, 16, 28, 29].
For cooling, the radiator transfers heat from the fluid
inside to the air outside, thereby cooling the fluid, which
in turn cools batteries. Heating is also required for
driving at extremely cold temperature. For example,
GM Chevy Volt [10] uses 144 thermal fins to actively
cool/heat 288 battery cells with a coolant flow valve
controlling cooled/heated coolant flows. Ford Focus [9]
is also equipped with an active liquid-cooling and heat-
ing system for thermal management of its lithium-ion
battery packs.
So far, this simple approach has been effective for the
normal operation of battery cells during a vehicle war-
ranty period; a warranty can be made by thoroughly
testing battery cells’ performance in thermal experiment
chambers. However, such a passive, coarse-grained ther-
mal control does not take full advantage of thermal man-
agement systems. By understanding battery thermal
characteristics and controlling temperature, we can im-
prove battery’s capacity without compromising the life-
time of battery cells. This is because heating the cell in-
creases the battery performance instantaneously, while
cooling the cell for the situation of requiring low power
can delay the drop of lifetime. To regulate cell temper-
ature systematically, we analyze battery dynamics and
propose active and cell-level thermal management for
more efficient and reliable BMSes.
3. PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this paper, we would like to develop “good” ther-
mal management for more efficient and reliable battery
systems. For this, we state the problem of thermal man-
agement for which we first introduce relevant terms.
A battery pack in EVs supplies DC power to an in-
verter which operates the electric motors in EVs. To op-
erate motors, a power inverter needs an applicable input
voltage (Vapp) during the vehicle’s operation. Then, the
operation-time (`op) is defined as the cumulative time
for a battery pack to provide the required power with
applicable output voltage range after a full charge [18].
Therefore, a BMS should enable its battery pack to
supply the required power (Preq(t)) to electric motors
while maintaining output voltage no less than the ap-
plicable input voltage for a long operation-time. Mean-
while, the operation-time should be kept long during
the battery warranty period; otherwise, the vehicle re-
quires a larger battery pack and/or batteries must be
recharged more frequently.
In this paper, we want to develop a BMS that yields a
long operation-time during the warranty period by con-
trolling the temperature of battery cells. We can con-
trol battery temperature by selecting the coolant type
in each thermal fin at each time instant to be cooled or
heated, which will be detailed in Section 5.3. That is,
the coolant type is used as a control knob for our BMS.
Our goal is then to determine the coolant type at each
time instant (Cfin(t)) such that the operation-time (`op)
is maximized during the warranty period without any
malfunction or explosion, which is formally expressed
as:
Given stress conditions {Preq(t), Text(t)}0<t<twarr , de-
termine {Cfin(t)}0<t<twarr , such that `op is maximized
at twarr without any malfunction or explosion in [0, twarr],
where Text(t) is temperature outside the battery pack,
and 0 and twarr are the time at the beginning and
end of the battery warranty period, respectively. Note
that the stress conditions and the control of Cfin(t)
are valid/necessary only during operation of the EV in
[0, twarr].
Note that `op monotonically decreases over time, be-
cause the performance of a battery keeps on degrading
over time and never recovering. Therefore, `op at any
time during the warranty is at least as much as that at
twarr.
4. ABSTRACTION OF PHYSICAL DYNAM-
ICS OF BATTERIES
Several battery dynamics under stress conditions af-
fect the performance and safety of battery systems. For
example, uncontrolled high temperature may cause ex-
plosion, while an extremely low temperature reduces the
battery’s performance, potentially leading to failure to
power the electric vehicle. Therefore, the impacts and
dependencies of control knobs and external conditions
on battery dynamics should be analyzed to improve the
safety and performance of a battery system.
To this end, we will first identify the factors that affect
the performance by bridging different abstraction mod-
els for battery physical dynamics. Then, based on the
unified abstraction model, we will address how a change
in temperature affects battery physical dynamics, which
will be a basis for our battery thermal management to
be described in Section 5.
4.1 Abstraction of Battery Characteristics
By analyzing the dependency on thermal conditions
and the impacts on states of batteries, we can figure
out how controllable thermal conditions affect the out-
put voltage of the entire battery system and each cell’s
temperature.
4.1.1 Circuit-Based Battery Model (Vo = f(Rint, Id, SoC))
Output voltage (Vo) dictates the operation-time of a
battery system, and the output voltage is greatly af-
fected by battery cells’ internal states. A circuit-based
battery model uses fundamental electric elements, such
as internal resistance (Rint), discharge current (Id), and
open-circuit voltage (Voc) to represent the cell’s internal
states, and explains the output voltage by basic circuit
theory as described in Fig. 3 and Eq. (1).
When the cell is connected to an external load, an
electron flow (Id) occurs from the anode to the cathode
through the external load. Open-circuit voltage (Voc) is
the difference of electrical potential between two termi-
nals of the cell when disconnected from any circuit, and
it largely depends on deliverable charges (SoC) in bat-
tery cells. The internal resistance (Rint) represents all
SoC Voc 
Power requirement 
Vo 
Id 
Rint 
Rint 
+ 
 
 
- 
 
↓ 
I 
SoC 
+ 
 
Vo 
 
- 
Voc 
(SoC) 
← Id 
Figure 3: Circuit-based battery model
the factors causing voltage drop between open-circuit
voltage (Voc) and output voltage (Vo) when the power
source delivers current. In addition, large capacitors are
adopted to represent states of deliverable charge (SoC)
of cells. Then, the output voltage is expressed as [23]:
Vo = Voc − IdRint = f(SoC)− IdRint, (1)
which says that a change in internal resistance affects
output voltage as follows:
P1. Internal resistance⇒Output voltage (R ↑→ Vo ↓):
As the internal resistance gets higher, the output
voltage decreases.
Supplying the required power (Preq) to the electric
load induces power dissipation (Pd) in a battery pack.
That is, total power consumption (Pbat) in a battery
pack (Pbat) consists of the two power consumption pa-
rameters (Preq and Pd) as shown in the following equa-
tion [23]:
Voc = Vo + IdRint ⇒ VocId = VoId + I2dRint
⇒ Pbat = Preq + Pd. (2)
Therefore, to use batteries efficiently and increase the
operation-time of a battery pack, a BMS should re-
duce power dissipation (Pd) during operation, which is
recorded as follows.
P2. Internal resistance⇒ Power dissipation (R↑→Pd↑):
As internal resistance gets higher, power dissipa-
tion increases.
Since the output voltages of the cells connected in
parallel should be the same and the variation of open-
circuit voltage is small, discharge current depends on
internal resistance according to Eq. (1). Then, the dis-
charge current of a cell with larger internal resistance
is lower than that of the other cells in the module, as
recorded in the following statement:
P3. Internal resistance ⇒ Discharge rate (R↑→Id↓):
As internal resistance gets higher, the discharge
rate per cell decreases in a module.
4.1.2 Relation between Internal Resistance and Cell
Temperature (Rint = f(Tcell, t))
As shown in P1 and P2, internal resistance is an im-
portant parameter that affects batteries’ performance.
Tcell 
Rint 
0.9 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
0 8 16 24 R
e
la
ti
ve
 r
e
si
st
an
ce
 
Time (month) 
260K 290K 320K 
(b) 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
253 273 293 313 
In
te
rn
al
 r
e
si
st
an
ce
 
(o
h
m
) 
Temperature (K) (a) 
Figure 4: Internal resistance increases as tem-
perature decreases, and relative internal resis-
tance increases as time to expose to high temper-
ature increases; both graphs are obtained with
evaluation tools/settings to be described in Sec-
tion 6.
Therefore, we describe how internal resistance varies
with thermal stresses during operation.
Before presenting the effect of temperature on internal
resistance, we define two terms related to time interval.
An operation cycle represents a cycle of a battery cell’s
operation from its full charge to no charge. A calendar
life is a duration from a battery cell’s production to its
warranty period (e.g., 5 years). We describe how tem-
perature affects internal resistance, when a given tem-
perature lasts during (i) an operation cycle, and (ii) a
calendar life.
Regarding (i), a higher temperature stimulates the
mobility of electron or ion, temporarily reducing the
cell’s internal resistance and increasing its capacity (by
P2). For example, as shown in Fig. 4(a), resistance with
320K is smaller than that with 290K. Therefore, during
an operation cycle, the following relation holds:
P4. Temperature⇒ Internal resistance (T↑→R↓ (oper-
ation cycle)): As temperature during an operation
cycle increases, internal resistance decreases.
In literature, relation between internal resistance and
cell temperature is well-described by a polynomial model,
and experimental results substantiate its effectiveness
[27]:
Rint = c3T 3cell + c2T
2
cell + c1Tcell + c0. (3)
This model dictates cell temperature (Tcell) for the re-
quired internal resistance (Rint).
On the other hand, a long-term temperature expo-
sure affects internal resistance the other way around,
as explained next. Battery performance deteriorates
over time, regardless of whether the battery is used or
not, which is known as “calendar fade”, and it can be
represented by a rise of internal resistance as shown in
Fig. 4(b). There are two key factors influencing the cal-
endar life, namely temperature (T ) and time (t), and
empirical evidences show that these effects can be rep-
resented by two relatively simple mathematical depen-
dencies (t and T ). The extent of deterioration can be
assessed by relative resistance (µ), which is expressed as
External environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Battery 
 
 
 
 
 
Tcell Tfin 
External temperature 
Id 
Rint 
Th
er
m
al
 f
in
 
Th
er
m
al
 f
in
 
Qs 
Qt Qd 
Figure 5: Battery thermal dynamics
[33, 34]:
µ(T ; t) = 1 + exp(β0 + β1 ·
1
T
) · tρ, (4)
where β0, β1, and ρ represent the model parameters.
According to Eq. (4), the following statement holds:
P5. Temperature over time ⇒ Resistance (t↑, T↑→R↑
(calendar life)): As time to high temperature expo-
sure increases during a calendar life, internal resis-
tance increases.
4.1.3 Thermal Behavior Model (Tcell = f(Tamb, Rint, Id))
While internal resistance depends on cell temperature
(P4 and P5), cell temperature, in turn, varies with a
battery internal state and external stress.
Any battery operation generates heat due to internal
resistence when the cell delivers power to electric loads,
which is also known as joule heating (I2dRint loss). Some
part of generated heat (Qd) would be released on the
surface of cells (Qt), and the remaining heat is absorbed
into cell materials (Qs), which can be calculated by [3]:
Qd = I2dRint, Qs = Ccell
dTcell
dt
,
Qt = Ah(Tcell − Tamb),
where A is the surface area, h the heat transfer coeffi-
cient, Tamb temperature around the cell, and Ccell heat
capacity, respectively. Note that ambient temperature
(Tamb) is affected by external temperature (Text) and
temperature of thermal fins (Tfin).
Eq. (5) shows Bernardi’s energy balance [3], and it
can explain cell temperature (Tcell) variation by heat
generation (Qd) as shown in Fig. 5. Then, Eq. (5) can
be solved by Eq. (6) as follows.
Qd = Qt +Qs, (5)
Tcell(t+∆t) = Tcell(t)+∆t[c1(Tcell−Tamb)+c0I2dRint],
(6)
where t is current time and ∆t time interval. Based on
the equation, the following statement holds.
P6. Discharge current ⇒ Heat generation (Id↑→T↑):
As discharge current increases, heat generation in-
creases.
If we bridge all the battery characteristics discussed in
P1–P6, we have an abstract layer from the temperature
SoC Voc 
Tcell Tfin 
Power requirement External temperature 
Vo 
Id T
h
e
rm
a
l 
m
an
ag
e
m
e
n
t  
O
p
e
ra
ti
o
n
 t
im
e
 
Rint 
Figure 6: Abstraction of battery dynamics
of thermal fins (Tfin) to operation-time, as described in
Fig. 6.
4.2 Battery Physical Dynamics According to a
Thermal Change
Our goal is to develop thermal management so as
to increase battery operation-time during its warranty
period without explosion and malfunction. To figure
out battery dynamics affecting the operation-time and
safety, we constructed an abstraction layer by accumu-
lating several physical dependencies as shown in Fig. 6.
We revisit the physical dependencies (P1–P6) on the
abstraction to analyze the battery physical dynamics,
which will be a basis for our thermal management to be
presented in Section 5.
4.2.1 Thermal runaway (P3, P4 and P6)
Thermal runaway is one of the most serious thermal
issues affecting safety of a battery cell, and results in
extremely high temperature and current. A rise in the
temperature of a battery cell decreases its internal re-
sistance (by P4) and increases its current (by P3) rel-
atively in a parallel connection, which, in turn, raises
its temperature (by P6); this process may repeat, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 7. Since extremely high temperature
(above around 80◦C) may cause an explosion due to de-
composition of materials [23, 14], the thermal stability
of battery cells should be maintained.
Explosion T↑R↓ R↓I↑ I↑T↑ 
Figure 7: Increase in temperature of a cell
causes a further increase in the temperature, po-
tentially resulting in explosions of the battery
cells because of material decomposition inside
the cells.
4.2.2 Malfunction at low temperature (P1 and P4)
Each BMS has a specification of applicable output
voltage (Vapp). The BMS should guarantee delivery of
the required power within Vapp range. However, a de-
crease in temperature increases internal resistance (by
P4), and it may cause a higher voltage drop (by P1) for
supplying the same current. Output voltage (Vo) drops
below the applicable voltage (Vapp) making a power in-
verter unable to operate in a specified condition, and
hence failing to provide the required power to the vehi-
cle’s electric motors. Fig. 8 illustrates how a low tem-
perature causes malfunction.
Malfunction T↓R↑ R↑Vo↓ 
Insufficient 
supply 
voltage 
Figure 8: Low temperature leads to high inter-
nal resistance and voltage drop.
4.2.3 Short operation-time at lower temperature (P2
and P4)
A decrease in temperature reduces the mobility of
charges and chemical reaction in cells, which can be
represented by the increased internal resistance (by P4).
This increased internal resistance implies a larger power
dissipation during operation (by P2), which reduces operation-
time as shown in Fig. 9. For example, it is reported that
a drop of just 20 Celsius degrees can drain 10 – 20% of
a battery’s charge [8].
Shorten lifetime T↓R↑ Large power dissipation R↑Pd↑ 
Figure 9: Low temperature leads to higher in-
ternal resistance and power dissipation.
4.2.4 Performance degradation due to continuous ex-
posure to high temperature (P1, P2 and P5)
Operating under continuous exposure to high tem-
perature induces a rapid increase in internal resistance
(by P5) due to the acceleration of irreversible side re-
actions [23]. The increase in internal resistance causes
energy dissipation of cells, shortening their operation-
time. Faster performance degradation may also cause
battery malfunction even during its warranty period (by
P1 and P2), potentially leading to tragic accidents or fi-
nancial loss. Figs. 8 and 9 illustrate what we explained
so far.
4.2.5 Unbalanced SoC (P4, P5 and P3)
Uneven temperature distribution causes different re-
sistances between battery cells in a battery pack (by
P4 and P5). Since the discharge rate depends on in-
ternal resistance (by P3), the discharge rates available
for different cells are uneven, leading to unbalanced SoC
among the cells in a battery pack as shown in Fig. 10.
SoC unbalancing t↑,T↑R↑ T↑R↓ R↑↓I↓↑ 
Figure 10: Uneven degradation and tempera-
ture of cells cause different internal resistances of
battery cells, leading to different discharge cur-
rent and SoCes.
4.2.6 Rate-capacity effect and recovery effect (P4,
P5, P3 and P6)
A higher discharge rate causes more capacity loss yield-
ing larger voltage drop due to heat loss (by P5), called
rate-capacity effect explained in Section 2.1. In case
of a very low (or zero) discharge rate, the battery can
recover its capacity loss to some extent during high-
rate of discharge, called recovery effect, also discussed
in Section 2.1. Uneven temperature distribution may
cause more unexpected discharge current (by P3, P4,
P5), leading to more rate-capacity effect in some cells
as shown in Fig. 11. Also, uneven discharge rates cause
different amounts of heat loss (by P6), causing unbal-
anced SoC of cells in a battery pack.
Rate-capacity effect ↑ 
Recovery effect ↓ 
T↑R↓ R↓I↑ 
Figure 11: Uneven states of cells yield different
rate-capacity/recovery effects, leading to unbal-
anced electrical states.
5. THE PROPOSED BATTERY THERMAL
MANAGEMENT
So far, we have investigated and abstracted the phys-
ical characteristics of batteries. We have then uncov-
ered their effects on thermal dynamics that dictate the
performance of a large-scale battery system. Based on
these, we now identify the thermal requirements consid-
ering the thermal dynamics, and then develop a battery
thermal management policy which can satisfy the re-
quirements based on the abstraction.
5.1 Requirements for efficient and reliable BM-
Ses
To enhance the battery’s operation-time, we need to
control the physical dynamics we discussed thus far.
To protect battery cells from thermal runaway (Sec-
tion 4.2.1) and malfunction at low temperature (Sec-
tion 4.2.2), the operation temperature (Tcell) should lie
between its upper (Tup) and lower (Tlow) bounds as fol-
lows.
R1. Tlow < Tcell < Tup.
According to P3, delivering power with high temper-
ature reduces internal resistance and improves the ca-
pacity of a battery cell during an operation cycle. Un-
fortunately, continuous/frequent exposure to high tem-
perature also accelerates the degradation of battery cells
during a calendar life (as shown in P4 and Section 4.2.4).
According to these two characteristics, to improve ca-
pacity of cells while increasing lifetime, we should
R2’. Maximize
[
Tcell(t)
]
for 0 < t < twarr ∈ OPERATION,
and
-10 
190 
390 
590 
790 
990 
1190 
1390 
1590 
1790 
1990 
-100 
-80 
-60 
-40 
-20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
600 650 700 750 800 P
W
 (
W
) 
Sp
e
e
d
 (
K
m
/h
) 
Time (s) 
Speed PW 
Figure 12: Driving pattern and power require-
ments, generated by a vehicle simulator with real
driving records
R3’. Minimize
[ ∫ twarr
0
Tcell(t)dt|t ∈ OPERATION
]
,
where OPERATION is a set of time intervals in which
an EV operates.
However, we cannot achieve R2’ and R3’ at the same
time, because maximizing cell temperature will increase
cumulative cell temperature. Therefore, existing stud-
ies on battery thermal management attempted to deter-
mine a static operation temperature range [24, 6], rather
than dynamic thermal control, and therefore they can-
not fully address the two requirements.
To achieve R2’ and R3’ together, we should focus on
a property: EVs require power intermittently, rather
than continuously. For example, requiring high power
for rapid accelerations consumes most energy as shown
in Fig. 12. This means, we do not have to heat cells
all the time for reduction of energy dissipation, because
heating the cells only during the period of high power re-
quirement can reduce energy dissipation mostly. There-
fore, separating the management period based on the
power requirement can greatly reduce energy dissipa-
tion without losing potential performance improvement
much. That is, we divide OPERATION into two: WORK
and REST, which denote a set of time intervals in OP-
ERATION in which a battery cell should provide a high
power, and a lower power (or no power) is required,
respectively; by definition, OPERATION = WORK ∪
REST. Then, we modify R2’ and R3’ such that it is
possible to achieve them together by scheduling heat-
ing/cooling based on their working/resting status: max-
imizing working cell temperature (Tcell ↑, if t ∈WORK)
and minimizing cumulative resting cells temperature (Tcell ↓,
if t ∈ REST), as recorded below.
R2. Maximize
[
Tcell(t)
]
for 0 < t < twarr ∈ WORK,
and
R3. Minimize
[ ∫ twarr
0
Tcell(t)dt|t ∈ REST
]
,
Also, we should take into account issues that previous
work focused on. First, we have to equalize the SoC
of cells during operation-time (as mentioned in Section
4.2.5), because just one deep discharged battery cell can
lead to significant reduction of capacity of the entire
battery pack. Therefore, we enforce
R4. Minimize deviation
[
SoCes
]
.
By rate-capacity effect, a higher discharge rate causes
inefficiency of a battery. To reduce inefficient energy
loss by excessive high discharge rates, we set a discharge
current limit (Idlim) where the rate-capacity effect does
not have much impact on the cell’s capacity, and enforce
cells to operate within the tolerable discharge rate range
(≤ Idlim), if possible, as follows.
R5. Id ≤ Idlim if possible.
Meeting R1–R5 will reduce energy dissipation and
protect cells from unbalanced SoC, explosion, and mal-
function. By controlling the temperature of each cell,
we can directly meet R1–R3 and also alter discharge
rate, addressing R4 and R5. That is, by P3 and P4, we
can decrease (increase) discharge rate by lowering (rais-
ing) temperature. To realize such a control, we need
a battery thermal management system and a cell-level
thermal management architecture, which are detailed
next.
5.2 Main thermal management: after starting
a vehicle
We now propose a battery thermal management sys-
tem (TMS) that meets R1–R5. Its basic principle is to
heat (cool) cells to be high-discharged (rested or low-
discharged). Based on each cell’s SoC and the required
power, our TMS determines the type of coolant for each
cell to realize the principle and achieve our goal. Algo-
rithm 1 describes how the proposed TMS operates.
5.2.1 Update states of cells (Lines 2–6)
We update all the states of battery cells in a pack to
support the following steps. We can directly measure
each cell’s output voltage and current via sensors, and
then estimate the cell’s SoC, Rint, and Voc based on the
measured values [30, 20, 5, 22].
5.2.2 Set target output voltage (Lines 7–11)
This step regulates the target output voltage (Vo)
based on the power requirements. Increasing Vo helps
power the vehicle because the following steps heat the
battery cells to reduce internal resistance in order to
supply the target output voltage. Unfortunately, the
power requirement may change abruptly (e.g., due to
sudden acceleration or deceleration of the vehicle) and
thermal control takes time. Therefore, we predict the
power requirement by analyzing the driving patterns [35,
15] before segmenting the driving path for effective man-
agement in the subsequent steps.
5.2.3 Calculate the target discharge current (Line 13)
This calculates efficient discharge current (Id) of cells
for small heat dissipation and SoC balancing. As dis-
cussed in R5, we need to make each cell’s discharge
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for thermal management after
starting operation
1: for Each module do
2: measure Vo
3: for Each cell X (the n-th cell) in the module do
4: measure Id[n] and Tcell[n];
5: estimate SoC[n], Voc[n] and Rint[n];
6: end for
7: if High power is required then
8: increase Vo;
9: else
10: decrease Vo;
11: end if
12: for Each cell X (the n-th cell) in the module do
13: choose efficient Id[n];
14: choose Rint[n] from Eq. (1);
15: choose Tcell[n] from Eq. (3);
16: choose Tfin[n] from Eq. (6) and thermal distribution in
a pack;
17: if Tfin[n] ≥ previous Tfin[n] then
18: HeatingSet ← HeatingSet ∪ {X};
19: else
20: CoolingSet ← CoolingSet ∪ {X};
21: end if
22: if Tcell[n] ≥ Tup then
23: CoolingSet ← CollingSet ∪ {X};
24: HeatingSet ← HeatingSet \ {X};
25: end if
26: end for
27: end for
rate no larger than Idlim for reduction of inefficient en-
ergy dissipation. Suppose Idlim ≤ PreqN ·Vtot holds, where
Preq is the required power, N is the number of parallel-
connected cells, and Vtot is the total output voltage.
Then, by making each cell discharged at ItotN , we can
supply the required power without excessive heat dissi-
pation, where Itot is total discharge current. To meet
R4, we set Id based on the SoC when the level of power
requirement (Preq) is satisfied; cells with higher SoC
should work more. Therefore, the discharge current (Id)
is set to ItotN if Idlim ≤
Preq
N ·Vtot holds, and Itot
SoC
ΣSoC oth-
erwise, which is recorded as:
Id =
{
Itot
N , if Idlim ≤
Preq
N ·Vtot ,
Itot
SoC
ΣSoC , otherwise.
5.2.4 Calculate the required thermal fins’ tempera-
ture (Lines 14–16)
After setting Id and Vo, we can calculate the required
Rint and Tcell from Eqs. (1) and (3) as:
c3T
3
cell + c2T
2
cell + c1Tcell + c0 = Rint =
Voc − Vo
Id
,
while Eq. (6) calculates the desirable ambient tempera-
ture (Tamb).
Cell temperature depends on ambient temperature in-
cluding the temperature of thermal fins, and the ambi-
ent temperature can be estimated by updating tempera-
ture distribution in a battery pack as shown in Fig. 13.
Note that the temperature distribution can be calcu-
lated based on temperatures measured by sensors in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CELL1 
 
 
 
 
 
CELL2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CELL3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CELL4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CELL5 
 
Cell 
Thermal fins 
External 
Ambient 
Figure 13: Temperature distribution and ambi-
ent temperature of cells in a battery pack
      Battery pack 
 
 
 
 
 
Electric 
motor 
Heating channel 
↑ ↑ 
Cooling channel 
+ 
Power 
inverter 
R
ad
ia
to
r 
H
e
at
e
r 
↓ 
 
- 
Figure 14: Thermal management for battery
packs
pack. Based on the temperature distribution, we can
obtain thermal fins’ temperatures that achieve the tar-
get ambient temperature.
5.2.5 Select the coolant type for thermal fins (Lines
17–25)
Lines 17–21 determine the coolant type (heated or
cooled) for cells based on current and required fin tem-
peratures. In Lines 22–25, we choose the cells whose
temperature is higher than the upper limit, and move
them from HeatingSet to maintain thermal stability.
As discussed earlier, the way of calculating Id ad-
dresses R4 and R5. Then, all the steps will meet R2
and R3, since cells are heated (cooled) when they need
high power (otherwise). The final step (Lines 22–25)
guarantees R1. So, Algorithm 1 meets R1–R5.
5.3 Thermal Management Architecture
R1–R3 can be met by the existing thermal architec-
ture, since it can regulate the temperature of battery
cells in a timely manner. To satisfy R4 and R5, we need
a new architecture which can cool/heat each cell selec-
tively as shown in Fig. 14. The new architecture is not
much different from existing architectures. While ex-
isting BMSes are already been equipped with the heat-
ing/cooling capability (e.g., [10, 9]), we need to add
more coolant flow valves between the heating/cooling
channel and thermal fins for each cell, as shown in the
figure. Each coolant control valve should be able to se-
lect the type (either heating or cooling) of coolant for
cells.
6. EVALUATION
Cell status simulation Cell degradation model 
Random driving pattern Monthly temperature pattern 
Energy dissipation Output voltage 
Sub-module status simulation 
Pack status simulation 
Operation-time 
Cell degradation 
Figure 15: Evaluation tools
We now evaluate the performance improvement by
the proposed TMS, focusing on whether or not the goal
stated in Section 3 is met. We first introduce the perfor-
mance metrics and evaluation tools/settings to be used.
We then present the evaluation results, and finally make
remarks on the TMS implementation.
6.1 Evaluation metrics
To evaluate the performance of the proposed TMS, we
conducted various simulations, and recorded relevant in-
ternal battery states. To check if the goal is achieved or
not, we extracted the information of battery operation-
time. Also, to analyze the simulation results, we use
energy dissipation to see how fast energy in batteries is
consumed, and internal resistance to figure out degra-
dation rate of batteries.
6.2 Evaluation tools and settings
To study battery behavior under the proposed TMS,
we designed a comprehensive simulator which can calcu-
late each cell’s internal states under realistic situations.
Also, to obtain realistic thermal stress values for each
cell, three US cities are selected: Anchorage, AK; Ann
Arbor, MI; and Phoenix, AZ (denoted by AC, AA and
PH, respectively), which represent an extremely cold,
moderate, and hot weather environments. Fig. 15 pro-
vides an overview, components of which are described
next.
6.2.1 Dualfoil5 (cell-level battery simulator)
Dualfoil5 is a popular battery simulator written in
Fortran, and can simulate various types of batteries in-
cluding the lithium-metal, lithium-ion, and sodium-ion
batteries [7]. The program reads the load profile as
a sequence of constant current steps, and the battery
lifetime is obtained from the output by reading off the
time at which the cell potential drops below the cutoff
voltage. The equations and methods used in the pro-
gram rely on an electrochemical model that describes
the charge and discharge of a lithium ion battery devel-
oped by Marc Doyle et al. [7].
6.2.2 CarSim with driving patterns (power require-
ment)
To acquire realistic power requirements, we exploit US
driving patterns [32], a daily driving pattern model [31,
-10
190
390
590
790
990
1190
1390
1590
1790
1990
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
0 500 1000 1500 2000
P
W
 (
W
) 
Sp
e
e
d
 (
K
m
/h
) 
Time (s) 
Speed PW
Figure 16: Speed and power requirement profiles
21], and CarSim [25]. CarSim is a well-known and
widely-used vehicle modeling tool, simulating the dy-
namic behavior of vehicles under specified driving con-
ditions, and calculating the required power during driv-
ing. We obtain the power requirement profile as fol-
lows. First, a daily driving pattern model with a set of
US real driving patterns yields daily driving patterns.
These daily driving patterns are then fed to CarSim to
generate the power requirement. Fig. 16 shows a set of
speed and power requirement profiles generated by this
process.
6.3 Evaluation results
We evaluate the following three thermal management
schemes:
• BASE: no thermal management;
• EX: existing approaches described in Section 2 (pack-
level cooling/heating only for thermal stability);
and
• MSC: our thermal management described in Sec-
tion 5 (active cell-level cooling/heating for efficient
BMSes).
For these evaluations, we generated realistic driving
and external temperature profiles before simulating the
behavior of a battery system with the above three schemes.
The three metrics described in Section 6.1 are then ex-
tracted from the simulation results.
6.3.1 Operation-times after one-year operation
We ran simulation and extracted operation-times of
each scheme under various stress conditions. Average
operation-times are then calculated to show the over-
all performance of each scheme. Table 1 shows the ra-
tio of the average operation-time of MSC (and EX), to
that of BASE. As shown in the table, MSC improves the
operation-time by up to 204% and 58.4%, respectively
over BASE and EX. Also, MSC keeps all the batteries
within a tolerable temperature range to prevent explo-
sion or malfunction as shown in Fig. 17; in AC, some
batteries operate at extremely cold temperature under
BASE, potentially leading to malfunction or inefficient
usage of the battery pack, whereas all the cells in a
pack operate within a tolerable temperature range un-
der MSC and EX.
0
6000
12000
18000
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
D
is
si
p
at
io
n
 e
n
e
rg
y 
(W
h
/m
^
2
) 
time (month) 
BASE MSC EX
Figure 18: Cumulative energy dissipation for
one-year operation in AA
Average `op (Sec)
City, Month AC AA PH
EX/BASE 1.92 0.92 1.03
MSC/BASE 3.04 1.40 1.62
Table 1: Average operation-time
From Table 1, we can observe that MSC’s improve-
ment in AC is more pronounced than that in AA and
PH, because there is more room for performance im-
provement in colder areas, which we will elaborate in
Section 6.3.2. As shown in Table 1, MSC effectively ex-
ploits such room for improvement. For a more detailed
analysis for the improvement of MSC, we investigate
energy dissipation and performance degradation in the
following subsections.
6.3.2 Energy dissipation
Our TMS in Section 5 includes several methods to
decrease energy dissipation. They actually contribute to
the extension of operation-time, since reducing energy
dissipation increases available energy in the cells, which,
in turn, extends the operation-time.
We compare the energy dissipation of the three ther-
mal management schemes when the car operates in AC,
AA and PH. Table 2 shows energy dissipation when
drivers operate their cars repeating the same driving
pattern every day for a year. Fig. 18 shows an ex-
ample energy dissipation of each management scheme.
Compared to BASE, MSC reduces energy dissipation by
70.6% in AC, 63.8% in AA, and 48.4% in PH. MSC is even
better than EX in that it can reduce more energy dissi-
pation by up to 58.6% than EX. This reduction of energy
dissipation extends the operation-time under MSC.
Cumulative energy dissipation (Wh/m2)
City AC AA PH
BASE 20978 16216 10474
EX 14910 13450 9976.5
MSC 6167.5 5864.6 5403.5
Table 2: Energy dissipation after one year of op-
eration
An interesting point to note is that the difference be-
tween energy dissipation of MSC (or EX) and that of
BASE is significant in AC. This can be reasoned as fol-
Figure 17: Example of thermal management in AC; C x means Cell x
0.0027
0.0028
0.0029
0.003
0.0031
0.0032
0.0033
0 2 4 6 8 10
in
te
rn
al
 r
e
si
st
an
ce
 
(o
h
m
*m
^2
) 
time (month) 
MSC
EX
BASE
0.99
1.01
1.03
1.05
1.07
1.09
0 2 4 6 8 10
re
la
ti
ve
 r
e
si
st
an
ce
 (
μ
) 
time (month) 
Figure 19: Relative resistance and internal re-
sistance in AA
lows. In a hotter area, the efficiency is higher (or smaller
energy dissipation) even without any thermal manage-
ment (i.e., BASE), because high temperature increases
the chemical reaction rate in a battery. So, in AC where
temperature is extremely low in winter, MSC and EX
heat the cells to attain effective operation temperature;
we observe from Fig. 17 that EX and MSC yield a toler-
able temperature range for battery cells. This reduces
energy dissipation.
MSC reduces energy dissipation significantly more than
EX, since it not only timely cools/heats the cells in or-
der to reduce energy dissipation, but also selectively
cools/heats the cells for SoC equalization. Therefore,
each cell operates more efficiently under MSC, by re-
ducing temperature differences between cells. The re-
duction of energy dissipation is one of the dominant
reasons for improving the operation-time.
6.3.3 Degradation of battery performance
The degree of battery performance degradation de-
pends on its cumulative exposure to high temperature.
To evaluate the performance degradation, we compare
cells’ degradation levels, which are represented by rela-
tive resistance and the absolute value of internal resis-
tance, under each thermal management scheme in AC,
AA and PH during a 1-year period. Of these three loca-
tions, we chose AA, since the results for other locations
exhibit a similar or same trend.
Figs. 19(a) and (b) plot relative resistance and the
absolute value of internal resistance, respectively. As
shown in Fig. 19(a), MSC leads to a little bit faster
degradation than the other schemes, because MSC ac-
tively cools/heats each cell. However, such active con-
trol reduces the absolute value of internal resistance;
as shown in Fig. 19(b), internal resistance after one-
year usage under MSC is smaller than that under other
schemes. This implies that MSC, despite higher rela-
tive resistance, is still more efficient for up to one year.
These results validate an increase of operation-time dis-
cussed in Section 6.3.1, i.e., MSC is efficient in using a
battery pack.
6.4 Remarks on implementation
We can construct the TMS based on the exsisting
thermal managmenet system for cooling and heating en-
gines and batteries in the current vehicles on the mar-
ket. To implement the BMS that accommodates the
proposed TMS, some additional hardware should be in-
stalled in each battery pack. Measuring the output volt-
age and discharge current of cells requires sensors, as
other BMSes [13, 19, 11] do. Additional control flow
valves are also required to cell-level thermal controls;
their performance and reliability should be considered
since they directly affect the effectiveness of battery
management. It would be interesting to design a BMS
with efficient and reliable management of hardware sen-
sors and actuators by considering their physical charac-
teristics along with battery dynamics. This is part of
our future work.
7. CONCLUSION
To resolve increasing demand to make EVs less ex-
pensive and safer, BMSes should cope with thermal and
general issues that affect efficiency and reliability of BM-
Ses. A thermal management is the key to addressing
these issues, since temperature has significant impact on
electrical states of BMSes. In this paper, we presented
how to achieve efficient and reliable BMSes using ther-
mal controls. We proposed a battery thermal manage-
ment scheme that cools/heats battery cells timely and
selectively based on the analysis for impacts of power
requirements and temperature variation on electrical
states of battery cells. To support this scheme, we also
proposed thermal management architecture, which is
able to cool/heat battery cells selectively. Our evalua-
tion with realistic simulation showed that our approach
makes a significant improvement in BMSes’ efficiency
without compromising their reliability, over a simple
method often seen in the existing BMSes.
It would be interesting to explore ways of improving
thermal management techniques based on the proposed
architecture. If we use a more accurate and adaptive
abstraction model instead of the fundamental model of
current version, the performance would be enhanced.
Also, we can improve the efficiency of BMSes by heat-
ing/cooling cells in advance with more accurate power
requirement prediction [35, 15].
Acknowledgement
The work reported in this paper was supported in part
by the NSF under grants CNS-1138200 and CNS-1329702.
8. REFERENCES
[1] T. M. Bandhauer, S. Garimella, and T. F. Fuller. A critical
review of thermal issues in lithium-ion batteries. Journal of
The Electrochemical Society, 2011.
[2] L. Benini, A. Macii, E. Macii, M. Poncino, and R. Scarsi.
Scheduling battery usage in mobile systems. IEEE
Transactions on VLSI systems, 11(6):1136–1143, 2003.
[3] D. Bernardi, E. Pawlikowski, and J. Newman. A general
energy balance for battery systems. Journal of the
electrochemical society, 132:5–12, 1985.
[4] Y. Chen, L. Song, and J. Evans. Modeling studies on
battery thermal behaviour, thermal runaway, thermal
management, and energy efficiency. In Proceedings of
Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, the 31st
Intersociety, volume 2, pages 1465–1470 vol.2, 1996.
[5] Y.-H. Chiang, W.-Y. Sean, and J.-C. Ke. Online estimation
of internal resistance and open-circuit voltage of lithium-ion
batteries in electric vehicles. Journal of Power Sources,
196(8):3921 – 3932, 2011.
[6] W. J. Culver. High-value energy storage for the grid: A
multi-dimensional look. The Electricity Journal,
23(10):59–71, 2010.
[7] M. Doyle and J. Newman. Dualfoil5.
http://www.cchem.berkeley.edu/jsngrp/fortran.html.
[8] O. Erdinc, B. Vural, and M. Uzunoglu. A dynamic
lithium-ion battery model considering the effects of
temperature and capacity fading. In Clean Electrical Power,
2009 International Conference on, pages 383–386, 2009.
[9] FordMotorCompany. Ford uses innovative liquid-cooled
battery system to help focus electric owners maximize
range. http://www.at.ford.com/news/cn/Pages/
FordUsesInnovativeLiquidCooledBatterySystemtoHelpFocus\
ElectricOwnersMaximizeRange.aspx, 2013.
[10] GeneralMotors. The chevrolet volt cooling/heating systems
explained.
http://gm-volt.com/2010/12/09/the-chevrolet-volt\
-coolingheating-systems-explained/, 2009.
[11] L. He, L. Gu, L. Kong, Y. Gu, C. Liu, and T. He. Exploring
adaptive reconfiguration to optimize energy efficiency in
large battery systems. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE
Real-Time Systems Symposium, 2013.
[12] M. Jongerden, B. Haverkort, H. Bohnenkamp, and
J. Katoen. Maximizing system lifetime by battery
scheduling. In Dependable Systems Networks, 2009.
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on, pages 63–72,
2009.
[13] R. Kaiser. Optimized battery-management system to
improve storage lifetime in renewable energy systems.
Journal of Power Sources, 168(1):58–65, 2007.
[14] H. Kiehne. Battery Technology Handbook. CRC Press,
second edition, 2003.
[15] E. Kim, J. Lee, and K. G. Shin. Real-time prediction of
battery power requirements for electric vehicles. In
Proceedings the 4th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Cyber-Physical Systems, Philadelphia, PA, Apr 2013.
[16] G.-H. Kim and A. Pesaran. Battery thermal management
system design modeling. In the 22nd International Battery,
Hybrid and Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Conference and
Exhibition, Yokohama, Japan, Oct 2006.
[17] H. Kim and K. G. Shin. On dynamic reconfiguration of a
large-scale battery system. In Proceedings of the 15th IEEE
Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications
Symposium, pages 87–96, 2009.
[18] H. Kim and K. G. Shin. Scheduling of battery charge,
discharge, and rest. In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE
Real-Time Systems Symposium, pages 13–22, 2009.
[19] H. Kim and K. G. Shin. Dependable, efficient, scalable
architecture for management of large-scale batteries. In
Proceedings of the 1st ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems, pages 178–187,
2010.
[20] S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Lee, and B. Cho. State-of-charge and
capacity estimation of lithium-ion battery using a new
open-circuit voltage versus state-of-charge. Journal of
Power Sources, 185(2):1367 – 1373, 2008.
[21] T.-K. Lee, B. Adornato, and Z. Filipi. Synthesis of
real-world driving cycles and their use for estimating phev
energy consumption and charging opportunities: Case
study for midwest/u.s. Vehicular Technology, IEEE
Transactions on, 60(9):4153–4163, 2011.
[22] Y. Li, R. Anderson, J. Song, A. Phillips, and X. Wang. A
nonlinear adaptive observer approach for state of charge
estimation of lithium-ion batteries. In Proceedings of
American Control Conference, 2011, pages 370–375, 2011.
[23] D. Linden and T. Reddy. Handbook of batteries.
McGraw-Hill, third edition, 2002.
[24] A. A. P. Matthew Zolot and M. Mihalic. Thermal
evaluation of toyota prius battery pack. In SAE Technical
Paper 2002-01-1962, 2002.
[25] MechanicalSimulationCorporation. Carsim simulator.
http://www.carsim.com/products/carsim/index.php.
[Online; accessed 21-October-2012].
[26] Merriam-Webster. http://www.merriam-webster.com/.
[27] C. Park and A. Jaura. Dynamic thermal model of li-ion
battery for predictive behavior in hybrid and fuel cell
vehicles. In SAE Technical Paper 2003-01-2286, 2003.
[28] A. Pesaran. Battery thermal management in evs and hevs:
Issues and solutions. In the 4th Vehicle Thermal
Management Systems Conference and Exhibition, Las
vegas, Nevada, Feb 2001.
[29] A. Pesaran, S. Burch, and M. Keyser. An approach for
designing thermal management systems for electric and
hybrid vehicle battery packs. In the 4th Vehicle Thermal
Management Systems Conference and Exhibition, London,
UK, May 1999.
[30] G. L. Plett. Extended kalman filtering for battery
management systems of lipb-based hev battery packs: Part
3. state and parameter estimation. Journal of Power
Sources, 134(2):277 – 292, 2004.
[31] R. Smith, S. Shahidinejad, D. Blair, and E. Bibeau.
Characterization of urban commuter driving profiles to
optimize battery size in light-duty plug-in electric vehicles.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment, 16(3):218–224, 2011.
[32] TheNewNextGenerationSimulationCommunity.
Introduction of NGSIM. http://ngsim-community.org.
[Online; accessed 21-October-2012].
[33] E. Thomas, I. Bloom, J. Christophersen, and V. Battaglia.
Statistical methodology for predicting the life of lithium-ion
cells via accelerated degradation testing. Journal of Power
Sources, 184(1):312–317, 2008.
[34] E. Thomas, I. Bloom, J. Christophersen, and V. Battaglia.
Rate-based degradation modeling of lithium-ion cells.
Journal of Power Sources, 206(0):378–382, 2012.
[35] H. Yu, F. Tseng, and R. McGee. Driving pattern
identification for ev range estimation. In Electric Vehicle
Conference, 2012 IEEE International, pages 1–7, 2012.

