24th International Meshing Roundtable (IMR24) 
Image-to-Mesh Conversion Tool 
Kevin Garner1a, Daming Fenga, Fotis Drakopoulosa, Yixun Liua, and Nikos Chrisochoidesa 
aCenter for Real-Time Computing, Computer Science Department, Old Dominion University, Norfolk VA 
Motivation 
Motivating application: to provide an easy-to-use Image-To-Mesh Conversion tool (I2MTool) for medical imaging computing. Certain problems 
like deep brain tumors are very challenging to handle with existing algorithms and we will adopt semi-automatic/interactive ways to approach 
them. 
Approach 
1) Implement several modules essential to medical imaging, more specifically: 
a.  Image-To-Mesh (I2M) Conversion: Delaunay-based, Lattice De-refinement [1] , Body-Centered Cubic Lattice 
Refinement & Deformation (CBC3D) 
b.  Registration: Affine Registration, B-Spline Registration, Point-Based Registration, Point-Based Warping, Physics-
Based Non-Rigid Registration 
c.  Miscellaneous  Tools: Interactive and Hausdorff Distance Measuring, Volume Fraction Measuring, Region Grow 
Segmentation, and Image Resampling. 
2)  Use some existing algorithms implemented within the ITK library [2]. 
Methods for two recently implemented modules: 
Physics-Based Non-Rigid Registration [3]: This module registers a moving to a fixed MRI. It uses a linear homogeneous bio-mechanical model 
to compute a dense deformation field that defines a transformation for every point in the fixed image to the moving image. 
CBC3D [4]: This module generates an adaptive multi-tissue tetrahedral mesh from a multi-label segmented image. Initially, this module 
constructs an adaptive Body-Centered Cubic (BCC) mesh of high quality elements. Then, it deforms the mesh surfaces to their corresponding 
physical image boundaries, hence, improving the mesh fidelity and smoothness. The deformation scheme, relies on a multi-material point-based 
registration, and performs between a source and a target point-set. The first set contains the surface/interface vertices of the mesh. The second set 
contains the surface/interface voxels of the object depicted in the image. The mesh deformation performs a number of iterations specified by the 
user. The larger the number of iterations, the higher the mesh fidelity and the smoother the mesh surface. 
Implementation 
A class for each module within the I2MTool 
CBC3D, MultipleSurfaceMeshesGeneration, MeshGenerationRefinement, AffineRegistration, BSplineRegistration, 
PointBasedRegistration, PointBasedWarping, PhysicsBasedNonRigidRegistration, HausdorffDistance, 
VolumeFraction, RegionGrow, ImageResampling 
 
 
                                                          
1 Corresponding author: nikos@cs.odu.edu ,  
E-mail address: {kgarner, dfeng}@cs.odu.edu, fdrakopo@gmail.com, yxliuwm@gmail.com 
Figure 1: The GUI of the I2MTool allows for saving images/meshes, loading them, printing them, using all of the listed modules, and  using several 
visualization tools (such as showing the X, Y, Z and box widgets, seed setting, and showing an orthogonal/oblique view of a mesh) 
 
 
 
 
 
Future Work 
This tool contains some of the functionality in well known medical 
imaging software tools such as 3D Slicer and Paraview, but will also 
support additional features not seen in any medical imaging tool to 
date. One feature in particular that will be implemented is the ability 
to edit a mesh directly from the GUI of the I2MTool. Another 
method that will be implemented is the ability to select an area of a mesh and generate a new detailed mesh of the 
selected area of the original mesh. 
Although the CBC3D module generates multi-material meshes, the current version of the I2MTool cannot 
distinguish among tissues using different colors when displaying meshes. It can only display a mesh with one solid 
color for the entire mesh. The module is still able to use and generate multi-tissue meshes, which could be viewed 
in multiple colors in other tools such as Paraview. The ability to display a multi-tissue labeled mesh using different 
colors will be implemented in the future. The ability to cut a mesh to get a cross-section and view the inside of it 
will also be implemented. 
References 
[1] Chernikov, A. N. & Chrisochoides, N. P. (2011). Multitissue tetrahedral image-to-mesh conversion with guaranteed quality and fidelity. SIAM Journal on 
Scientific Computing, 33(6), 3491-3508. doi: 10.1137/100815256 
[2] (2015). ITK. Retrieved from http://www.itk.org. 
[3] Liu, Y., Kot, A., Drakopoulos, F., Yao, C., Fedorov, A., Enquobahrie, A., … Chrisochoides, N. P. (2014). An ITK implementation of a physics-based non-rigid 
registration method for brain deformation in image-guided neurosurgery. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 8, 33. doi:10.3389/fninf.2014.00033 
[4] Drakopoulos, F., Ortiz, R., Enquobahrie, A., Sasaki-Adams, D., & Chrisochoides, N. (2015). Tetrahedral image-to-mesh conversion software for anatomic 
modeling of arteriovenous malformations. 24th International Meshing Roundtable, TX. 
Acknowledgements: This work in part is funded by NSF grants, CCF-1439079 and CCF-1139864. In addition, it is partially supported by the Computer Science 
Department and  Richard T. Cheng Endowment. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official 
views of the NSF. 
Figure 2: Use of the Physics-based 
Non-Rigid Registration method 
within the I2MTool, the GUI for 
this particular module can be seen 
on the left, the bottom 3 
visualization panels allow for any 
image to be shown, and the top 
panel shows the newly registered 
image volume 
Figure 4: A multi-label segmented image 
is shown on the left. The BCC tetrahedral 
mesh that the CBC3D method in the 
I2MTool generates from it is shown in the 
middle and the final, deformed mesh is 
shown on the right. 
Figure 3: Use of the CBC3D method 
within the I2MTool, the GUI for this 
particular module can be seen on the left 
with the top panel showing the deformed 
mesh that this module generates 

