ISSN (Print) : 2319-5940 
ISSN (Online) : 2278-1021 
 
  International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 
 Vol. 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
Copyright to IJARCCE                     www.ijarcce.com                                                             622       
 
Bioinformatics: A revolutionary way of using 
Computer technology for evidence based medicine 
 
Onkar S Kemkar
1
 and Dr P B Dahikar
2
 
PCD ICSR, VMV College Campus, Wardhaman Nagar, Nagpur – 440008, India
1
 
 
Kamla Nehru Mahavidyalaya, Sakkardara Square, Nagpur – 440009, India
2
 
 
ABSTRACT: A flood of data means that many of the challenges in biology are now challenges in computing. Bioinformatics, the 
application of computational techniques to analyze the information associated with bimolecular on a large-scale, has now firmly 
established itself as a discipline in molecular biology, and encompasses a wide range of subject areas from structural biology, 
genomics to gene expression studies. In this review we provide an introduction and overview of the current state of the field. We 
discuss the main principles that underpin bioinformatics analyses, look at the types of biological information and databases that 
are commonly used, and finally examine some of the studies that are being conducted, particularly with reference to transcription 
regulatory systems. 
 
Keywords: Healthcare system, Bioinformatics, Biological data
I INTRODUCTION 
Bioinformatics is the combination of biology and 
information technology. The discipline encompasses any 
computational tools and methods used to manage, analyze 
and manipulate large sets of biological data. Essentially, 
bioinformatics has three components: 
 The creation of databases allowing the storage and 
management of large biological data sets. 
 The development of algorithms and statistics to 
determine relationships among members of large data sets. 
 The use of these tools for the analysis and 
interpretation of various types of biological data, including 
DNA, RNA and protein sequences, protein structures, gene 
expression profiles, and biochemical pathways[1,2]. 
The term bioinformatics first came into use in the 1990s 
and was originally synonymous with the management and 
analysis of DNA, RNA and protein sequence data. 
Computational tools for sequence analysis had been 
available since the 1960s, but this was a minority interest 
until advances in sequencing technology led to a rapid  
 
 
 
 
 
expansion in the number of stored sequences in databases 
such as GenBank. 
Now, the term has expanded to incorporate many other 
types of biological data, for example protein structures, 
gene expression profiles and protein interactions[3]. Each 
of these areas requires its own set of databases, algorithms 
and statistical methods. Bioinformatics is largely, although 
not exclusively, a computer-based discipline. Computers 
are important in bioinformatics for two reasons: 
First, many bioinformatics problems require the same task 
to be repeated millions of times. For example, comparing a 
new sequence to every other sequence stored in a database 
or comparing a group of sequences systematically to 
determine evolutionary relationships. In such cases, the 
ability of computers to process information and test 
alternative solutions rapidly is indispensable. Second, 
computers are required for their problem-solving power [4, 
5]. Typical problems that might be addressed using 
bioinformatics could include solving the folding pathways 
of protein given its amino acid sequence, or deducing a 
biochemical pathway given a collection of RNA 
expression profiles. Computers can help with such 
problems, but it is important to note that expert input and 
robust original data are also required 
Over the past few decades, major advances in the field of 
molecular biology, coupled with advances in genomic 
technologies, have led to an explosive growth in the 
biological information generated by the scientific 
community [6, 7, 8]. This deluge of genomic information 
has, in turn, led to an absolute requirement for 
computerized databases to store, organize, and index the 
data and for specialized tools to view and analyze the data.  
     
ISSN (Print) : 2319-5940 
ISSN (Online) : 2278-1021 
 
  International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 
 Vol. 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
Copyright to IJARCCE                                                                               www.ijarcce.com                                                                           623 
 
II WHAT IS A BIOLOGICAL DATABASE? 
A biological database is a large, organized body of 
persistent data, usually associated with computerized 
software designed to update, query, and retrieve 
components of the data stored within the system. A simple 
database might be a single file containing many records, 
each of which includes the same set of information [9]. For 
example, a record associated with a nucleotide sequence 
database typically contains information such as contact 
name, the input sequence with a description of the type of 
molecule, the scientific name of the source organism from 
which it was isolated, and often, literature citations 
associated with the sequence[10]. 
For researchers to benefit from the data stored in a 
database, two additional requirements must be met:  
 easy access to the information 
 a method for extracting only that information 
needed to answer a specific biological question 
Bioinformatics is the application of computer technology 
to the management of biological information. Computers 
are used to gather, store, analyze and integrate biological 
and genetic information which can then be applied to gene-
based drug discovery and development 
Biology in the 21st century is being transformed from a 
purely lab-based science to an information science as well. 
 
III WHAT IS BIOINFORMATICS? 
Bioinformatics is the field of science in which biology, 
computer science, and information technology merge to 
form a single discipline. The ultimate goal of the field is to 
enable the discovery of new biological insights as well as 
to create a global perspective from which unifying 
principles in biology can be discerned. At the beginning of 
the "genomic revolution", a bioinformatics concern was the 
creation and maintenance of a database to store biological 
information, such as nucleotide and amino acid sequences. 
Development of this type of database involved not only 
design issues but the development of complex interfaces 
whereby researchers could both access existing data as 
well as submit new or revised data[11,12]. 
Ultimately, however, all of this information must be 
combined to form a comprehensive picture of normal 
cellular activities so that researchers may study how these 
activities are altered in different disease states. Therefore, 
the field of bioinformatics has evolved such that the most 
pressing task now involves the analysis and interpretation 
of various types of data, including nucleotide and amino 
acid sequences, protein domains, and protein structures. 
The actual process of analyzing and interpreting data is 
referred to as computational biology. Important sub-
disciplines within bioinformatics and computational 
biology include:  
 The development and implementation of tools that 
enable efficient access to, and use and 
management of, various types of information 
 The development of new algorithms 
(mathematical formulas) and statistics with which 
to assess relationships among members of large 
data sets, such as methods to locate a gene within 
a sequence, predict protein structure and/or 
function, and cluster protein sequences into 
families of related sequences [13]. 
  
IV WHY IS BIOINFORMATICS SO IMPORTANT? 
The rationale for applying computational approaches to 
facilitate the understanding of various biological processes 
includes:  
 A more global perspective in experimental design. 
 The ability to capitalize on the emerging 
technology of database-mining - the process by 
which testable hypotheses are generated regarding 
the function or structure of a gene or protein of 
interest by identifying similar sequences in better 
characterized organisms . 
Although a human disease may not be found in exactly the 
same form in animals, there may be sufficient data for an 
animal model that allow researchers to make inferences 
about the process in humans. 
 
V EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY 
New insight into the molecular basis of a disease may 
come from investigating the function of homolog’s of a 
disease gene in model organisms. In this case, homology 
refers to two genes sharing a common evolutionary history. 
Scientists also use the term homology, or homologous, to 
simply mean similar, regardless of the evolutionary 
relationship. 
Equally exciting is the potential for uncovering 
evolutionary relationships and patterns between different 
forms of life. With the aid of nucleotide and protein 
sequences, it should be possible to find the ancestral ties 
between different organisms. Thus far, experience has 
taught us that closely related organisms have similar 
sequences and that more distantly related organisms have 
more dissimilar sequences. Proteins that show significant 
sequence conservation, indicating a clear evolutionary 
relationship, are said to be from the same protein family. 
By studying protein folds (distinct protein building 
blocks) and families, scientists are able to reconstruct the 
evolutionary relationship between two species and to 
estimate the time of divergence between two organisms 
since they last shared a common ancestor. 
 
 
ISSN (Print) : 2319-5940 
ISSN (Online) : 2278-1021 
 
  International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 
 Vol. 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
Copyright to IJARCCE                                                                               www.ijarcce.com                                                                           624 
 
VI PROTEIN MODELING 
The process of evolution has resulted in the production of 
DNA sequences that encode proteins with specific 
functions. In the absence of a protein structure that has 
been determined by X-ray crystallography or nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, researchers can 
try to predict the three-dimensional structure using protein 
or molecular modeling. This method uses experimentally 
determined protein structures (templates) to predict the 
structure of another protein that has a similar amino acid 
sequence (target). 
Although molecular modeling may not be as accurate at 
determining a protein's structure as experimental methods, 
it is still extremely helpful in proposing and testing various 
biological hypotheses. Molecular modeling also provides a 
starting point for researchers wishing to confirm a structure 
through X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. 
Because the different genome projects are producing more 
sequences and because novel protein folds and families are 
being determined, protein modeling will become an 
increasingly important tool for scientists working to 
understand normal and disease-related processes in living 
organisms. 
 
The Steps of Protein Modeling  
 Identify the proteins with known three-
dimensional structures that are related to the target 
sequence 
 Align the related three-dimensional structures 
with the target sequence and determine those 
structures that will be used as templates 
 
VII GENOME MAPPING 
Genomic maps serve as a scaffold for orienting sequence 
information. A few years ago, a researcher wanting to 
localize a gene, or nucleotide sequence, was forced to 
manually map the genomic region of interest, a time-
consuming and often painstaking process. Today, thanks to 
new technologies and the influx of sequence data, a 
number of high-quality, genome-wide maps are available 
to the scientific community for use in their research. 
Computerized maps make gene hunting faster, cheaper, 
and more practical for almost any scientist. In a nutshell, 
cientists would first use a genetic map to assign a gene to a 
relatively small area of a chromosome. They would then 
use a physical map to examine the region of interest close 
up, to determine a gene's precise location. In light of these 
advances, a researcher's burden has shifted from mapping a 
genome or genomic region of interest to navigating a vast 
number of Web sites and databases. 
 
Map Viewer: A Tool for Visualizing Whole 
Genomes or Single Chromosomes 
Map Viewer is a tool that allows a user to view an 
organism's complete genome, integrated maps for each 
chromosome (when available), and/or sequence data for a 
genomic region of interest. When using Map Viewer, a 
researcher has the option of selecting either a "Whole-
Genome View" or a "Chromosome or Map View". The 
Genome View displays a schematic for all of an 
organism’s chromosomes, whereas the Map View shows 
one or more detailed maps for a single chromosome. If 
more than one map exists for a chromosome, Map Viewer 
allows a display of these maps simultaneously. 
 
Using Map Viewer, researchers can find answers to 
questions such as: 
 Where does a particular gene exist within an 
organism's genome? 
 Which genes are located on a particular 
chromosome and in what order? 
 What is the corresponding sequence data for a 
gene that exists in a particular chromosomal 
region? 
 What is the distance between two genes? 
 
The rapidly emerging field of bioinformatics promises to 
lead to advances in understanding basic biological 
processes and, in turn, advances in the diagnosis, 
treatment, and prevention of many genetic diseases. 
Bioinformatics has transformed the discipline of biology 
from a purely lab-based science to an information science 
as well. Increasingly, biological studies begin with a 
scientist conducting vast numbers of database and Web site 
searches to formulate specific hypotheses or to design 
large-scale experiments. The implications behind this 
change, for both science and medicine, are staggering. 
 
ISSN (Print) : 2319-5940 
ISSN (Online) : 2278-1021 
 
  International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 
 Vol. 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
Copyright to IJARCCE                                                                               www.ijarcce.com                                                                           625 
 
1)  
VIII GENETIC MAPS 
Types of Landmarks Found on a Genetic Map 
Genetic maps use landmarks called genetic markers to 
guide researchers on their gene hunt. 
Just like interstate maps have cities and towns that serve as 
landmarks, genetic maps have landmarks known as genetic 
markers, or "markers" for short. The term marker is used 
very broadly to describe any observable variation that 
results from an alteration, or mutation, at a single genetic 
locus. A marker may be used as one landmark on a map if, 
in most cases, that stretch of DNA is inherited from parent 
to child according to the standard rules of inheritance. 
Markers can be within genes that code for a noticeable 
physical characteristic such as eye color, or a not so 
noticeable trait such as a disease. DNA-based reagents 
can also serve as markers. These types of markers are 
found within the non-coding regions of genes and are used 
to detect unique regions on a chromosome. DNA markers 
are especially useful for generating genetic maps when 
there are occasional, predictable mutations that occur 
during meiosis—the formation of gametes such as egg and 
sperm—that, over many generations, lead to a high degree 
of variability in the DNA content of the marker from 
individual to individual. 
 Commonly Used DNA Markers 
 RFLPs, or restriction fragment length polymorphisms, 
VNTRs, or variable number of tandem repeat 
polymorphisms 
 Microsatellite polymorphisms  
 SNPs, or single nucleotide polymorphisms  
From Linkage Analysis to Genetic Mapping 
 
IX PHYSICAL MAPS 
Types of Physical Maps and What They Measure 
Physical maps can be divided into three general types: 
chromosomal or cytogenetic maps, radiation hybrid 
(RH) maps, and sequence maps. The different types of 
maps vary in their degree of resolution, that is, the ability 
to measure the separation of elements that are close 
together. The higher the resolution, the better the picture. 
The lowest-resolution physical map is the chromosomal or 
cytogenetic map, which is based on the distinctive 
banding patterns observed by light microscopy of stained 
chromosomes. As with genetic linkage mapping, 
chromosomal mapping can be used to locate genetic 
markers defined by traits observable only in whole 
organisms. Because chromosomal maps are based on 
estimates of physical distance, they are considered to be 
physical maps. Yet, the number of base pairs within a band 
can only be estimated. 
RH maps and sequence maps, on the other hand, are more 
detailed. RH maps are similar to linkage maps in that they 
show estimates of distance between genetic and physical 
markers, but that is where the similarity ends. RH maps 
are able to provide more precise information regarding the 
distance between markers than can a linkage map. 
The physical map that provides the most detail is the 
sequence map. Sequence maps show genetic markers, as 
well as the sequence between the markers, measured in 
base pairs. 
X CONCLUSION 
The future of bioinformatics is integration. For example, 
integration of a wide variety of data sources such as 
clinical and genomic data will allow us to use disease 
symptoms to predict genetic mutations and vice versa. The 
integration of GIS data, such as maps, weather systems, 
with crop health and genotype data, will allow us to predict 
successful outcomes of agriculture experiments. Another 
future area of research in bioinformatics is large-scale 
comparative genomics. For example, the development of 
tools that can do 10-way comparisons of genomes will 
push forward the discovery rate in this field of 
bioinformatics. Along these lines, the modeling and 
visualization of full networks of complex systems could be 
used in the future to predict how the system (or cell) reacts 
to a drug for example. A technical set of challenges faces 
bioinformatics and is being addressed by faster computers, 
technological advances in disk storage space, and increased 
bandwidth. Finally, a key research question for the future 
of bioinformatics will be how to computationally compare 
complex biological observations, such as gene expression 
patterns and protein networks. Bioinformatics is about 
converting biological observations to a model that a 
computer will understand. This is a very challenging task 
since biology can be very complex. 
ISSN (Print) : 2319-5940 
ISSN (Online) : 2278-1021 
 
  International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 
 Vol. 1, Issue 9, November 2012 
 
Copyright to IJARCCE                                                                               www.ijarcce.com                                                                           626 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Anderson, James G, and Kenneth W. Goodman. Ethics 
and Information 
[2] Technology: A Case-Based Approach to a Health Care 
System in Transition. 
[3] Health Informatics. New York: Springer, 2002. BA 
Call Number: 174.2 A5451 (B4) 
[4] Bourne, Philip E., and Helge Weissig, eds. Structural 
Bioinformatics. Methods of Biochemical Analysis 44. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Liss, 2003.BA Call Number: 
572.8733 (B1) 
[5] Bremer, Eric G, eds. Knowledge Discovery in Life 
Science Literature: PAKDD 2006 
[6] International Workshop, KDLL 2006, Singapore, April 
9, 2006: Proceedings. 
[7] Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3886. Lecture 
Notes in Bioinformatics. Berlin:Springer, 2006.BA Call 
Number: 006.3 P1111 (B4) 
[8] Campbell, A. Malcolm, and Laurie J. Heyer. 
Discovering Genomics, Proteomics, and Bioinformatics. 
San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings, 2003. BA Call 
Number: 572.86 (B4 -- Closed Stacks) 
[9] Dwyer, Rex A. Genomic Perl: From Bioinformatics 
Basics to Working Code. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003. BA Call Number: 572.80285 
D9935 (B1) 
[10] Algorithms for Molecular Biology (AMB). BioMed 
Central. 2006-2008.  
[11] BMC Bioinformatics. BioMed Central. 2000-2008. 
Cancer Informatics. Libertas Academica. 2005-2008. 
[12] Chem-Bio Informatics Journal (CBI). Chem-Bio 
Informatics Society. 2001-2007.  
[13] Computational Biology and Chemistry. Elsevier 
Science. 2003-2008. Source: ScienceDirect (Database) 
 
 
 

