Biological Data Mining 
 
George Tzanis, Christos Berberidis, and Ioannis Vlahavas 
D e p a r t m e n t  o f  I n f o r m a t i c s ,   
A r i s t o t l e  U n i v e r s i t y  o f  T h e s s a l o n i k i ,  G r e e c e  
 
 
  
I N T R O D U C T I O N  
 
At the end of the 1980’s a new discipline, named data mining, emerged. The 
introduction of new technologies such as computers, satellites, new mass storage media 
and many others have lead to an exponential growth of collected data. Traditional data 
analysis techniques often fail to process large amounts of -often noisy- data efficiently, 
in an exploratory fashion. The scope of data mining is the knowledge extraction from 
large data amounts with the help of computers. It is an interdisciplinary area of 
research, that has its roots in databases, machine learning, and statistics and has 
contributions from many other areas such as information retrieval, pattern recognition, 
visualization, parallel and distributed computing. There are many applications of data 
mining in real world. Customer relationship management, fraud detection, market and 
industry characterization, stock management, medicine, pharmacology, and biology are 
some examples (Two Crows Corporation, 1999). 
Recently, the collection of biological data has been increasing at explosive rates 
due to improvements of existing technologies and the introduction of new ones such as 
the microarrays. These technological advances have assisted the conduct of large scale 
experiments and research programs. An important example is the Human Genome 
Project, that was founded in 1990 by the U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and was completed in 2003 (U.S. Department of 
Energy Office of Science, 2004). A representative example of the rapid biological data 
accumulation is the exponential growth of GenBank (Figure 1), the U.S. NIH genetic 
sequence database. (National Center for Biotechnology Information, 2004). The 
explosive growth in the amount of biological data demands the use of computers for the 
organization, the maintenance and the analysis of these data.  
This led to the evolution of bioinformatics, an interdisciplinary field at the 
intersection of biology, computer science, and information technology. As Luscombe et 
al. (2001) mention, the aims of bioinformatics are: 
• The organization of data in such a way that allows researchers to access existing 
information and to submit new entries as they are produced.  
• The development of tools that help in the analysis of data. 
• The use of these tools to analyze the individual systems in detail, in order to gain 
new biological insights. 
The field of bioinformatics has many applications in the modern day world, including 
molecular medicine, industry, agriculture, stock farming, and comparative studies 
(2can Bioinformatics, 2004). 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Millions
1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
DN
A
 S
eq
ue
nc
es
 
Figure 1: Growth of GenBank (Years 1982-2003). 
 
 
B A C K G R O U N D  
 
One of the basic characteristics of life is its diversity. Everyone can notice this by 
just observing the great differences among living creatures. Despite this diversity, the 
molecular details underlying living organisms are almost universal. Every living 
organism depends on the activities of a complex family of molecules called proteins. 
Proteins are the main structural and functional units of an organism’s cell. Typical 
example of proteins are the enzymes that catalyze (accelerate) chemical reactions. 
There are four levels of protein structural arrangement (conformation) as listed in 
Table 1 (Brazma et al., 2001). The statement about unity among organisms is 
strengthened by the observation that similar protein sets, having similar functions, are 
found in very different organisms (Hunter, 2004). Another common characteristic of all 
organisms is the presence of a second family of molecules, the nucleic acids. Their role 
is to carry the information that “codes” life. The force that created both the unity and 
the diversity of living things is evolution (Hunter, 2004). 
 
• Primary Structure. The sequence of amino acids, forming a chain called polypeptide.  
 
• Secondary Structure.  The structure that forms a polypeptide after folding.  
 
• Tertiary Structure. The stable 3D structure that forms a polypeptide.  
 
• Quaternary Structure. The final 3D structure of the protein formed by the 
conjugation of two or more polypeptides. 
 
Table 1: The Four Levels of Protein Conformation. 
 
 
Proteins and nucleic acids are both called biological macromolecules, due to their 
large size compared to other molecules. Important efforts towards understanding life 
are made by studying the structure and function of biological macromolecules. The 
branch of biology concerned in this study is called molecular biology.  
Both proteins and nucleic acids are linear polymers of smaller molecules called 
monomers. The term sequence is used to refer to the order of monomers that constitute 
a macromolecule. A sequence can be represented as a string of different symbols, one 
for each monomer. There are twenty protein monomers called amino acids. There exist 
two nucleic acids, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), composed 
by four different monomers called nucleotides. DNA is the genetic material of almost 
every living organism. RNA has many functions inside a cell and plays an important 
role in protein synthesis (Table 2). Moreover, RNA is the genetic material for some 
viruses such as HIV, which causes AIDS.  
The genetic material of an organism is organized in long double stranded DNA 
molecules called chromosomes. An organism may contain one or more chromosomes. 
Gene is a DNA sequence located in a particular chromosome and encodes the 
information for the synthesis of a protein or RNA molecule. All the genetic material of 
a particular organism constitutes its genome. 
 
• Messenger RNA (mRNA) . Carries information from DNA to protein synthesis site. 
 
• Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) . The main constituent of ribosomes, the cellular components 
where the protein synthesis takes place. 
 
• Transfer RNA (tRNA) .  Transfers the amino acids to ribosomes. 
 
Table 2: Some of the Basic Types of RNA. 
 
 
The central dogma of molecular biology, as coined by Francis Crick (1958), 
describes the flow of genetic information (Figure 2). DNA is transcribed into RNA and 
then RNA is translated into proteins. The circular arrow around DNA denotes its 
replication ability. However, today is known that in retroviruses RNA is reverse 
transcribed into DNA. Moreover, in some viruses RNA is able to replicate itself. The 
extended statement of central dogma of molecular biology is depicted in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 2: The Central Dogma of Molecular Biology (Initial Statement). 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The Central Dogma of Molecular Biology (Extended Statement). 
 
 
 
Houle et al. (2000) refer to a classification of three successive levels for the 
analysis of biological data, that is identified on the basis of the central dogma of 
molecular biology: 
1. Genomics is the study of an organism's genome and deals with the systematic use of 
genome information to provide new biological knowledge. 
 
DNA 
 
RNA Protein 
Replication 
Translation Transcription 
 
DNA 
 
RNA Protein 
Replication 
Translation Transcription 
Reverse 
Transcription 
Replication 
2. Gene expression analysis is the use of quantitative mRNA-level measurements of 
gene expression (the process by which a gene’s coded information is converted into 
the structural and functional units of a cell) in order to characterize biological 
processes and elucidate the mechanisms of gene transcription (Houle et al., 2000). 
3. Proteomics is the large-scale study of proteins, particularly their structures and 
functions. (Wikipedia). 
These application domains are examined in the following paragraphs. 
As many genome projects (the endeavors to sequence and map genomes) like the 
Human Genome Project have been completed, there is a paradigm shift from static 
structural genomics to dynamic functional genomics (Houle et al., 2000). The term 
structural genomics refers to the DNA sequence determination and mapping activities, 
while functional genomics refers to the assignment of functional information to known 
sequences. There are particular DNA sequences, that have a specific biological role. 
The identification of such sequences is a problem that concerns bioinformatics 
scientists. One such sequence is transcription start site, which is the region of DNA 
where transcription (the process of mRNA production from DNA) starts. Another 
biologically meaningful sequence is the translation initiation site, which is the site 
where translation (protein production from mRNA) initiates.  
Although every cell in an organism -with only few exceptions- has the same set of 
chromosomes, two cells may have very different properties and functions. This is due 
to the differences in abundance of proteins. The abundance of a protein is partly 
determined by the levels of mRNA which in turn are determined by the expression or 
non-expression of the corresponding gene. A tool for analyzing gene expression is 
microarray. A microarray experiment measures the relative mRNA levels of typically 
thousands of genes, providing the ability to compare the expression levels of different 
biological samples. These samples may correlate with different time points taken 
during a biological process or with different tissue types such as normal cells and 
cancer cells (Aas, 2001). An example raw microarray image is illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: An illuminated microarray (enlarged). A typical dimension of such an array 
is about 1 inch or less, the spot diameter is of the order of 0.1 mm, for some 
microarray types can be even smaller. (Brazma et al., 2001). 
 
 
Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) is a method that allows the 
quantitative profiling of a large number of transcripts (Velculescu et al., 1995). A 
transcript is a sequence of mRNA produced by transcription. However, this method is 
very expensive in contrast to microarrays, thus there is a limited amount of publicly 
available SAGE data. 
One of the concerns of Proteomics is the prediction of protein properties such as 
active sites, modification sites, localization, stability, globularity, shape, protein 
domains, secondary structure and interactions (Whishart, 2002). Secondary structure 
prediction is one of the most important problems in proteomics. The interaction of 
proteins with other biomolecules is another important issue.  
 
M I N I N G  B I O L O G I C A L  D A T A  
 
Data mining is the discovery of useful knowledge from databases. It is the main 
step in the process known as Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) (Fayyad et al., 
1996), although the two terms are often used interchangeably. Other steps of the KDD 
process are the collection, selection, and transformation of the data and the 
visualization and evaluation of the extracted knowledge. Data mining employs 
algorithms and techniques from statistics, machine learning, artificial intelligence, 
databases and data warehousing etc. Some of the most popular tasks are classification, 
clustering, association and sequence analysis, and regression. Depending on the nature 
of the data as well as the desired knowledge there is a large number of algorithms for 
each task. All of these algorithms try to fit a model to the data (Dunham, 2002). Such a 
model can be either predictive or descriptive. A predictive model makes a prediction 
about data using known examples, while a descriptive model identifies patterns or 
relationships in data. Table 3 presents the most common data mining tasks (Dunham, 
2002). 
 
Predictive Descriptive 
Classification. Maps data into predefined 
classes. 
 
Regression.  Maps data into a real valued 
prediction variable.  
Association Analysis. The production of 
rules that describe relationships among data. 
 
Sequence Analysis. Same as association, but 
sequence of events is also considered. 
 
Clustering. Groups similar input patterns 
together. 
 
Table 3: Common Data Mining Tasks. 
 
Many general data mining systems such as SAS Enterprise Miner, SPSS, S-Plus, 
IBM Intelligent Miner, Microsoft SQL Server 2000, SGI MineSet, and Inxight 
VizServer can be used for biological data mining.  However, some biological data 
mining tools such as GeneSpring, Spot Fire, VectorNTI, COMPASS, Statistics for 
Microarray Analysis, and Affymetrix Data Mining Tool have been developed (Han, 
2002). Also, a large number of biological data mining tools is provided by National 
Center for Biotechnology Information and by European Bioinformatics Institute. 
 
Data Mining in Genomics 
Many data mining techniques have been proposed to deal with the identification of 
specific DNA sequences. The most common include neural networks, Bayesian 
classifiers, decision trees, and Support Vector Machines (SVMs) (Ma & Wang, 1999; 
Hirsh & Noordewier, 1994; Zien et al., 2000). Sequence recognition algorithms exhibit 
performance tradeoffs between increasing sensitivity (ability to detect true positives) 
and decreasing selectivity (ability to exclude false positives) (Houle et al., 2000). 
However, as Li et al. (2003) state, traditional data mining techniques cannot be directly 
applied to this type of recognition problems. Thus, there is the need to adapt the 
existing techniques to this kind of problems. Attempts to overcome this problem have 
been made using feature generation and feature selection (Zeng & Yap, 2002; Li et al.,  
2003). Another data mining application in genomic level is the use of clustering 
algorithms to group structurally related DNA sequences. 
 
Gene Expression Data Mining 
The main types of microarray data analysis include (Piatetsky-Shapiro & Tamayo, 
2003): gene selection, clustering, and classification. 
Piatetsky-Shapiro and Tamayo (2003) present one great challenge that data mining 
practitioners have to deal with. Microarray datasets -in contrast with other application 
domains- contain a small number of records (less than a hundred), while the number of 
fields (genes), is typically in thousands. The same case is in SAGE data. This increases 
the likelihood of finding “false positives”.  
An important issue in data analysis is feature selection. In gene expression analysis 
the features are the genes. Gene selection is a process of finding the genes most 
strongly related to a particular class. One benefit provided by this process is the 
reduction of the foresaid dimensionality of dataset. Moreover, a large number of genes 
are irrelevant when classification is applied. The danger of overshadowing the 
contribution of relevant genes is reduced when gene selection is applied.  
Clustering is the far most used method in gene expression analysis. Tibshirani et 
al. (1999) and Aas (2001) provide a classification of clustering methods in two 
categories: one-way clustering and two-way clustering. Methods of the first category 
are used to group either genes with similar behavior or samples with similar gene 
expressions. Two-way clustering methods are used to simultaneously cluster genes and 
samples. Hierarchical clustering is currently the most frequently applied method in 
gene expression analysis. An important issue concerning the application of clustering 
methods in microarray data is the assessment of cluster quality. Many techniques such 
as bootstrap, repeated measurements, mixture model-based approaches, sub-sampling 
and others have been proposed to deal with the cluster reliability assessment (Kerr & 
Churchill, 2001; Yeung et al., 2003; Ghosh & Chinnaiyan, 2002; Smolkin & Ghosh, 
2003).  
In microarray analysis classification is applied to discriminate diseases or to 
predict outcomes based on gene expression patterns and perhaps even identify the best 
treatment for given genetic signature (Piatetsky-Shapiro & Tamayo, 2003). 
Table 4 lists the most commonly used methods in microarray data analysis. 
Detailed descriptions of these methods can be found in literature (Aas, 2001; 
Tibshirani et al., 1999; Hastie et al., 2000; Lazzeroni & Owen, 2002; Dudoit et al., 
2002; Golub et al., 1999). 
 
 
One-way Clustering Two-way Clustering Classification 
Hierarchical Clustering 
Self-organizing Maps (SOMs) 
K-means 
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) 
Block Clustering 
Gene Shaving 
Plaid Models 
SVMs 
K-nearest Neighbors 
Classification/Decision Trees 
Voted Classification 
Weighted Gene Voting 
Bayesian Classification 
 
Table 4: Popular microarray data mining methods 
 
 
Most of the methods used to deal with microarray data analysis can be used for 
SAGE data analysis. 
Finally, machine learning and data mining can be applied in order to design 
microarray experiments except to analyze them (Molla et al., 2004). 
 
Data Mining in Proteomics 
Many modification sites can be detected by simply scanning a database that 
contains known modification sites. However, in some cases, a simple database scan is 
not effective. The use of neural networks provides better results in these cases. Similar 
approaches are used for the prediction of active sites. Neural network approaches and 
nearest neighbor classifiers have been used to deal with protein localization prediction 
(Whishart, 2002). Neural networks have also been used to predict protein properties 
such as stability, globularity and shape. Whishart refers to the use of hierarchical 
clustering algorithms for predicting protein domains. 
Data mining has been applied for the protein secondary structure prediction. This 
problem has been studied for over than 30 years and many techniques have been 
developed (Whishart, 2002). Initially, statistical approaches were adopted to deal with 
this problem. Later, more accurate techniques based on information theory, Bayes 
theory, nearest neighbors, and neural networks were developed. Combined methods 
such as integrated multiple sequence alignments with neural network or nearest 
neighbor approaches improve prediction accuracy. 
A density based clustering algorithm (GDBSCAN) is presented by Sander et al. 
(1998), that can be used to deal with protein interactions. This algorithm is able to 
cluster point and spatial objects according to both, their spatial and non-spatial 
attributes. 
 
 
F U T U R E  T R E N D S  
 
Because of the special characteristics of biological data, the variety of new 
problems and the extremely high importance of bioinformatics research, a large number 
of critical issues is still open and demands active and collaborative research by the 
academia as well as the industry. Moreover, new technologies such as the microarrays 
led to a constantly increasing number of new questions on new data. Examples of hot 
problems in bioinformatics are the accurate prediction of protein structure and gene 
behavior analysis in microarrays. Bioinformatics demands and provides the 
opportunities for novel and improved data mining methods development. As Houle et 
al. (2000) mention, these improvements will enable the prediction of protein function 
in the context of higher order processes such as the regulation of gene expression, 
metabolic pathways (series of chemical reactions within a cell, catalyzed by enzymes) 
and signaling cascades (series of reactions which occur as a result of a single 
stimulus). The final objective of such analysis will be the illumination of the way 
conveying from genotype to phenotype. 
 
 
C O N C L U S I O N  
 
The recent technological advances, have led to an exponential growth of biological 
data. New questions on these data have been generated. Scientists often have to use 
exploratory methods instead of confirming already suspected hypotheses. Data mining 
is a research area that aims to provide the analysts with novel and efficient 
computational tools to overcome the obstacles and constraints posed by the traditional 
statistical methods. Feature selection, normalization, and standardization of the data, 
visualization of the results and evaluation of the produced knowledge are equally 
important steps in the knowledge discovery process. The mission of bioinformatics as a 
new and critical research domain is to provide the tools and use them to extract 
accurate and reliable information in order to gain new biological insights. 
 
 
R E F E R E N C E S  
 
2can Bioinformatics (2004. March 15). Bioinformatics Introduction. Available: 
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/2can/bioinformatics/index.html 
Aas, K. (2001). Microarray Data Mining: A Survey. NR Note, SAMBA, Norwegian 
Computing Center. 
Brazma, A., Parkinson, H., Schlitt, T. and Shojatalab, M. (2001). A Quick 
Introduction to Elements of Biology - Cells, Molecules, Genes, Functional Genomics, 
Microarrays. Retrieved February 2, 2005 from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray/ 
biology_intro.html 
Dudoit, S., Fridlyand, J. and Speed, T.P. (2002). Comparison of Discrimination 
Methods for the Classification of Tumors Using Gene Expression Data. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association 97(457), 77-87. 
Dunham, M.H. (2002). Data mining: Introductory and advanced topics. Prentice 
Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, USA. 
Fayyad, U.M., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P., & Uthurusamy, R. (1996). 
Advances in knowledge discovery and data mining. AAAI Press/MIT Press, Menlo 
Park, California, USA. 
Golub, T.R., Slonim, D.K., Tamayo, P., Huard, C., Gaasenbeek, M., Mesirov, J.P., 
Coller, H., Loh, M.L., Downing, J.R., Caligiuri, M.A., Bloomfield, C.D. and Lander, 
E.S. (1999). Molecular Classification of Cancer: Class Discovery and Class Prediction 
by Gene Expression Monitoring. Science 286(5439), 531-537. 
Ghosh, D. and Chinnaiyan, A.M. (2002). Mixture Modeling of Gene Expression 
Data from Microarray Experiments. Bioinformatics, 18, 275-286. 
Han, J. (2002). How Can Data Mining Help Bio-Data Analysis? In Zaki, M.J., 
Wang, J.T.L. and Toivonen, H.T.T. (Eds). Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGKDD 
Workshop on Data Mining in Bioinformatics, 1-2. 
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Eisen, M.B., Alizadeh, A., Levy, R., Staudt, L., Chan, 
W.C., Botstein, D. and Brown, P. (2000). ‘Gene Shaving’ as a Method for Identifying 
Distinct Sets of Genes with Similar Expression Patterns. Genome Biology, 1(2): 
research0003. 
Hirsh, H. and Noordewier, M. (1994). Using Background Knowledge to Improve 
Inductive Learning of DNA Sequences. Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence for Applications, 351-357. 
Houle, J.L., Cadigan, W., Henry, S., Pinnamaneni, A. and Lundahl, S. (2004. 
March 10). Database Mining in the Human Genome Initiative. Whitepaper, Bio-
databases.com, Amita Corporation. Available: http://www.biodatabases.com/ 
whitepaper.html 
Hunter, L. (2004). Life and Its Molecules: A Brief Introduction. AI Magazine, 
25(1), 9-22. 
Kerr, M.K. and Churchill, G.A. (2001). Bootstrapping Cluster Analysis: Assessing 
the Reliability of Conclusions from Microarray Experiments. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 98, 8961-8965. 
Lazzeroni, L. and Owen, A. (2002). Plaid Models for Gene Expression Data, 
Statistica Sinica, 12(2002), 61-86. 
Li, J., Ng, K.-S. and Wong, L. (2003). Bioinformatics Adventures in Database 
Research. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Database Theory, 31-46, 
Siena, Italy. 
Luscombe, N.M., Greenbaum, D. and Gerstein, M. (2001). What is Bioinformatics? 
A Proposed Definition and Overview of the Field. Methods of Information in Medicine, 
40(4), 346-358. 
Ma, Q. and Wang, J.T.L. (1999). Biological Data Mining Using Bayesian Neural 
Networks: A Case Study. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, Special 
Issue on Biocomputing, 8(4), 433-451. 
Molla, M., Waddell, M., Page, D. and Shavlik, J. (2004). Using Machine Learning 
to Design and Interpret Gene-Expression Microarrays. AI Magazine, 25(1), 23-44.  
National Center for Biotechnology Information (2004. June 18). Genbank 
Statistics. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/genbankstats.html 
Piatetsky-Shapiro, G. and Tamayo, P. (2003). Microarray Data Mining: Facing the 
Challenges. SIGKDD Explorations, 5(2), 1-5. 
Sander, J., Ester, M., Kriegel, P.-H. and Xu, X. (1998). Density-Based Clustering 
in Spatial Databases: The Algorithm GDBSCAN and its Applications. Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery, 2(2): 169-194. 
Smolkin, M. and Ghosh, D. (2003). Cluster Stability Scores for Microarray Data in 
Cancer Studies. BMC Bioinformatics, 4, 36. 
Tibshirani, R., Hastie, T., Eisen, M., Ross, D., Botstein, D., & Brown, P. (1999). 
Clustering methods for the analysis of DNA microarray data (Tech. Rep.). Department 
of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 
Two Crows Corporation (1999). Introduction to Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery (3rd ed.). 
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science (2004. June 25). Human Genome 
Project Information. Available: http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/ 
Human_Genome/home.shtml 
Velculescu, V.E., Zhang, L., Vogelstein, B. and Kinzler, K.W. (1995). Serial 
Analysis of Gene Expression, Science, 270(5235), 484-487. 
Whishart, D.S. (2002). Tools for Protein Technologies. In Sensen, C.W. (Ed.), 
Biotechnology, (Vol 5b) Genomics and Bioinformatics, 325-344, Wiley-VCH. 
Wikipedia – Online Encyclopedia (2004. April 12). Available: 
http://en2.wikipedia.org 
Yeung, Y.K., Medvedovic, M. and Bumgarner, R.E. (2003). Clustering Gene-
Expression Data with Repeated Measurements. Genome Biology, 4(5), R34. 
Zeng, F., Yap C.H.R. and Wong, L. (2002). Using Feature Generation and Feature 
Selection for Accurate Prediction of Translation Initiation Sites. Genome Informatics, 
13, 192-200. 
Zien, A., Ratsch, G., Mika, S., Scholkopf, B., Lengauer, T. and Muller, R.-K. 
(2000). Engineering Support Vector Machine Kernels that Recognize Translation 
Initiation Sites. Bioinformatics, 16(9), 799-807. 
 
 
Terms and Definitions 
 
Data Cleaning (Cleansing): The act of detecting and removing errors and inconsistencies in data to 
improve its quality. 
Genotype: The exact genetic makeup of an organism. 
Machine Learning: An area of artificial intelligence the goal of which is to build computer systems 
that can adapt and learn from their experience. 
Mapping: The process of locating genes on a chromosome. 
Phenotype: The physical appearance characteristics of an organism. 
Sequence Alignment: The process to test for similarities between a sequence of an unknown target 
protein, and a single (or a family of) known protein(s). 
Sequencing: The process of determining the order of nucleotides in a DNA or RNA molecule or the 
order of amino acids in a protein. 
Visualization: Graphical display of data and models facilitating the understanding and interpretation 
of the information contained in them. 

