06381 Abstracts Collection
Computer Science in Sport
 Dagstuhl Seminar 
Arnold Baca1, Larry Katz2, Jürgen Perl3 and Otto Spaniol4
1 Universität Wien, AT
arnold.baca@univie.ac.at
2 University of Calgary, CA
katz@ucalgary.ca
3 Universität Mainz, DE
Perl@Informatik.Uni-Mainz.de
4 RWTH Aachen, DE
spaniol@informatik.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract. From 17.09.06 to 20.09.06, the Dagstuhl Seminar 06381 Com-
puter Science in Sport was held in the International Conference and
Research Center (IBFI), Schloss Dagstuhl. During the seminar, several
participants presented their current research, and ongoing work and open
problems were discussed. Abstracts of the presentations given during the
seminar as well as abstracts of seminar results and ideas are put together
in this paper. The rst section describes the seminar topics and goals in
general. Links to extended abstracts or full papers are provided, if avail-
able.
Keywords. Modelling and Simulation, Multimedia, Sports management,
Soft computing / computational intelligence E-learning, Distributed games,
Interdisciplinary collaboration, Behavioral process analysis, Net-based
pattern analysis, Information and communication technology, Game analy-
sis / notational analysis, Training and competition analysis, Training and
competition data management, Performance analysis, Biomechanics, As-
sisted mobility
06381 Executive Summary  Computer Science in Sport
Arnold Baca (Universität Wien, A)
The seminar dealt with a dynamically developing interdisciplinary area, where
qualitative and non-deterministic paradigms from Sport like behavioural processes
and modelling meet technological and structural paradigms from Computer Sci-
ence. New demands, new concepts and technologies, and future trends in both
disciplines were discussed.
Internationally well known researchers as well as researchers from the younger
generation participated in this seminar and discussed their recent work and
actual tendencies in Computer Science in Sport.
Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings 06381
Computer Science in Sport
http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2006/833
2 A. Baca, L. Katz, J. Perl and O. Spaniol
Keywords: Modelling, Data acquisition, RoboCup, Biomechanics, Motion track-
ing, Multimedia
Extended Abstract: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2006/818
Computer Science in Sport - a Historical Survey
Arnold Baca (Universität Wien, A)
In 1975, an international congress entitled Creative Sports Informatics was or-
ganized in Graz, Austria. At this time, and in particular in the framework of
the congress, Sports Informatics mainly dealt with questions of sports informa-
tion with special emphasis on activities in documentation and dissemination of
information. Through-out the last 30 years Sports Informatics has become a sci-
entic discipline ("Computer Science in Sport") in a more general meaning of
informatics/computer science. Working areas have evolved, national and inter-
national associations have been founded, journals are published and congresses
are organized regularly to present research activities.
The following main areas of research have developed:
+ Data acquisition, processing and analysis
+ Modelling and simulation
+ Data bases and expert systems
+ Multimedia and presentation
+ IT networks / communication
There are many (research) activities that cut across these areas. Most of
them can be assigned to one of the following topics:
+ (Biomechanical) motion analysis
+ Game and competition analysis
+ Motor learning, training and performance analysis
+ Pattern recognition
+ Complex systems
+ Application and adaptation of soft computing methods
+ Pervasive Computing
+ Development of hard- and software tools
+ Instruction, training, education
+ Information and documentation
+ Virtual Reality
These developments and the increasing importance of knowledge in informa-
tion and communication technologies and computer skills for career perspectives
of students of sport science show consequences in curricula. Lectures not only
on basic tools of informatics but more and more also on complex tools, concepts
and advanced methods are integrated into their education programs.
Keywords: History, Sports informatics
Computer Science in Sport 3
Humanoid Soccer Robots
Sven Behnke (Universität Freiburg, D)
Humanoid robots are enjoying increasing popularity as a research tool.
As step towards the long-term goal of winning against the FIFA world cham-
pion, the RoboCup Federation added in 2002 a league for humanoid robots to
its annual soccer competitions. Now, the young Humanoid League raised the bar
again. After less demanding competitions, soccer games with humanoid robots
were started in 2005.
In the talk, I will explain the rules of the league and discuss the dierent
approaches for the design of the robot hardware and the software for perception
and behavior control. I will cover the robots of my team NimbRo in detail.
I will review the results of the 2006 competition in Bremen and give an
outlook to the research issues that must be addressed in the future.
Keywords: Robots, soccer, hardware, software
The future synergy of computer modelling and smart
technologies in sport
Peter Dabnichki (Queen Mary College - London, GB)
Computational modelling in biomechanics and specically in sport performance
has been constantly evolving and developing. However, frequently emphasis has
been put sometimes complex modelling and sometimes extremely simplistic tech-
niques that yield results impossible to validate and have little or no practical
impact. An example of the former is modelling of cartilage as a multiphase
continua and the latter is very evident in a number of publications devoted.
However, the problems are normally attributed to modelling but they also lie in
the provision of input and validation from both experiments and competition.
The above point is illustrated by a practical example of a project on the scale
of the propulsive force in swimming. The project relied on combination of com-
putational modelling, experimental data collection including the construction
of a robotic arm and data from competition level training sessions. As a result
it is now known the level of forces involved in front crawl swimming, and will
soon be possible to optimise the stroke trajectory in terms of maximum thrust
generated. However, is this sucient? The human being is not designed to swim
so to talk about optimal stroke is ill-founded. Such "optimum" is dependent on
physiological constrains and hence more multidisciplinary approach is needed.
The problem with the analytical approach presented above is that it enhances
the scientic knowledge and understanding but does not show the way ahead
in terms of how practically this could be achieved. Currently strong emphasis
is given to the rapid feedback provision for the athletes. But this has a lot of
4 A. Baca, L. Katz, J. Perl and O. Spaniol
limitations as it is hardly rapid and depends on the individual interpretation of
the data collected by coaches and technical sta.
A parallel development and it up to now a separate one are the so called smart
technologies, the best known examples of which are smart materials such as
piezoelectric ones and memory shape alloys. Up to know mostly smart materials
have been developed and used. They have the propensity to react to change
in the environmental parameters. However, their response is limited to a small
number of parameters. However, the more recent trend is towards "intelligent"
technologies and materials that could oer a variety of responses and dierentiate
the factors contextually. The author believes that computers will be playing a
more prominent role in this development. This is illustrated with some ongoing
projects devoted to drug testing and individualised comfort. Possibilities for
the use of these novel technologies in sport are discussed. The author strongly
believes that such approaches should end the deeply awed statistical approaches
in very near future.
Keywords: Smart Technologies, Intelligent Systems, Computational Modelling
Full Paper: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2006/819
eLearning - Potentials, Perspectives & Curriculum
Integration
Christian Eder (Universität Wien, A)
Throughout the last years increasing eorts in developing and using multimedia
based courses and materials in sport science can be observed. Currently avail-
able software authoring packages oer numerous options for the development of
educational applications and for the integration of multimedia materials.
Several multimedia projects (SpInSy, Sport multimedial etc.) and master
thesis in this area have been accomplished at the Institute of Sport Science,
University of Vienna.
The integration of the developed materials into the current curriculum has
been completed in accordance with the Bologna model. Credit points (ECTS-
Points) for traditional courses and especially for eModules have been allocated
with respect to the standards for eLearning of the University of Vienna. eLearn-
ing materials have thus been embedded in Blended Learning scenarios.
Future steps are comprehensive studies and researches on the acceptance,
eectiveness and topology of the students' use.
Keywords: ELearning, Usability, Curriculum Integration
Joint work of: Eder, Christian; Strubreither, Oliver
Computer Science in Sport 5
Qualitative World Models for Soccer Robots
Alexander Ferrein (RWTH Aachen, D)
Specifying the behavior of autonomous agents or robots is a complex and some-
times tricky task. The system designer needs expert knowledge of the application
domain and must be able to translate the domain knowledge into a behavior
specication for the robot. In this talk we give an overview of the ongoing work
to formalize strategies for soccer playing robots. Starting with soccer literature
describing tactics and strategies for human soccer play we derive a formaliza-
tion in the logic-based robot programming language Readylog. A specication
problem arises because knowledge from human experts are represented in a qual-
itative fashion which cannot directly be transfered to a robot. To bridge the gap
between the robot working with quantitative data and the experts we dene a
qualitative world model. With this world model the task of specifying the robots'
behavior is eased.
Keywords: Robot, soccer, modeling
Mechanics of motor units: modeling and simulation of
skeletal muscle performance in sport
Mario Heller (Universität Wien, A)
The mammalian nervous system is able to regulate force production and con-
traction speed in a muscle by recruitment of motor units and by modulation of
the ring rates of recruited units. Research areas related to the control of the
motor units attempt to explain how the nervous system might function to eect
the regulation of motor unit behaviour within the muscle (De Luca & Erim,
1994) and to identify neural mechanisms which increase muscle performance
after training (e.g. Van Cutsem et al., 1998).
The main focus of current work is to combine biological knowledge (physiol-
ogy and neuro science) and methods from engineering and computer science for a
better understanding of possible principles and mechanisms underlying nervous
system's overall operation.
Actually, models of single motor unit force responses with varying contractile
properties (see Heller & Witte, 2006) are compared with data experimentally
observed to optimize tted parameter values of the motor unit models.
References:
[1] De Luca & Erim (1994). TINS, 17 (7), 299-305.
[2] Heller & Witte (2006). IJCSS, 5(1), 30-40.
[3] Van Cutsem, Duchateau & Hainaut (1998). JP 513 (1), 295-305.
Keywords: Biomechanics, motor control, motor units, modeling and simulation,
muscle performance
6 A. Baca, L. Katz, J. Perl and O. Spaniol
Issues in the Adoption of Innovations in Sport
Larry Katz (University of Calgary, CA)
Sport has been greatly inuenced by the impact of computer science and tech-
nology. However, very little research has focused on the eectiveness of various
sport technology tools and equipment. Certainly great successes have been well
documented, such as the clap skate in speed skating. However, numerous eective
programs have not been widely adopted. Many problems exist with the diusion
of information and the issues of technology acceptance in sport as it relates to
equipment design, performance evaluation, game statistics and analysis, mea-
surement, computerized training and computer assisted education. There has
been a widening gap between changes and innovations that technology brings
to athletes and coaches, and the human capacity to adapt to/cope with those
changes. Fear of change, the perceived usefulness of an innovation, and the per-
ceived ease of use of the resource heavily inuence acceptance of technology at
an individual level, but complex interactions between social, economic, and or-
ganizational factors are also a critical part of the adoption process. In the nal
analysis, the purpose of research in the diusion of technology is to facilitate the
creation of well-designed products, ensure the adoption and wide-spread use of
those products, and to encourage innovative use of those resources.
This presentation highlights the adoption issues as they relate to sport and
provides examples of research into the adoption of technology, the decision-
making processes involved in adapting to change, and methods of measuring
the level of engagement.
Keywords: Computer science, technology, acceptance
The use of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) for the
development of new oar blades to improve the eectiveness
of aquatic propulsion in rowing
Philipp Kornfeind (Universität Wien, A)
If one looks at technical related sports like rowing, the area of sport technology
has become an important part in the equipment development process. In the
past 10 years, no signicant changes in the functional construction of rowing
equipment (boat, oars and blades) can be observed. Like in many other areas
the design processes was (and is) characterized by the use of "trial and error".
Research methods such as CFD-Simulations in combination with experiments
in real rowing situations (on-water rowing) shall be used to identify factors which
are responsible for the generation of propulsive force on the oar blade in driving
direction. In particular the hydrodynamic eects (lift, drag, vortex) caused by
the movement of the blade through the water are of special interest. Many studies
have been performed to determine the lift and drag coecients of blades, hands
Computer Science in Sport 7
and comparable objects in a quasistatic situation which is far away from reality.
For a dynamic situation it is nearly impossible to obtain the lift and drag force
components generated on the blade (during a rowing stroke) by using common
force measurement methods. However the simulation results should give a good
direction for the design and construction of new blade shapes or dierent angles
of incidence.
Based on these ndings a series of prototypes shall be constructed and man-
ufactured to verify their eectiveness in rowing.
Keywords: CFD, Computational Fluid Dynamics, Simulation, Rowing, Hydro-
dynamics
Tracking People and the Application in Sports Game
Analysis
Thomas Mauthner (TU Graz, A)
This work gives an overview about the current work in the project of digital game
analysis in Beachvolleyball and summarizes the results which have been achieved
so far. Trainers of sport games need to gather automatically information about
their athletes during training or competition. As the success of sport teams and
athletes depends on the physical condition and tactical behaviour, coaches have
to base their training methods on the requirements of competitions. The use of
cameras is a simple method to monitor the athletes without having to inuence
their behaviour. The combination of database entries and the corresponding
video data leads to a better description of the game than statistical data alone.
The integration of computer vision methods to support the user during his
annotation and the supply of additional information about athletes' behaviour
and game ow is a useful extension. A semiautomatic application is developed
which combines manual annotation done by sport experts and image based al-
gorithms. Several computer vision methods can resolve tasks like tracking, clas-
sication into player and background and computation of real world positions.
The rst step in the application is the detection and tracking of dened ob-
jects (athletes, balls). Tracking algorithms should be able to deal with the highly
non-rigid shapes of athletes during a game and their mostly unpredictable move-
ments. Furthermore, possible mutual occlusions of players have to be coped with
in order to maintain a continuous identication of players to describe the load
of a player during a match. Developing and testing several tracking algorithms
in the closed world of a sport activity (like in our case beach volleyball), where
several constrains can be applied, can also be useful in a visual surveillance task.
Examples for detection methods are color or shape features as well as background
subtraction and blob segmentation methods for static cameras. KALMAN- and
PARTICLE-lters deliver robust results for the sports and surveillance applica-
tions (Isard, Blake, 1998).
Although various tracking algorithms exist, specic problems require the de-
velopment of new ideas. Especially the area of individual and group behaviour is
8 A. Baca, L. Katz, J. Perl and O. Spaniol
a challenging part of the computer vision point of view and may give important
information to sport sciences as well as to other elds of science.
A further topic in the context of video based analysis is the detection and
recognition of specic actions or interactions performed by the athletes. In sports
game analysis the recognition of actions is the rst step to the understanding
of player behavior and game tactics. Additionally, the automated detection of
e.g. jumps, sprints or attacks gives the coaches and sport scientists the needed
amount of data to detect the demands of the specic game sport. Methods
for this purpose are based on contours, changes in the motion ow of tracked
patches, or gradient information to estimate the motions (actions) of tracked
players (Mori, Efros, et al., 2003).
References:
[1] Isard, M., Blake, A. (1998). Condensationconditional density propagation
for visual tracking. International Journal of Computer Vision, Vol. 29(1),
5-28.
[2] Mori, G., Efros, A., Berg A. & Malik, J. (2003). Recognizing Action at a
Distance. International Conference on Computer Vision, Vol.2, 726-733.
Keywords: Beachvolleyball, interactive video systems, tracking
Joint work of: Mauthner, Thomas; Tilp, Markus; Bischof, Horst
On the presence of space-time patterns in squash contests
Tim McGarry (University of New Brunswick - Fredericton, CA)
We report research using the point-light method to investigate the space-time
patterns of squash players. To this end, the real-time movements of squash play-
ers in a squash rally were presented on a computer monitor as single dots, ren-
dering a two-dimensional representation of the player movements in the lateral
(forward and backward) and longitudinal (side-to-side) directions similar to what
would be obtained from a viewpoint located directly above the playing surface.
In addition to the movements of the squash players, however, a distracter set
comprising of two other dots was introduced to the visual display. Thus, a trial
comprised of four dots in the visual display - two squash players and two dis-
tracters - each dot being of the same size and color making them indistinguishable
from each other except for their respective movements on the squash court. In-
dependent observers (O = 6) were tasked separately with identifying the squash
dyad from the distracter set within a trial (N = 47). In the rst experimental con-
dition, the level of diculty (D) of the distracter set was varied from the least
dicult (D1) comprising of random movements through to the most dicult
(D4) comprising the movements of squash players. In the second experimental
condition, the size (S) of the distracter set was varied from two distracters (S1)
through to six distracters (S3). Interestingly, the observers retained the ability to
Computer Science in Sport 9
identify the squash dyad beyond chance under all variations of both experimen-
tal conditions, albeit with varying degrees of success, as expected. These ndings
demonstrate unambiguously that the space-time interactions of the two squash
players demonstrate patterned features and, furthermore, that these patterned
features are specic to the squash dyad. The important information contained in
the point-light display that gives rise to these patterned features will be discussed
in terms of dynamical principles of self-organizing systems.
Keywords: Patterns, perception, point-light, sport, squash
Computer Science in Sport: Present Fields and Future
Applications
Jürgen Perl (Universität Mainz, D)
During the last about 15 years, the spectrum of Computer Science in Sport has
changed a lot. Due to the development of computers and information technology
as well as of scientic concepts and methods new working areas have been devel-
oped. Meanwhile, the eld of research and applications stretches from data bases
to articial intelligence. Traditional areas like game analysis and theory of train-
ing are involved as well as technologically innovative areas like internet-based
coaching and e-learning.
Future development of rapidly changing elds like Computer Science in Sport
is dicult to predict. There are, however, two major aspects that in general seem
to increase its importance continuously. On the one hand, the amount of avail-
able data increases permanently and makes it more and more dicult to extract
the useful information. On the other hand, the role of world wide communica-
tion becomes increasingly important and needs improved information technol-
ogy. Both trends not only require more powerful computers but in particular
better concepts and techniques in order to handle problems in a fruitful and
interdisciplinary way.
Keywords: Computer Science, Data, Information, Communication, Internet
Are Oscillations of Physiological Variables a Consequence
of the homeostatic Control during Exercise?
Daniel Ranz (INEFC - Barcelona, E)
The principle of homeostasis classically explains the regulatory processes in-
volved in the physiological adaptation to exercise. It is supposed that complex
neural integration of multiple inputs leads (including feedback and feed forward
components) to the recovery of baseline levels. It has been suggested that the
limits of exercise performance are created by these dynamically occurring regu-
latory processes than by absolute limiting capacity of the dierent physiological
systems.
10 A. Baca, L. Katz, J. Perl and O. Spaniol
In the context of the homeostatic control the oscillations of physiological
variables during exercise are understood as a lag between aerent and eer-
ent neural adjustments or as unavoidable consequences of interactions between
dierent peripheral systems.
However these oscillations can be alternatively interpreted not as imperfect
features of homeostatic regulation but as the necessary uctuations to produce
the adaptation of the regulation system.
In our experiment VO2 consumption of trained and untrained subjects is
registered breath by breath during an exercise in treadmill. The exercise test
consists on continuous work load (5 min duration) at low intensity (below VT)
followed by a continuous work load at high intensity (above VT) of same dura-
tion. Spectral analysis of the signal is performed to characterize the frequencies
present at the VO2 consumption oscillations. Its dynamics of change is also stud-
ied by the time delay embedding and learnt with ANN (multilayer perceptron).
The minimum error achieved by the net in each period of the exercise is studied
to detect changes in the dynamics of VO2 oscillations.
Dierences in frequencies and signal regularity between trained and untrained
responses are observed as well as among dierent work loads. The role of oscilla-
tions and the homeostatic control as unique mechanism explaining adaptations
to exercise are questioned.
Keywords: VO2 consumption, homeostatic control, ANN
Joint work of: Balague, Natalia; Ranz, Daniel
Markerless Motion Capture in Outdoor environments
Bodo Rosenhahn (MPI für Informatik - Saarbrücken, D)
In the talk we give an outline of our markerless motion capture system. The input
is a multi-view image stream and a representation of the subject in terms of free-
form surface patches. Our system extracts silhouettes using level set functions,
determines correspondences between the model and the image data and nally
computes the pose conguration (the rotation and translation in 3D and the
joint angles). Due to the integration of 3D shape priors and statistical learning,
we are able to track (complex) motions in (more or less) arbitrary environments.
Keywords: Motion Capture, Segmentation, Pose estimation, statistical learning
Analysis and visualization of space-time variant
performance parameters in endurance sport training
Dietmar Saupe (Universität Konstanz, D)
A brief project sketch. In this research project we develop methods for data
acquisition, analysis, and viszualization of performance parameters in endurance
sports with emphasis on road biking.
Computer Science in Sport 11
There is a rapidly growing palette of commercial measuring devices, rang-
ing from common "bike computers" capturing speed, cadence, heart rate, tem-
perature, and barometric pressure to more complex ones for GPS localization.
Moreover, there are (expensive) power meters and spiroergometric devices that
measure ventilation and gas exchange. For scientic research it is desirable to
combine several such devices, thus, creating the need for methods for data fusion
and synchronization. The amount of data collected can get very large requiring
methods for appropriate analysis and visualization. Also biofeedback methods
require complex data processing. The talks surveys some of the initial approaches
in this newly started research project, in cooperation with the Department of
Sports Science at the University Konstanz and the Herzzentrum Lahr.
Identication of emotions in biomechanical gait patterns
Wolfgang Schöllhorn (Universität Münster, D)
"How is it going?" Who ever has used this term probably never thought about
the connection between the meaning of the word "going" as a mode of locomotion
and as an expression of inner feelings or emotions at the same time. Evidence for
the correlation of feelings and motor actions is provided too by the etymology
of the word emotion (e: "out of"; movere: "move"). Despite some basic work
in psychological or clinical context was done, research mainly concentrated on
subjective recognition of dierent facial (Ekmann et al. 1978) or body expres-
sions (Montepare et al. 1999) of emotions. The utilization of optimizing clinical
therapy by means of individual characteristics (Schöllhorn et al. 2003) has been
mainly neglected so far. The aim of this study was to identify emotional states
of individuals in biomechanical gait patterns with articial neural nets (ANN).
Kinetic and kinematic gait data was derived from 25Hz Video and from a
1000Hz force plate of 38 and 16 healthy subjects. The gaits were accompanied
either by imagination of four emotional states (normal, happy, sad, and angry)
or by listening to dierent types of music (excitatory, calmative, no music). After
digitization and ltering the data was fed to following types of ANNs: supervised:
MLP and Self-Organized Map (SOM) and two coupled SOMS (2SOM). The
results show a clear distinction between individuals in all nets and some partially
clear indications of emotion-recognition. Consequences on training and clinical
therapy will be discussed.
References:
[1] Ekman,P. Friesen,W.V. (1978) Facial action coding system. Palo Alto. CA
Consulting Psychologists Press.
[2] Montepare, J., Ko, E., Zaitchik, D., Albert, M. (1999): The use of body
movements and gestures as cues to emotions in younger and older adults.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 23 (2), 133-152.
[3] Schöllhorn, W. I. Nigg, B.M. Stefanyshyn, D. Liu, W. (2002) Identication
of individual walking patterns using time discrete and time continuous data
sets. Gait & Posture. 15 (2):180-6.
12 A. Baca, L. Katz, J. Perl and O. Spaniol
Keywords: Gait pattern, emotion, articial neural net
Joint work of: Schöllhorn, Wolfgang; Janssena, Daniel; Föllinga, Karina
Emergence of Gait in Legged Systems
André Seyfarth (Universität Jena, D)
The understanding of human and animal locomotion is a challenging and com-
plex issue. Although much is known about the properties of the individual parts
of the musculo-skeletal system, a comprehensive theory of the organisation the of
motor system is still missing. Here we propose to use very simple biomechanical
models to address several issues in the organisation of motor systems. First, we
describe the leg function on an internal level including leg segmentation, muscle-
tendon dynamics and local reexes on joint level. Later, we discuss the behavior
of legged systems with spring-like leg behavior. We nd that the common gaits
in human and animal locomotion, namely walking and running, are just two nat-
ural behaviors of a system with two elastic legs. This theory is a powerful basis
for the development of novel legged systems either in robotics or prosthetics.
Keywords: Gait, legged systems
End-User Programming and Sport Science
Guido Töpfer (Universität Mainz, D)
The use of computers is common in our working environments and end-user
computing - meaning the use of computers and prefabricated software - is no
longer an exclusive domain of specialists. The next step is to enable end-users to
modify existing functionality and dene new functionality on their own. Since
end-users are not educated in the development of software they need tools and
processes supporting them.
Some possible benets and risks of end-user programming will be discussed.
Furthermore it is motivated why it seems promising to apply end-user program-
ming in sports science and to conduct further research in this area.
As outlook an developed approach for end-user programming based on message-
based component composition is demonstrated.
Keywords: End-user programming, component, sport science
Current issues of e-learning in sport - shifting from media
to complex interactions
Josef Wiemeyer (TU Darmstadt, D)
The concept of e-learning undoubtedly oers surplus to university learning and
teaching.
Computer Science in Sport 13
Nevertheless, research on e-learning clearly reveals that e-learning does not
generally have a positive eect. Rather the complex interactions of e-learning
media, learners, teachers, and the learning environment have to be considered.
The purpose of this paper is to present current research that focuses on criti-
cal factors of e-learning eectivity and eciency and their complex interactions:
 Equipment and attitude of learners
A four-year survey of fresh(wo)men in sport science study programs shows
that there are specic attitude dierences concerning gender and course of study.
We found also some particular changes within four years.
 Equipment and attitude of teachers
A state-survey concerning the use of and demand for e-learning content at
institutes of sport science in Hesse shows, that there are good technical oppor-
tunities for e-learning, but there is also a lack of positive attitude. On the other
hand e-learning needs to be supported by several actions like establishing an
open-access e-learning data base, information and incentives for teachers, and
development high-quality assets by interdisciplinary teams.
 Self-regulated learning support
When students engage in e-learning they need to self-regulate their learning.
They have to plan their learning schedule, to self-monitor their learning, to
decide on using internal and external resources etc. In an experimental study
we examined the eect of a special two-day course enhancing the ability to
self-regulate e-learning in comparison to unsupervised e-learning. We found a
signicant eect on learning behaviour, but not on learning outcome.
These results clearly show that in order to fully exploit the surplus of e-
learning we need to take a broader perspective. For example, the further devel-
opment of e-learning content should be systematically based on concepts that
embody formative evaluations dealing with the application of the e-learning con-
tent in real-world settings as early as possible.
Keywords: E-learning, critical factors, teacher, learner, self-regulation

