We, Lonely Robots
A review of
Alone Together: Why We Expect More From Technology and Less
From Each Other
by Sherry Turkle
New York, NY: Basic Books, 2011. 360 pp. ISBN 978-0-465-01021-9.
$28.95
Reviewed by
Marianne LaFrance
Not all technological advances are greeted with open arms and minds. Indeed, new
technological developments are often met with fear and loathing. In the late Middle Ages, a
respected Swiss scientist, Conrad Gessner, sounded the alarm about the unmanageable flood
of information set loose by the printing press (Bell, 2010). Today, some 500 years later, the
alarms apply to the psychological and moral disintegration being unleashed by social media
and social robots.
Situated in the middle of these current warnings is a new book by a psychoanalytically
trained psychologist, Sherry Turkle, titled Alone Together: Why We Expect More From
Technology and Less From Each Other. Turkle examines how children interact with
companionate robots (e.g., Tomagotchi, My Real Baby) and the extent to which adolescents
and young adults rely on Internet-based communication (e.g., Facebook), seeing in both not
the cultivation and nourishing of social bonds, but their dilution and dissolution.
Alone Together is the third book by Sherry Turkle, a professor at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, to address the psychology of computer use. The conclusions of the
first two, The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit (Turkle, 1984) and Life on the
Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet (Turkle, 1995) were quite sanguine about people’s
reliance on personal computers and their increasing dependence on the Internet. In Alone
Together her early benign appraisals have gone the way of cassette recorders.
Turkle describes advancements in social robotics (also known as affective computing),
especially the assumption that robots will be able to serve in the not-too-distant future as
stand-alone companions to the aging or as babysitters to the young, seeing this not as a
viable solution to the shortage of caregivers but as bringing increased isolation for target
individuals and significant moral hazards for the rest of us. When human caring is replaced
by machine “caring,” society has a problem.
Turkle worries, too, that interactions with emotionally expressive robots are causing
children to develop new models of interpersonal attachment far different from those they
have had previously with teddy bears, action figures, and even with people. The difference
arises in part because companionate robots possess some capacity to learn and hence are able
to adapt to each individual child. Social robots are also programmed to be contingently
emotional with children who interact with them. As such, the attachments children form to
social robots like My Real Baby come uncannily close to real-life attachments but, as Turkle
points out, without the usual responsibilities that come with human relationships.
When Turkle turns her attention to how young people use technology she also sees
trouble. She surveys adolescents’ passionate attachment to their cell phones (which includes
sleeping with them) and notes that they are no longer used for talking but for texting.
Texting is the new handset, the preferred means of communication allowing more
detachment and control, a combination that paradoxically induces compulsive use. However,
face-to-face interaction, in contrast to texting, is complicated and requires some modicum
level of empathy and accommodation.
Turkle is disturbed, too, by the degree to which the Internet has become central in the
lives of young adults. She argues that although the Internet has made interpersonal
connections easier, it has made them both more superficial and more intrusive, contending
that, for example while individuals may have lots of “friends” on Facebook, they probably
have fewer real friends.
As a counter to this, a recent study found that college students overwhelmingly use
Facebook to keep in touch with old friends and deepen relationships with new ones (Ellison,
Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007). Turkle argues instead that in Facebook, any one relationship
matters less because most contacts are fully public, and postings are never-ending
performances. Even complex negotiations like apologies are “posted”; they no longer derive
from and reflect empathetic impulses but are just one more routine to put on someone’s
“wall.”
Turkle describes her research methodology in Alone Together as intimate
ethnography. Her data are anecdotes taken from conversations with children, adolescents,
and young adults who range in age from 5 to 20 years. They number over 450 people,
approximately two thirds of whom are children. No demographic details are provided, but it
is probably safe to say that her informants were not randomly selected. For example,
participating adolescents were students at seven high schools, five of which were private.
There is no attempt to provide explanations for her observations—they are presumed to
speak for themselves.
In Alone Together, Turkle asks a number of interesting psychological questions: Does
virtual intimacy degrade real intimacy? What happens when people would rather text than
talk? If we are always on line, what happens to solitude? Are children becoming too
comfortable with robotic companions?
Such questions are provocative, but unfortunately Turkle’s evidence is rhetorical
rather than empirical. Relevant psychological theory and research are all but absent. For
example, loneliness is a major theme, but no reference is made to the work by Cacioppo and
others (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008); getting lost in computer games is described, but not
Csikszentmihalyi’s (2008) findings on “flow” (total involvement); the need for others in
response to anxiety is noted, but no acknowledgment is made of the extensive social
psychological research on anxiety and affiliation (Leary, 1983); new research examining
how children bestow agency on objects is not consulted (e.g., Scholl & Tremoulet, 2000),
nor is Pennebaker’s (1997) program of research on the effects of confession when she
describes individuals’ use of online confessions.
Alone Together draws on the personal stories of children, adolescents, a few elderly
folk, and the author’s own experiences to describe how people frame their connections to
computers and the Internet circa 2011. Alas, the formulation is also conversational, veering
toward the advisory rather than the verified. Turkle is clearly passionate in describing what
she sees as the looming social isolation being wrought by the new technology. Although less
alarm and more science would have been more convincing, Alone Together does offer a
needed counter to the wholesale adoption of the social media and social robots.
References
Bell, V. (2010). Don’t touch that dial! A history of media technology scares, from the
printing press to Facebook. Retrieved from http://www.slate.com/id/2244198/
Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick, B. (2008). Loneliness: Human nature and the need for social
connection. New York, NY: Norton.
PsycCRITIQUES
1554-0138
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2008). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York, NY:
Harper Perennial.
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook “friends”: Social
capital and college students’ use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 12, 1143–1168. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x
Leary, M. R. (1983). Understanding social anxiety: Social, personality, and clinical
perspectives. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1997). Opening up: The healing power of expressing emotions. New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Scholl, B. J., & Tremoulet, P. D. (2000). Perceptual causality and animacy. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4, 299–309. doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01506-0
Turkle, S. (1984). The second self: Computers and the human spirit. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York, NY:
Simon & Schuster.
December 21, 2011, Vol. 56, Release 51, Article 4
© 2011, American Psychological Association

