Publ. Astron. Obs. Belgrade No. 84 (2008), 439 Invited Lecture
SIMULATION SCIENCE FOR FUSION PLASMAS
M. M. ŠKORIĆ and S. SUDO
National Institute for Fusion Science,
Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
Toki-shi, 509-5292, Japan
E–mail: skoric.milos@nifs.ac.jp
Abstract. The world fusion effort has recently entered a new age with the construction
of ITER in Cadarache, France, which will be the first magnetic confinement fusion plasma
experiment dominated by the self-heating of fusion reactions. In order to operate and control
burning plasmas and future demo fusion reactors, an advanced ability for comprehensive
computer simulations that are fully verified and validated against experimental data will be
necessary. The ultimate goal is to develop the capability to predict reliably the behavior
of plasmas in toroidal magnetic confinement devices on all relevant time and space scales.
In addition to developing a sophisticated integrated simulation codes, directed advanced
research in fusion physics, applied mathematics and computer science is envisaged.
In this talk we review the basic strategy and main research efforts at the Department of
Simulation Science of the National Institute for Fusion Science (NIFS)- which is the Inter
University Institute and the coordinating Center of Excellence for academic fusion research
in Japan. We overview a simulation research at NIFS, in particular relation to experiments
in the Large Helical Device (LHD), the worlds largest superconducting heliotron device,
as a National Users facility (see Motojima et al. 2003). Our main goal is understanding
and systemizing the rich hierarchy of physical mechanisms in fusion plasmas, supported by
exploring a basic science of complexity of plasma as a highly nonlinear, non-equilibrium,
open system. The aim is to establish a simulation science as a new interdisciplinary field
by fostering collaborative research in utilizing the large-scale supercomputer simulators. A
concept of the hierarchy-renormalized simulation modelling will be invoked en route toward
the LHD numerical test reactor. Finally, a perspective role is given on the ITER Broad
Approach program at Rokkasho Center, as an integrated part of ITER and Development of
Fusion Energy Agreement.
References
Motojima, O. et al.: 2003, Nuclear Fusion, 43, 1674.
439

