In: Cangelosi A & Parisi D. (Eds.). Simulating the Evolution of Language, London: 
Springer, 2001 
  3   
excerpt from Chapter 1 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific 
Approach to the Study of Language Evolution 
Angelo Cangelosi and Domenico Parisi 
Introduction 
Language is such an important human characteristics that we would like to know 
how it first came into existence and how it managed to reach its present form. If we 
could go back in time for a sufficient number of generations we would encounter 
human ancestors that did not have language. In a succession of generations the 
descendants of those non-linguistic ancestors came to possess the ability to speak 
and to understand the speech of others. What made the transition possible? How 
did the transition occur? Were there intermediate forms of language in the sense of 
communication systems different from known animal communication systems but 
also different from language as we know it and as is spoken today by all humans? 
These questions constitute the scientific study of language origins and language 
evolution. The study of language origins does not directly include historical 
linguistics since this focuses on how human languages change historically and how 
new languages emerge from pre-existing languages, nor does it directly include the 
study of how language is acquired by children since they learn in an environment 
in which language already exists. The study of language origins and evolution is 
the study of how language emerges from a situation in which there is no language. 
However, both historical linguistics and the developmental psychology of language 
are concerned with causes, mechanisms, and processes of language change and 
with primitive forms of language such as pidgin, creole, and children’s languages. 
These disciplines can indirectly contribute to the study of language origins and 
evolution. 
The study of language origins and evolution clearly is an interdisciplinary field 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
(Knight, Studdert-Kennedy and Hurford, 2000; Hurford, Studdert-Kennedy and 
Knight, 1998; Harnad, Steklis and Lancaster, 1976). Evolutionary biology and the 
neurosciences are involved in this study because the human capacity of language 
has a genetic and a neural basis. Furthermore, as we have seen, historical 
linguistics and developmental psycholinguistics and, more generally, linguistics 
and psychology, may have something to say about language evolution. Finally, 
paleoanthropology and cultural anthropology are clearly relevant since language 
has evolved in human ancestors and, although it can have an evolved genetic basis, 
is culturally transmitted, i.e., learned from others, and it changes culturally 
(historically) from one generation to the next. 
The rich interdisciplinary basis of the study of language evolution can be an 
asset but also a liability since the various disciplines that contribute to this study 
tend to have different theoretical and methodological orientations and practices 
which are difficult to reconcile. But the real problem that makes the study of 
language origins and evolution a difficult and even problematic research field is 
that it is a field with a multitude of theories but a very limited, or even non-
existent, empirical basis. Language has emerged from non-language in the distant 
past and there is no direct trace of the event. Furthermore, the origin of language is 
an event that does not repeat itself and therefore cannot be observed. We can 
observe a child’s first acquisition of language and the emergence of pidgin/creole 
languages but these are different events, although somewhat related.  
How can we reconstruct the origin and evolutionary stages of human language 
given these difficulties? Since language is so important for defining what a human 
being is, human beings have a natural tendency to propose theories and 
evolutionary scenarios for its origin and evolution. But these theories inevitably 
tend to remain speculative because we don’t have the empirical evidence to 
confirm or disconfirm them or to choose among them. In the nineteenth century 
this situation persuaded the Société Linguistique de Paris to emit its famous ban on 
research and publication on the subject. Today we know much more about 
language, about mind and the brain, and about human ancestors than was known in 
the nineteenth century. But still the variety of different theories and interpretations 
of language origin and evolution that have at least initial plausibility is so great and 
the empirical basis for choosing among these different theories and interpretations 
so restricted that the study of language origins and evolution remains a somewhat 
dubious research field. Science is the production of theories about causes, 
mechanisms, and processes underlying the phenomena of reality and explaining 
them but a mature science cannot stop at theories. To be called scientific a theory 
must generate specific empirical predictions and these predictions must be 
compared with directly or indirectly observed facts. 
Theories of language origins and evolution not only are difficult to test 
empirically but they tend to be stated in such vague and general terms that these 
theories are unable to generate specific and detailed empirical predictions. 
Empirical predictions are the “interface” between theories and empirical reality. 
Science makes progress when this “interface” is extended and detailed. This is not 
the case for theories of language evolution. Hence, the problem of the objective 
scarcity of empirical evidence for such theories becomes even more serious 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
because the theories do not generate specific and detailed empirical predictions and 
they do not help the researcher to look for empirical evidence.  
It is this very problematic aspect of the study of language evolution which 
computer simulations can help us to overcome. Computer simulations are theories 
of the empirical phenomena that are simulated. Traditionally, scientific theories are 
expressed verbally or with the help of formal and mathematical symbols. 
Simulations are a novel way to express theories in science. Simulations are 
scientific theories expressed as computer programs. The program incorporates a set 
of hypotheses on the causes, mechanisms, and processes underlying the simulated 
phenomena and, when the program runs in the computer, the results of the 
simulations are the empirical predictions derived from the theory incorporated in 
the simulation. All this contributes to the development of a new approach to the 
study of the origins and evolution of language. 
A New Approach to the Study of Language 
Evolution: Computer Simulation 
The use of computer modeling and simulation in the natural and human sciences 
has greatly progressed in recent decades. This progress has been possible because 
of the availability of very efficient and low cost computers. The new 
methodological approach has also facilitated interdisciplinary research because the 
great memory and processing speed of computers make it possible to incorporate in 
one and the same simulation data and ideas from a variety of disciplines. For 
example, in cognitive science and artificial life the computer simulation 
methodology plays a major role in bringing together scientists from different 
disciplines. In the specific field of language evolution, simulation provides a 
complementary methodology that can help researchers to develop detailed and 
precise hypotheses on language origins and evolution and to test these hypotheses 
in the virtual experimental laboratory of the simulation. Various bits of empirical 
evidence such as observations and experiments on animal communication, fossil 
record analysis, genetics studies, and experimental psycholinguistic data can lead 
to the formulation of theories and predictions that can be verified through computer 
simulations. 
As we have said, a simulation is the implementation of a theory in a computer. 
A theory is a set of formal definitions and general assertions that describe and 
explain a class of phenomena. Examples of language evolution theories are those 
that identify a specific ability as the major factor explaining the origins of 
language, such as gestural communication (Armstrong, Stokoe and Wilcox, 1998), 
tool making (Parker and Gibson, 1979), vocalization and speech (Lieberman, 
1994), or symbol acquisition abilities (Deacon, 1997).  
Theories expressed as simulations possess three characteristics that may be 
crucial for progress in the study of language origins and evolution1. First, if one 
                                                        
1 Some of these characteristics will be discussed in more detail in the section on the 
advantages of simulation. 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
expresses one’s theory as a computer program the theory cannot but be explicit, 
detailed, consistent, and complete because, if it lacks these properties, the 
theory/program would not run in the computer and would not generate results. This 
is crucial for theories of language evolution because, as we have said, these 
theories tend to be stated in vague and general terms and, therefore, it is virtually 
impossible to determine if they are internally consistent and complete, that is, 
sufficient to explain the phenomena. Second, a theory expressed as a computer 
program necessarily generates a large number of detailed predictions because, as 
we have said, when the program runs in the computer, the simulation results are the 
predictions (even predictions not thought of by the researcher) derived from the 
theory. This is important for theories of language evolution because a large and 
diverse set of empirical predictions broadens and strengthens the usually restricted 
and weak interface between theory and data which characterizes these theories. 
Third, simulations are not only theories but also virtual experimental laboratories. 
As in a real experimental laboratory, a simulation, once constructed, will allow the 
researcher to observe phenomena under controlled conditions, to manipulate the 
conditions and variables that control the phenomena, and to determine the 
consequences of these manipulations. This is crucial for the study of language 
evolution not only because experimental manipulations yield a richer and more 
detailed set of observed empirical phenomena but because these manipulations 
allow the researcher to test hypotheses and ideas experimentally, which is 
otherwise entirely impossible if one is interested in long past events and 
phenomena such as those concerning the origins and evolution of language. 
Simulations not only implement general theories but they can implement a 
specific model derived from a theory, or some specific hypothesis. A model is a 
simplification of a general theory, or focuses on a specific aspect of the phenomena 
of interest. For example, there are formal models that seek to explain the necessary 
conditions for the evolution of syntactic communication (Nowak, Plotkin and 
Jansen, 2000), or that focus on the role of imitation of motor skills and the 
development and specialization of Broca cortical areas for language (Rizzolatti and 
Arbib, 1998). A computer simulation is a clearer and more practical way of 
expressing what a theory or a model says. This makes a theory or model more 
verifiable, because the execution of a computer program can easily identify the 
problems, inconsistencies, and incompleteness of the theory or model. Simulations 
also permit the discovery of new predictions that can (and must) be derived from a 
theory and the search of new (real) empirical data that can verify these predictions. 
Computer simulations are also important because they tend to be inherently 
quantitative research tools. Quantitative predictions derived from theories, 
quantitative descriptions of the empirical data, quantitative manipulations of 
variable and parameters controlling the observed phenomena, are critical features 
of a mature science. The natural sciences have made great progress in the last 3-4 
centuries not only because they have created an intense and detailed dialogue 
between theories and experiments but because empirical observations, predictions 
derived from theories, and experimental manipulations are all expressed in precise, 
quantitative terms. Quantification makes ideas and observations more objective 
and makes it possible for other people to replicate observations and experiments. 
Computer simulations tend to be quantitative. The simulated phenomena tend to be 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
described and analyzed in quantitative terms and the parameters and conditions 
controlling the phenomena that are manipulated by the researcher also tend to be 
quantitative. Furthermore, simulations can be repeated ad libitum, varying the 
initial conditions, and they make possible all sorts of statistical and reliability 
analyses.  
But simulations are not only a novel way of expressing scientific theories and 
not only virtual experimental laboratories. Simulations re-create reality, they are 
artificial reality. This is a property of simulations which can be very important for 
the study of language origins and evolution. The study of language origins and 
evolution is the study of long past and non-repeating phenomena that it is 
impossible for us to observe today. There is some empirical evidence available 
from which we can reconstruct these past events but it is only very indirect. From 
archeological evidence about ancient stone tools we can learn about the tool-
making skills of our ancestors (Davidson, 2000) and from the study of cranial 
bones we can speculate on their vocalization abilities (Lieberman, 1994). From 
observations of the communicative behavior of species that are closely related to 
humans, we can hypothesize about the communicative abilities of our ancestors 
(Savage-Rumbaugh, 1998) and reflect on the differences between human language 
and animal communication systems (Hauser, 1996). But as we have said, this is all 
indirect empirical evidence. The phenomena and events of language origin and 
evolution elude us. Computer simulations allow us to re-create these phenomena 
and events. To some extent, we can simulate the process of natural selection 
(Holland, 1975) and re-create possible evolutionary scenarios (natural 
environments, social groups, survival strategies) to directly test the validity of 
possible evolutionary explanations of the origins of language. We can observe the 
primitive form that this simulated language tends initially to assume and the 
changes which occur in successive forms due to both biological and cultural 
evolution. We can systematically study the adaptive advantages of different 
communication systems and the pre-conditions that make the evolutionary 
emergence of these communicative systems possible. 
With computer simulations researchers tend to adopt a synthetic strategy 
(Steels, 1997), which is quite different from classical scientific methodologies 
based on the analytic approach. In the natural sciences such as biology a top-down 
approach is often used. The organism is analyzed, i.e., divided up, into organs: 
brain, heart, lungs, etc. An organ is then divided up into different tissues, tissues 
are divided into cell types, and so on until the molecular and purely physical level 
is reached. In linguistics, language is analyzed, i.e., decomposed, into lexicon and 
syntactic principles, then lexical entries are divided up into morphemes and 
phonemes, and so on. A synthetic strategy uses a bottom-up and constructive 
approach. The researcher decides the basic components of a system, the rules by 
which these components interact and, possibly, the environment in which the 
components interact with each other or with the environment itself. The computer 
program will then simulate the interactions among the components and as a result 
of these interactions the researcher should be able of observing the emergence of 
the various higher-level entities with their properties and the different phenomena 
that involve these entities. With a simulation, the feasibility and validity of 
assumptions regarding components, their interaction rules, and the environment 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
can be tested. Wrong, incomplete, or inadequate assumptions will make it 
impossible to observe the emergence of higher-level entities or of entities that do 
not have realistic properties and do not exhibit realistic phenomena. The bottom-up 
approach of synthetic simulations also permits the study of problems and 
phenomena that are analytically intractable, such as those of complex and non-
linear systems – and language and evolution are typical complex systems (De Jong, 
1999). 
The synthetic methodologies that can be used to study the origins and evolution 
of language include evolutionary computation (Goldberg, 1989), neural networks 
(Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986; Levine, 2000), artificial life and synthetic 
ethology (Langton, 1995; Parisi, 1997) and rule-based agents (Kirby, 1999). In this 
book we are not restricting the use of the term simulation only to software 
implementation of models. We also include embodied simulations, which are 
hardware-based models such as robots. In fact, various robotic models for studying 
the evolution of communication and language have been developed (Steels and 
Vogt, 1997; Steels and Kaplan, 1998; Billard and Dautenhahn, 1999). All these 
methods will be described in detail in Chapter 2. In the next paragraph we look at 
the advantages and limitations of simulation. 
….. 
Advantages of simulation  
1. Simulations as virtual experimental laboratories 
2. Simulations as tools for testing the internal validity of theories 
3. Simulations as tools for studying language as a complex 
system 
Limits of simulation 
1. Simplification  
2. Arbitrariness of assumptions and details 
3. Difficult external validation  
….. 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
Simulation Approaches to the Evolution of 
Language 
The study of the origins and evolution of language and communication has a broad 
range of issues to address. These research questions spread along different 
continua. First, the differentiation between language and communication can be 
used to stress different levels of complexity in the communication medium. The 
study of the evolution of communication mostly focuses on simple animal 
communication systems, such as monkeys’ calls or honeybees’ dance. It 
investigates, for example, the adaptive role of communication in groups of animals. 
The evolution of language mainly refers to human languages, and focuses on their 
inherent complexity, such as syntax. However, this distinction is not always a very 
significant one, because of the large overlap between research aims in the 
evolution of language and of communication. Indeed, the study of language is 
inherently connected to the evolution of animal communication. 
Language/communication issues lie along the same continuum. 
Secondly, some differences exist between the study of the origins of language 
and that of the evolution of language. Research on the origins of language 
concentrates on the particular spatial (e.g., geographical), temporal (e.g., 
historical), individual (e.g., neural, cognitive) and social conditions that might have 
favored the beginning of language. The issue of the evolution of language is a 
broader one, and deals with the continuity in animal communication systems and 
human language, the historical changes of languages and differentiation of 
language families, and the adaptive, behavioral, neural, and social aspects of 
language. In fact, evolution includes the study of the origins of language, along 
with all other evolutionary and historical aspects.  
Current simulation models of language evolution have dealt with various 
research issues along these continua. This book presents a variety of approaches 
that focus on these issues. The volume is organized into seven parts. The first part, 
which includes this chapter, gives a general introduction to computer simulation in 
the study of language evolution and to the various methods and techniques. The 
various research questions will be addressed in the following five parts: (Part II) 
the evolution of simple signaling systems; (Part III) the emergence of syntax and 
syntactic universals; (Part IV) the sensorimotor grounding of symbols in evolving 
language systems; (Part V) the neural and behavioral factors in language use, 
evolution, and origins; (Part VI) the role of auto-organization and dynamical 
factors in the emergence of linguistic systems. In the final part, the concluding 
chapter suggests ways in which current studies of primate communication, 
including humans, may broaden the empirical base for future simulation 
approaches to language evolution. 
Introduction to simulation methods 
In Chapter 2 Huck Turner introduces the reader not familiar with computational 
methods to the different simulation techniques used in language evolution. 
Methods are grouped into two sections, one for the representation of the individual 
agents, and one for the learning and interaction algorithms. The agent 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
representation methods serve to control the behavior of the agents. These include 
symbolic rules and neural networks. The interaction amongst agents is 
implemented through learning techniques (rule generalization, obverter, imitation, 
self-understanding), evolutionary algorithms (genetic algorithms, game theory, 
synthetic ethology) and robotics. In the second part of the chapter the author gives 
some comments on the implications of these methods for language evolution issues 
such as innateness and adaptive benefits.  
The evolution of signaling systems: adaptive, phonetic, and 
diversity factors 
The chapters in Part I focus on the evolution of simple signaling systems. The 
emergence of shared communication in animal-like groups can be seen as a 
preliminary stage towards the emergence of more complex human languages. The 
simulation of simple signaling systems can help the understanding of various 
factors in language evolution. In particular, the three chapters look (a) at the 
adaptive factors in signaling systems, (b) at the emergence of a shared speech 
systems, and (c) at the formation of dialects. 
Chapter 3 investigates the selective pressures which affect the origin, 
organization, and maintenance of shared signaling systems. Jason Noble, Ezequiel 
Di Paolo and Seth Bullock present a series of simulations which model the 
evolution of populations of individuals interacting in shared environments.  This 
evolutionary simulation modeling approach is presented as a way of augmenting 
conventional game theoretic and mathematical models, allowing modelers to 
explore aspects of signaling system evolution that would otherwise remain cryptic. 
First, evolutionary simulation models address trajectories of evolutionary change, 
revealing how model populations change over evolutionary time, perhaps reaching 
one equilibrium or another, perhaps cycling endlessly, etc.  Second, these models 
help us to understand the relationship between the high-level phenomena exhibited 
by signaling systems and the low-level behaviors of the individual signalers and 
receivers that constitute these systems. 
The three main questions addressed by Noble et al. are the role of ecological 
feedback, the handicap principle in honest signaling, and the use of communication 
in animal contests.  Ecological factors such as the spatial distribution of individuals 
and the presence of noise are shown to have non-trivial implications for the 
evolution of altruistic communication.  In a first model, action-response games in 
which signalers and receivers suffer a conflict of interest are simulated.  Results 
show that evolutionary pressures bring about a spatial organization of the 
population which itself alters the selective pressures of the model such that 
altruism is supported.  A second simulation investigates Zahavi’s (1975) handicap 
principle, where extravagant displays such as colorful tail feathers are thought to 
be adaptive because their costliness guarantees trustworthiness. In particular, the 
authors investigate the evolutionary attainability of handicap signaling equilibria 
from appropriate initial conditions. Simulations suggest that although there exist 
scenarios in which signaling systems with any degree of exaggeration are 
evolutionarily stable, only those signaling systems which exhibit high degrees of 
exaggeration are likely to be evolutionarily attainable by populations evolving 
from reasonable initial conditions.  In a final model, Noble et al. describe a 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
continuous-time simulation of animal contests.  This tests Enquist’s hypothesis 
(1985) that weak animals cannot afford to risk commencing a fight and 
communicate this honestly.  Simulation results reject Enquist's explanation because 
it is based on an implausible discrete model of animal contests. 
A quite different aspect of the evolution of signaling systems is investigated in 
Chapter 4. Bart de Boer focuses on the form of signaling systems, i.e., speech 
sounds, rather than on the content and reliability of communication. He first 
reviews the different approaches to modeling speech systems and discusses the 
advantages of a modeling approach that combines genetic algorithms and language 
games. Subsequently, de Boer presents a population-based language game model 
of the emergence of a shared vowel system. Simulation results show that there is a 
significant bias towards the emergence of optimal vowel systems that closely 
reflects the frequency and structure of human language vowel systems. 
The author favors an explanation of the evolution of language speech universals 
based on the functional optimizations of communication over noisy channels. For 
example, it is shown that the frequency of vowel occurrence in human language 
reflects the optimization of acoustic distinctiveness. This functional explanation is 
proposed as an alternative to the view that speech universals are a reflection of 
innate human linguistic abilities, and to the historical explanation of relatedness 
between human languages. 
The evolution of dialect and linguistic diversity is presented in Chapter 5. 
Daniel Livingstone uses simulation models to inform the debate on the two 
existing opposite explanations of the role of dialect diversity. The first hypothesis 
is that dialects cannot be an accident of natural selection and, therefore, must have 
a purpose. The second explanation argues that the processes of language learning 
and transmission provide sufficient means to explain language diversity. 
Livingstone first reviews the different modeling approaches to the development 
of linguistic diversity, including both mathematical and computer simulation 
models. In particular, he criticizes Nettle’s models of dialect formation (Nettle, 
1999; Nettle and Dunbar, 1997) for the use of language acquisition rules based on 
explicit averaging and thresholding processes. Livingstone argues that these 
explicit mechanisms bias Nettle’s results on the evolution of diversity and its 
explanation based on social status influences. 
The author describes simulations in which communicating agents are spatially 
organized, but no social relationships exist between them. In a first simulation, 
agents learn an abstract signaling system. This model shows that dialect continua 
form depending on the patterns of spatial organization of individuals. For instance, 
larger neighboring sizes reduce the number of distinct dialects. The second model 
is an extension of de Boer’s simulation of evolving vowel system (see Chapter 4). 
This new simulation again shows the emergence of vowel dialect continua, due to 
the geographically limited interactions allowed between agents. It supports the 
general view that language diversity arises as part of the auto-organization process 
of language evolution and transmission. 
The emergence of syntax and syntactic universals 
The three chapters in Part II investigate the emergence and use of syntactic 
structures. Most of the chapters in this book deal with the emergence of syntax and 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
syntactic structures, along with other aspects of the evolution of language such as 
lexicon formation. The three included in this section mainly focus on the 
emergence of syntactic universals such as compositionality, the population 
dynamics of grammar acquisition, and the role of sequential learning. Moreover, 
the authors employ a variety of simulation approaches also in conjunction with 
other formal and experimental methods. 
The emergent properties of syntactic universals such as compositionality are 
explored in Chapter 6. Simon Kirby and Jim Hurford give an overview of the 
Iterated Learning Model (ILM) that they have used with other collaborators to 
simulate the emergence of linguistic structure. The ILM is presented as a general 
approach to simulate the process of glossogenesis, i.e., the cultural transmission of 
language in populations of interacting agents. Each agent is able to learn a 
meaning-signal mapping (1) from being exposed to the training data (E-language) 
produced by other agents and (2) through its ability to identify regularities in the 
language via neural networks or rule inference systems. In ILM simulations the 
agents are initialized without any linguistic system whatsoever and after many 
(thousands) learning iterations a stable (but potentially dynamic) language system 
is reached 
The authors present various simulations of the ILM. In a first model neural 
network learning agents are used for the emergence of expressive and stable 
meaning-signal mappings. Symbolic rule-based agents are used to simulate the 
emergence of compositionality and recursion “out of learning”. A final simulation 
studies the interaction between the process of glossogenesis and that of phylogeny 
and shows that functional pressures bias the initial setting of grammatical 
Principles. Overall all these simulations show that much of the structure of 
language is emergent. In particular, most fundamental features of human language 
can be explained as by-products of the pressures on language transmission, without 
necessary reference to communication. 
A mathematical model of the population dynamics of the acquisition of 
grammar is presented in Chapter 7. Natalia Komarova and Martin Nowak use a 
rigorous definition of grammar and formalize the process of grammar learning in 
evolving populations. Three factors are manipulated to study the evolution of 
shared coherent grammars: search space, learning mechanism, and learning 
examples. The search space refers to the “pre-formed linguistic theory” of a child, 
or the “universal grammar” that, according to Chomsky, specifies the form of 
possible human grammars.  The learning mechanism is the algorithm that children 
use to evaluate the available linguistic data in order to deduce the appropriate 
grammatical rules; since the actual learning mechanism in humans is unknown, 
two model grammar learning mechanisms are used, namely memoryless and batch 
learning; they provide the lower and the upper bound on the efficiency of the 
mechanism used by children. The effects of varying the number of learning 
interactions are also studied.  
The key result of this model is the finding of a “coherence threshold”. It turns 
out that in order to facilitate successful communication, i.e., to maintain 
grammatical coherence, the learning accuracy of children must be sufficiently high. 
Below this threshold no common grammar can evolve in a population. Above the 
threshold, coherent grammatical systems manifest themselves as stable equilibria. 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
The analyses of the threshold condition relate the maximum complexity of the 
grammars’ search space to the number of learning interactions and the performance 
of the learning mechanism. Only a universal grammar that operates above this 
threshold can induce and maintain successful communication in a population. 
Komarova and Nowak also extend their model to include variants of universal 
grammars and natural selection amongst them. 
The interaction between general cognitive limitations in sequential learning and 
their resulting linguistic by-products, such as word order constraints, is discussed 
in Chapter 8. Morten Christiansen and collaborators present a multi-
methodological approach to the investigation of the role of sequential learning in 
language acquisition and evolution. Sequential learning is defined as the 
acquisition of hierarchically organized structure in which combinations of 
primitive elements can themselves become primitives for further higher-level 
combinations. The authors propose artificial language learning as a complementary 
paradigm for testing hypothesis about language evolution. This method permits the 
investigation of language learning abilities in infants, children, adults, and also 
computational models such as artificial neural networks. Subjects are trained on 
artificial language with particular structural constraints on word order, and then 
their knowledge of language is tested.  
The results of these experimental and modeling studies demonstrate how 
constraints on basic word order and complex question formation are a by-product 
of underlying general cognitive limitations on sequential learning. In general this 
suggests how many constraints on language development are a consequence of 
limitations on cognitive abilities. This view is further supported by converging 
evidence from studies with aphasic patients, literature on primate cognition, and 
other computational models. 
The grounding of symbols in evolving languages 
The issue of the sensorimotor grounding of symbols is of central interest in 
language evolution research. It involves questions such as: How do symbols 
acquire their meaning? How do different individuals autonomously ground 
sufficiently similar representations that allow them to share a common lexicon? Is 
there a single mechanism for the symbol grounding, whereby all symbols are 
directly grounded to object in the world during language acquisition? Or are there 
other others complementary mechanisms for the transfer of grounding?  
Language evolution models differ in the way they approach (or avoid) the 
problem of grounding symbols into sensorimotor representations and objects in the 
world. Some simulations do not include any direct grounding of evolving symbols, 
and assume symbols are virtually grounded. The modeler has the interpretative 
power of linking the symbols of an evolving language with external objects. Other 
simulations have directly confronted symbol grounding. In these models the 
strategy for grounding symbols in reality is an integral part of the system and 
becomes one of the various factors in how language evolves. Two models that 
directly deal with the problem of symbol grounding in evolving language systems 
are included in the book. They show the importance of sensorimotor grounding and 
its potential contribution to the explanation of the origins of language. 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
In Chapter 9, Angelo Cangelosi, Alberto Greco and Stevan Harnad discuss the 
different definitions of a symbol and explain their implications for the symbol 
grounding problem in cognitive and linguistic models. The authors propose 
categorical perception (the compression of perceived similarities within categories 
and the expansion of perceived differences between categories as a side-effect of 
learning) as a unifying theoretical and computational framework for understanding 
the cognitive mechanisms of category learning and the acquisition of grounded 
symbols. Category learning and symbol grounding are based on a series of 
processes by which individuals (i) first transform categorical representations (i.e., 
filtered features of internal sensorimotor projections of objects) into grounded low-
level symbols (i.e., the names of basic categories), and (ii) subsequently learn new 
higher-level symbols through Boolean combination of already-grounded symbols. 
All these processes are shown to be possible in a neural network model for the 
categorization and naming of geometrical shapes. 
A simulation model that tests the “symbolic theft” hypothesis of the origins of 
language is also presented. The “symbolic theft” strategy refers to the linguistic 
acquisition of new categories by hearsay. New categories are defined as 
propositions consisting of Boolean combination of already-grounded categories. In 
contrast, the “sensorimotor toil” strategy for acquiring new categories is based on 
direct, real-time trial-and-error experience with the objects, guided by corrective 
feedback from the consequences of categorization and miscategorization. In 
competition, symbolic theft is always found to outperform sensorimotor toil. The 
picture of language origins and evolution that emerges from this hypothesis is that 
of a powerful hybrid symbolic/sensorimotor capacity. Initially, organisms evolved 
an ability to detect some categories of the world through direct sensorimotor toil. 
Category “names” were, originally, whatever differential instrumental action it was 
adaptive to perform on them (e.g., eat, mate, attack, carry, nurse, etc.). These 
analog actions may then have done some double duty in communication and been 
simplified by social convention into arbitrary names. Subsequently, some 
organisms may have experimented with stringing combinations of the names of 
those categories and discovered the advantage of this new way of acquiring and 
conveying categories: “stealing” them via hearsay instead of doing it the hard way. 
This hypothesis is tested in a computational model where two populations of 
organisms can learn new categories through sensorimotor toil or symbolic theft. 
The results clearly show the adaptive superiority of category learning by theft over 
toil, as well as the effect of categorical perception phenomena in language learning. 
This helps to explain the adaptive advantage of symbolic theft over direct 
sensorimotor toil and its role in the origins of language. 
A slightly different approach to the evolution of grounded symbols is proposed 
by Luc Steels in Chapter 10. He presents a complex and innovative approach to the 
problem of sensorimotor symbol grounding in groups of robots and Internet agents. 
The robotic setup consists of a set of “Talking Heads” connected through the 
Internet. Each Talking Head features a rotating video camera, a computer for the 
cognitive processing of perception, categorization, and language, and devices for 
audio input and output. Agents can load themselves in a physical Talking Head and 
teleport themselves to another Head by traveling through the Internet.  
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
Steels stresses the importance of representations used by a cognitive agent that 
are directly grounded in external reality through a sensorimotor apparatus. These 
representations need to be sufficiently similar to those used by other agents in the 
group. They will enable coordinated actions and shared communication. In this 
system, each agent autonomously acquires internally grounded representations. 
Steels argues that language plays a crucial role in the learning of similar grounded 
representations because it is a source of feedback and constrains the degrees of 
freedom of the representations used in the group. Evolutionary language games are 
introduced as a framework for concretizing the structural coupling between 
concept formation and symbol acquisition. An example experiment with physical 
robots is discussed in detail to show how grounded representations emerge. 
Behavioral and neural factors in language use, evolution, and 
origins 
Some theories and models of the evolution of language focus on the interaction 
between linguistic abilities and other behavioral and cognitive skills. For example, 
it has been hypothesized that there is a strict interdependence between the origins 
of language and those of other motor skills, such as hand signing, or the ability to 
imitate motor actions from others. Moreover, in these motor theories of language 
origins great importance is given to the neural control of motor behavior. In other 
theories, the evolution of language and cognitive skills are hypothesized to be 
strictly interdependent. The chapters in this section will present two of these 
theories that show the strict interaction between the evolution of language and 
other behavioral abilities, and the neural control of both systems. 
In Chapter 11 Michael Arbib proposes the view that the human brain and body 
have been evolutionarily shaped to be language-ready. As a consequence, the 
variety of human languages evolved culturally, as a more or less cumulative set of 
inventions. In particular, the author proposes the Mirror System hypothesis of the 
evolution of language. That is, speech derived from an ancient gestural system 
based on the mirror mechanism: the link between observer and actor became, in 
speech, a link between the sender and the receiver of messages. 
Arbib introduces computational models of monkey mechanisms for the control 
of grasping and for the mirror system of grasping. The proposed FARS model of 
visually-directed grasping in monkeys is used to ground the study of the evolution 
of the human brain upon a detailed understanding of the brain of monkeys and of 
our common ancestors. The chapter offers a very detailed exposition of the mirror 
system hypothesis. Arbib has postulated that the progression from grasp to 
language through primate and hominid evolution proceeded via seven stages: 
grasping, a mirror system for grasping, a “simple” imitation system, a “complex” 
imitation system, a manual-based communication system, protospeech, and 
language. During the discussion of such transitions between stages the author goes 
“beyond the mirror” to offer more detailed hypotheses about the evolution of the 
language-ready brain.  
In Chapter 12, Domenico Parisi and Angelo Cangelosi suggest that a unified 
computer simulation scenario can be used to try to answer three research questions: 
(i) What is the origin and past history of the ability to speak in the individual? (ii) 
What is the origin and past history of the ability to speak in the species? (iii) What 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
is the origin and past history of the particular language spoken by the social group 
of which the individual is a member? That is, simulations should simultaneously 
include phenomena of language development, evolution, and historical changes. 
The proposed scenario is based on the interaction between the process of biological 
evolution and adaptation (simulated through evolutionary computation algorithms), 
the process of ontogenetic acquisition of language (through neural network 
learning), and the process of cultural transmission of linguistic knowledge (through 
cultural learning between organisms). This approach also permits investigation of 
the effects of behavioral, cognitive, and neural factors in the evolution, learning, 
and transmission of language. 
To show how such a scenario can be used to study language evolution, the 
authors discuss three simulations that include lexicons of various complexity (from 
single-signal communication to compositional languages) and learning and 
interaction patterns of increasing complexity (from genetically-inherited signals to 
culturally-learned words). In particular, attention is placed on the interaction 
between behavioral and neural factors in the evolution of language. For example, 
results show that the evolution of good categorization abilities (to discriminate 
essential foraging stimuli) favors the emergence of optimal lexicons that 
discriminate between these categories. At the same time, language has a positive 
effect on categorization because it improves the neural network’s categorization by 
optimizing its internal representation of categories. Moreover, in compositional 
languages using verb-noun structure, verbs have a larger positive effect on 
performance than nouns and this is reflected in their neural representation.  
Auto-organization and dynamic factors 
This part contains two chapters that discuss in depth the role of auto-organization 
and dynamical processes in the emergence of language structure. Language is seen 
as a complex dynamical system whose functioning depends on the interaction of 
autonomous individuals. The communicative behaviors of these individuals 
determine the dynamic auto-organization of complex linguistic phenomena. The 
communication between language users affects the concurrent and interlaced 
development of categories (meanings) and words (forms).  
The processes of the auto-organization and emergence of shared language 
structure such as lexicons and grammars are thoroughly discussed in Chapter 13 by 
Ed Hutchins and Brian Hazlehurst. Emergent linguistic structures result from the 
organized interactions of patterns that are present in the initial conditions or are 
produced in the history of interactions within the models. Positive feedback loops 
control this process, which is capable of creating novel and complex structures. 
However, researchers can take different stances regarding the elements of language 
(Meanings, Referents and Forms) and the relations among those elements (e.g., 
arbitrariness in Forms-Referents associations). Hutchins and Hazlehurst consider 
three major frameworks for modeling the emergence of shared lexicons and 
grammars: (a) Expression/Induction, (b) Form-Tuning and (c) Embodied guessing 
games. For example, in models of the emergence of lexicons, researchers that use 
the Expression/Induction approach start with a closed set of forms and meanings to 
evolve shared form-meaning mappings. Following the Form-Tuning framework, 
employed by the same authors, the set of forms is not pre-determined and is made 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
dependent on the organization and sharing of sensory-motor experiences. With the 
Embodied language game approach the most complex representation of meanings 
is used together with a set of closed and arbitrary forms.  
Hutchins and Hazlehurst argue that Expression/Induction models are limited 
because these assume that complex structured meanings simply exist prior to the 
language phenomena that emerge later. This assumption is inherited from the 
physical symbol system hypothesis which posits that intelligent processes 
(including language) are realized through internal manipulation of language 
structure. The private language of thought (meanings) arises prior to, and 
independently of, the public language. In contraposition, the Form-Tuning and the 
Embodied frameworks view the evolutionary development of language and 
cognitive abilities to be strictly interdependent on each other. This supports a 
cultural symbol system hypothesis in which public symbols arise concurrently with 
the internal meaning structures with which they are coordinated. 
Language is characterized as a complex system in the work of Takashi 
Hashimoto (Chapter 14). As such, language is regarded as an essentially dynamic 
system. There are four dynamic processes that are of interest in the study of 
language evolution: (a) the origin of first linguistic systems, (b) the evolution of 
various languages and language structures, (c) the development and acquisition of 
language in children and adults, and (d) the sense-making process of giving 
meanings to words during communication. In addition, the language dynamics 
depend on the subjectivity of individual language users. Complex linguistic 
structures will emerge from the interaction of such dynamical and subjective 
processes. 
To understand such a complex dynamical system the constructive approach of 
computer simulation is proposed. This permits the modeling of the interaction of 
the individual activities of speaking, listening and understanding that contribute to 
the emergence of dynamical language structure. Hashimoto presents various 
simulations using this constructive approach. For example, he models the sense-
making activity as the formation of a web of relationships between words through 
conversation between individuals. The analysis of the dynamics of the formation of 
word clusters (categories) shows the coexistence of global stability (closed 
categories with rigid links) and local adaptability (prototype categories with 
changeable, gradual links) depending on the use of words during communication. 
Subsequently, the integration of word-web categorizations into a system with 
evolving grammatical structures causes the emergence of a bigger variety of word-
web categories. Hashimoto’s work supports the view that the essence of language 
relies on a series of internal mental processes and on a series of conversations. 
Simulation and empirical research 
In the concluding chapter Michael Tomasello suggests a direction for computer 
simulations of language evolution. He acknowledges that there is not much directly 
comparable evidence on the ancient past facts of the origins and evolution of 
language. However, there are a number of processes that are currently ongoing in 
the real world that were very likely to have been involved in the evolution of 
language. These processes regard non-human primate communication, child 
language acquisition, imitation and cultural learning, and language change 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
mechanisms such as pidginization and creolization. Most of these processes are 
studied empirically, with observational and experimental techniques. Some of the 
researchers using computer simulations have already attempted to benefit from 
recent research, sometimes by directly comparing simulation research with 
empirical data. Following this approach Tomasello suggests that computer 
simulations “can only make real progress with at least a little bit of back-
propagation from facts about the way these processes operate in the real-world”. 
This can create a “virtuous circle”: research-informed simulations will produce 
new predictions and insight into the evolution of language; experimental studies 
will verify these predictions leading to new insights that will then produce better 
simulations, and so on.  
Tomasello also claims that experimental and simulation studies on the origins 
and evolution of language require attention to three distinct time frames: 
evolutionary, historical, and ontogenetic. For each of these dimensions, he 
proposes a series of ideas. In evolution, to investigate human ability to use 
language we must look at human ability to understand others as intentional agents. 
In historical terms, processes such as grammaticalization suggests that 
constructions of individual languages have been built up by groups of people 
communicating with one another under the general constraints of human cognition, 
communication, and vocal-auditory processing. In ontogeny, young children 
themselves create linguistic abstractions, such as word classes, by using general 
cognitive and social-cognitive skills. 
Other approaches 
This book contains a collection of some of the current simulative work in the 
evolution of language. However, it is not meant to cover all simulation approaches 
to the evolution of language and all issues addressed through computational 
modeling. The editors have tried to cover broadly the full range of simulation 
methodologies, and the range of different research issues. However, we want to 
acknowledge explicitly other work that has not been possible to include in the 
book. Among the many computational models, we would like to mention the early 
simulations on the evolution of communication by Hurford (1991), MacLennan 
(1992), Werner and Dyer (1994), Ackley and Littman (1994), more recent models 
by Saunders and Pollack (1996), Arita and Taylor (1996), Oliphant (1996; 1999), 
Wagner (2000), Grim, St Denis and Kokalis (2001), the recent models of the 
evolution of syntax (Briscoe, 2000; Teal and Taylor, 2000), the robotic approach of 
Billard and Dautenhahn (1999), the computational modeling of primate social 
intelligence (Worden, 1996), the connectionist simulation of historical changes in 
English morphology (Hare and Elman, 1995), and other models of language 
diversity (Nettle, 1999; Nettle and Dunbar, 1997). The reader will find references 
to such models in the various book chapters. 
Computer Simulation: A New Scientific Approach  
Conclusions 
Among the advantages of computer simulation in language evolution research we 
have stressed the feasibility of synthetic methodologies as new scientific tools for 
studying language as a complex dynamical system. The theme that language is a 
complex system, whose functioning is due to bottom-up and non-linear interactions 
of local components, is common to the various chapters in this book.  
Concepts typical of the study of complex systems, such as that of emergence, 
auto-organization, and interaction will be used over and over again. A first 
common thread that links the variety of approaches, models and theories presented 
in the chapters is that of the emergence of language (see also Knight et al., 2000). 
Most of the chapters claim and show that linguistic behaviors, structures and 
processes emerge due to the interaction between the components of complex 
systems. These components are constituted by interacting autonomous agents, their 
neural, sensorimotor, cognitive and communication abilities, and their social and 
physical environment. Computer simulation permits fine analyses for the 
investigation of the role of such components in the process of the evolutionary 
emergence of language. This volume, and in general the simulation research on the 
evolution of language, provide a long series of examples of the analysis of 
emergent linguistic behavior and structure. Shared vowel systems are shown to 
emerge because of their optimality and discriminatory features (Chapter 4), dialect 
continua emerge due to spatial organization of agents (Chapter 5), shared 
representations for sensorimotor grounding emerge through interacting language 
games between simulated and robotic agents (Chapters 9, 10 and 13), 
compositional linguistic structures emerge due to learning bottleneck (Chapter 6), 
and shared word categories emerge from internal mental processes and 
conversational games (Chapter 14). 
A second common thread that connects most chapters in this volume is the 
strict interaction and interdependence between language and the other non-
linguistic abilities and characteristics of the organisms and their environment. The 
study of the origins of language needs to look at the way other non-linguistic and 
non-communicative factors can have affected language evolution. Various chapters 
show that general cognitive constraints such as sequential learning can explain the 
evolution of word order constraints (Chapter 8), that our ancestors’ behavioral and 
neural structures, such as the mirror system for grasping, can have shaped the 
evolution of the language-ready brain (Chapter 11), that sensorimotor and 
categorization abilities favor the evolution of language and contribute to the 
formation of word classes (Chapter 12). The interaction between language and 
general adaptive and population dynamics factors are analyzed in simulations on 
the evolution of simple signaling systems (Chapter 3) and in a mathematical model 
of the evolution of universal grammar (Chapter 7). 
The final common theme of this volume is the relation between simulation 
studies and empirical research. At present, not many computer models make direct 
comparisons between simulation results and available empirical evidence, although 
simulations tend to be constrained on empirical research. In this volume, only few 
chapters systematically compare simulation and experimental data. For example, 
the evolved vowel system of simulations on the emergence of speech is compared 
 Simulating the Evolution of Language 
with that of humans (Chapter 4), and the performance of neural networks in 
artificial language learning is directly compared with human subjects’ data 
(Chapter 8). All other chapters look at available empirical evidence to define the 
parameters of models and to make some indirect comparisons between simulation 
results and published literature data. As Tomasello highlights in the final chapter, 
the simulation approach to language evolution can make real and significant 
progress if it directly looks at known facts related to language evolution, such as 
non-human primate communication, child language acquisition, imitation and 
cultural learning, and language change processes. 
References 
Ackley DH, Littman ML (1994) Altruism in the evolution of communication. In: Brooks R, 
Maes P (eds) Proceedings of the Fourth Artificial Life Workshop. MIT Press, Cambridge 
Arbib MA (ed) (1995) The handbook of brain theory and neural networks, A Bradford 
Book/The MIT Press, Cambridge 
Arita T, Taylor CE (1996) A simple model for the evolution of communication. In: Fogel 
LJ, Angeline PJ, Bäck T (eds) Evolutionary Programming V, MIT Press, Cambridge 
Armstrong DF, Stokoe WC, Wilcox SE (eds) (1998). Gesture and the nature of language. 
Cambridge University Press 
Billard A, Dautenhahn K (1999) Experiments in learning by imitation: Grounding and use of 
communication in robotic agents. Adaptive Behavior, 7: 415-438 
Briscoe EJ (2000) Grammatical acquisition: Inductive bias and coevolution of language and 
the language acquisition device. Language, 76: 245-296 
Cangelosi A, Parisi D (1998) The emergence of a ‘language’ in an evolving population of 
neural networks. Connection Science, 10: 83-97 
Cangelosi A, Parisi D (2001). How nouns and verbs differentially affect the behavior of 
artificial organisms. In Moore JD, Stenning K (eds), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual 
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp 170-175 
Cavalli Sforza LL (2000) Genes, peoples and languages. Penguin Press. 
Churchland PS, Sejnowski TJ (1994) The computational brain. MIT Press 
Davidson I (2000) Tools, language and the origins of culture. In: Dessalles JL, Ghadakpour 
L (eds) Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on the Evolution of Language 
de Boer B (2000), Self organization in vowel systems. Journal of Phonetics, 28: 441-465 
de Jong ED (1999) Analyzing the evolution of communication from a dynamical systems 
perspective. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Artificial Life ECAL'99. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp 689-693 
Deacon TW (1997) The symbolic species: The coevolution of language and human brain. 
Penguin, London. 
Di Paolo EA, Noble J, Bullock S (2000) Simulation models as opaque thought experiments 
In: Bedau MA, McCaskill JS, Packard NH, Rasmussen S (eds) Artificial Life VII: 
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Artificial Life. MIT Press, 
Cambridge MA, pp 497-506 
Goldberg DE (1989) Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine learning. 
Addison-Wesley 
Grim P, St. Denis P, Kokalis T (2001) Learning to communicate: The emergence of 
signaling in spatialized arrays of neural nets. Technical Report, Department of Philosophy, 
SUNY at Stony Brooks 

