 1 
 
 
 
 
Report from the Joint ASCR/BERAC Subcommittee on  
Modeling and Simulation for GTL: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Toward the Development of  
Predictive Theory and Modeling in Biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rick Stevens, Argonne-UChicago (co-chair) 
John Wooley, UCSD (co-chair) 
Michael Banda, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab 
David Galas, Battelle and ISB 
Keith Hodgson, Stanford 
David Kingsbury, Moore Foundation 
Chris Somerville, Carnegie Institution 
Barbara Wold, Caltech 
Thomas Zacharia, Oak Ridge-UT 
 
 
 
 2 
Executive Summary 
 
A joint ASCAC/BERAC panel, responding to a charge from the Office of Science, has 
been analyzing how best to address issues relating to the development of computational 
models for the DOE Genomics: GTL Program.  The general issues concern the goals of 
the joint program office effort, the barriers to success, and strategies for overcoming 
these barriers.  Following preliminary discussions, the panel identified a team of experts 
from the community to participate with the panel in a two-day workshop (in October 
2007) to discuss the status of current research and potential goals for the future.  The 
panel observed that there has been substantial progress over the past five years in 
developing techniques for building computational models (e.g., for metabolic and 
regulatory networks) of microbes, for analysis of high-throughput datasets, and for the 
integration and visualization of biological datasets.   Given the capability of experimental 
techniques, the sustained progress in computational capabilities, the status of Genomics: 
GTL projects and the mission of DOE, the panel concluded that further progress is highly 
likely and  will be important for the goals of Genomics: GTL Program.  Progress can 
most readily be accelerated through a focused, joint effort within the Office of Science. 
The panel makes six recommendations for advancing the program and addressing the 
questions raised in the charge. 
 
• The ten-year OMB PART goal for ASCR for the joint modeling and simulation activity of 
ASCR and BER should be modified for both ASCR and BER to read as follows: 
(ASCR/BER) By 2018, validate capability to predict phenotype from an organism’s 
genome and to predict genotype from an organism’s physiology  
 
This PART goal should be accompanied by a specific set of progress metrics. 
 
• DOE should develop an explicit research program aimed at achieving significant 
progress on the overarching goal of predictive modeling and simulation in DOE relevant 
biological systems. This program should be a joint effort between ASCR and BER and 
should include a diversity of modeling approaches. 
 
• DOE should establish an annual conference that focuses on highlighting the progress in 
predictive modeling in biological systems. This should be an open meeting and separate 
from any programmatic PI meeting. 
 
• The DOE GTL modeling and simulation research program should be supported by an 
explicit series of investments in modeling technology, databases, algorithms, and 
software infrastructure needed to address the computational challenges.  
 
DOE should establish a mechanism to fund the long-term curation and integration of 
genomics and related datasets (annotations, metabolic reconstructions, expression data, 
whole genome screens, phenotype data, etc.) to support, in particular, the needs of 
modeling and simulation in areas of energy and the environment that are not well 
supported by NSF and NIH, as well as enabling biological research in general.   
 3 
• DOE should work with the community to identify novel scientific opportunities for 
connecting modeling and simulation at the organism level to modeling and simulation at 
other spatial and temporal scales. 
 
 
 4 
 
Introduction  
 
The joint ASCR-BER AC panel was chartered by Dr. Ray Orbach in February 2007 to 
address three questions posed in the charge letter (reproduced at the end of this report). 
 
The overall charge was to address the issue of computational models for GTL and how 
progress could be accelerated through targeted investments in applied mathematics, 
computer science, and computational biology. Specifically, the panel was asked to 
address the following questions: 
 
1. Is the current ASCR long-term goal too ambitious given the status and buy-in 
from the community? 
 
2. What intermediate goals might be more relevant to the two programs?  
 
3. What are the key computational obstacles to developing computer models 
necessary to characterize and engineer microbes for DOE missions such as 
biofuels and bioremediation? 
 
The joint subcommittee met for two days in October at the Moore Foundation to hear 
presentations from researchers on the state of the art of modeling and simulation of 
microbial organisms and to hear projections of what might be possible over the next ten 
years. This meeting resulted in the generation of a set of findings and recommendations 
aimed at positioning the combined efforts of the DOE offices of Advanced Scientific 
Computing Research and Biological and Environmental Research to address the 
community’s needs better and achieve widespread engagement by the community. 
 
Many of the issues addressed by the panel were foreseen by the community at the 
beginning of the GTL program. The following excerpt is from the vision workshop for 
computational and systems biology sponsored by DOE in September 2001. 
 
Biology is widely noted as the next scientific frontier and as the next “killer application” 
for high-end computational science.  It also will eventually drive both computer science 
research and the design and investment in high-performance computers and networks. 
However, funding agencies are still working to refine effective strategies to develop 
research programs in computational and systems biology.  In part, this is because 
computational biology is still a relatively small subfield of biology and therefore doesn’t 
yet have a large constituency—somewhat like the early days of the genome sequencing 
programs.  As computational biology begins to have more scientific impact on the field 
and the tools become more widely used, this difficulty will be reduced. 
 
The second challenge is the heterogeneity of computational biology applications.  Other 
scientific communities, such as climate modeling or combustion, typically have a single 
major computational application that has an unambiguous need for very high 
performance computing, so that it usually is easy to estimate the improvements that will 
 5 
be achieved by specific investments in software or hardware.  In this case, as was clear 
from the diversity of talks at the workshop, there is a huge variety of computational 
biology applications, including databases, sequence annotation, protein structure 
prediction, biochemical simulations, metabolic network modeling, and many others.  
Each involves different types of computer science and different barriers to progress, 
typically not just the need for faster computers and more efficient numerical algorithms. 
 
A number of strategies to develop programs in computational and systems biology were 
discussed at this workshop.  One is to link more clearly the results of quantitative 
biosciences to national needs.  For example, DOE is developing new computational and 
systems biology programs to support its missions in the roles of microorganisms in 
climate change and energy production, bioremediation of energy and nuclear materials 
waste, the health risks of low dose radiation exposure, and the basic bioscience needed 
for effectively defending against biological attack.  Another key strategy is to form 
partnerships between agencies and offices funding biology and other relevant disciplines. 
For example, a new partnership has been developed between the DOE Offices of 
Biological and Environmental Research and the Office of Advanced Scientific 
Computing Research in developing computational and experimental biosciences 
programs, including joint grant solicitations and multidisciplinary review teams. 
 
It has been nearly seven years since that 2001 workshop report was written.  During this 
time, the GTL program has made major investments in systems biology projects across 
the Laboratories and universities.  Moreover, numerous major accomplishments have 
advanced our knowledge of how biological systems function and have provided a 
framework for effectively coupling experimental, theoretical, and computational 
programs. 
 
This report addresses the key issues involved in ensuring continued progress in 
developing a systems level and integrative analysis, the new biology, in support of DOE 
missions. 
 6 
Background 
 
In the past decade, bioinformatics has been used to support advanced microbial 
biotechnology in many ways: computational analysis of wet-lab data, genome sequencing 
analysis, identification of protein coding genes, genome comparison to identify gene 
function, the development of genomic and proteomics databases, and the inference 
ofphenotypes (the higher-level implementation of functions) from genotypes (the gene-
level specification of functions). In order to understand higher-level functions, four major 
types of studies have been undertaken: automated reconstruction and comparison of 
metabolic pathways; the study of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions and 
expression data to understand regulatory and signaling pathways; modeling of the two-
dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) structures of proteins, RNA, and 
complexes; and modeling of the docking of 3D models of proteins with drugs.  
Understanding the 3D structure of proteins has had a major impact in our understanding 
of protein-protein interactions. Studies of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions 
have provided a good understanding of binding sites in signaling pathways. Moreover, 
understanding the interactions between proteins and chemical compounds has already 
facilitated the development of drugs by design. 
Three approaches have generally been used to undertake the research described above: 
computational search and alignment techniques to compare a new genome against the set 
of known genes to support the annotation and determination of the structure and function 
of genes in a newly sequence genome; applied mathematical modeling techniques such as 
data mining, statistical analysis, neural networks, genetic algorithms, and graph matching 
techniques to identify common patterns, features, and high-level functions; and 
increasingly, the integration of sequence analysis, database, and search techniques with 
mathematical modeling and simulation.  See Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 .
 7 
This report focuses on the third approach, which is now mature due to the simultaneous 
advances in biology and computing: the idea of integrating bioinformatics approaches 
with mathematical modeling and simulation to enable and accelerate advances in 
systems-level understanding of complex biological systems. 
 
Results are presented as a set of findings and recommendations. The findings aim to 
capture the significant accomplishments, opportunities, and remaining challenges in the 
areas of modeling and simulation in microbiology and cellular biology that are 
particularly essential for the Genomics: GTL Program. The presentations and other 
material convincingly show that tremendous progress has been made in developing 
predictive models of cellular processes during the past decade. It is now possible in some 
cases to create models of sequenced microbes that can predict growth rates on various 
substrates, predict genes that are essential for growth, and predict transcriptional 
responses of the modeled organism to specific types of environmental changes. These 
models represent early steps toward realizing a broader vision of being able to predict an 
organism’s phenotype (set of expressed traits and biochemical behavior) from an 
understanding of its genome and the environment in which it is found. 
 
These early pioneering efforts are still under development, and their predictive ability 
varies depending on the specific model and organism. However, significant progress 
clearly is being made in developing a broad range of predictive models, and more 
progress is likely in the immediate future. Nevertheless, at least two factors are currently 
slowing the research efforts of the community.    
 
The first factor is that small groups with limited funding are pursuing the vast majority of 
the current work, with uncertain levels and duration of funding often requiring the 
integration of multiple funding sources from multiple agencies over time to maintain 
progress.   This prevents the development of long term teams with critical masses of 
disciplinary and interdisciplinary researchers combining theory, modeling and 
experimentation needed to advance the goal (Fig. 2). 
 
 8 
 
 
The second limiting factor is that DOE is not yet a significant provider of funding for the 
development of modeling and simulation research for biological systems, even though the 
advancement of modeling and simulation would directly advance the DOE mission areas 
of computational science and applied mathematics and would improve our understanding 
and control of biological systems relating to energy and the environment.  Thus, the 
community’s work in this area is in many cases indirectly or even only tangentially 
related to DOE mission goals. 
 
The modeling efforts discussed by the committee span different levels of biological 
organization and detail, ranging from symbolic models of metabolic and regulatory 
networks, to flux balance analysis, to stochastic models of specific cellular subsystems. 
All of these modeling approaches are relevant to DOE problem areas. While the field of 
biomolecular modeling (structural modeling) is relatively mature and accounts for 
significant fractions of supercomputing time allocations at both DOE and NSF centers, it 
is limited in its ability alone to contribute to the challenge of developing of systems-level 
representations of organisms. The focus of this report is on the development of more 
integrated models that - instead of modeling a single protein or protein complexes - focus 
on models most appropriate for supporting systems biology research (e.g., metabolic 
pathways, transcription regulatory networks, signaling, and development). 
 
Enabling the construction and curation of these diverse biological models are numerous 
efforts to capture, integrate, and annotate the wealth of genomics data for hundreds of 
 9 
microbial organisms. These databases contain data from both model organisms and 
organisms that do not have extant user communities.  
 
Each model building effort is also coupled directly or indirectly to one or more 
experimental efforts that result in the generation of diverse datasets for model 
development and validation (Fig. 3).  Currently, however, no coordinated mechanism 
exists to capture these datasets and make them available to the community in a 
sustainable fashion. While NIH supports a variety of biological databases through the 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) for biomedical research, DOE 
has no corresponding activity for capturing data on organisms and experiments relevant 
to DOE applications that would not naturally be archived and curated in the NIH 
databases. 
 
 
 
This conclusion was pointed out in the September 2001 Vision for GTL report: 
 
The clear consensus was that these earlier efforts were limited by a lack of 
experimental data and the means to verify the models quantitatively. There also 
was agreement on the key requirements necessary to create a successful new 
biology. The methods and results of quantitative and predictive biology must: 
 
1. Be guided by the important biological questions of the day; 
 
2. Tightly integrate computational analysis and experimental 
characterization of biological systems; 
 
3. Draw on multiple types of experimental information and 
 computational analyses; 
 
4. Be made accessible to those not extensively trained in computational 
simulation; and 
 
5. Ultimately use computation and modeling to drive hypothesis 
formulation, experiment design, and data collection. 
 10 
 
Key also will be the need for scientists trained to be part of such a 
multidisciplinary research program—ideally this new generation of scientists will 
be equally “intellectually comfortable” in both biology and computation. 
 
One way to view the impact of modeling on microbiology is through the lens of 
improving our understanding of biological systems-level functions.    
 
Functioning models (of all types) require self-consistent representations of biological 
functions (metabolic, regulatory, or signaling networks) to produce correct results. By 
building integrated models and testing them against experimental data, it is possible and 
likely that inconsistencies in gene or gene product function assignments will be found 
and corrected. This situation has happened in cases where attempts to build flux balance 
analysis models of particular organisms have uncovered errors in biochemistry databases 
regarding reactions and gene product reaction mapping.  Further, it has resulted in the 
generation of numerous conjectures regarding missing genes (i.e., functions known to be 
present in the organism through experiment and required for self-consistent models, but 
not yet mapped to a known gene product).  In this way modeling itself acts like a large 
consistency check on our collective understanding of gene function assignments.  See 
Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 11 
Much current work in bioengineering (modification of metabolic and regulatory 
pathways) is guided mainly by the intuition of the researcher, perhaps with simple causal 
models of the system. Experience in other disciplines (e.g., electronics design) shows that 
progress can be greatly accelerated when simple computational tools and models (e.g., 
early VLSI [should this be defined?] CAD tools) become available that approximate the 
system enough to be useful as replacements for trial and error. Large-scale computing is 
also beginning to making it feasible to model ecosystems by aggregating models of 
individuals. With access to petascale computing capabilities this technique may begin to 
be applied to natural environments such as soils and to artificial environments such as 
bioreactors, in order to understand the interactions between different types of organisms 
and their ability to cooperatively metabolize compounds important for carbon cycling.  
See Figure 5. 
 
 
 
With the number of completed genome sequences reaching 1,000 in the next few years, a 
new class of biological problem can be addressed: reconstructing the function of entire 
genomes and building models that enable the prediction of phenotypes from the 
genotype. With advances in modeling it may become feasible to quickly produce a whole 
genome-scale model for a new sequenced organism and begin to understand the 
organism’s lifestyle prior to culturing the organism. 
Current systems and models can address one growth condition at a time and sweep 
through a narrow range of control parameters or through single- or double-gene 
 12 
knockouts to compute essentiality or coessentiality. Metabolic modeling tools use 
constrained optimization solvers.  On the largest systems it is possible to find coessential 
gene predictions and do limited parameter searches. Modeling of small consortia is just 
becoming possible.  Modeling the evolution of cellular networks is not yet feasible – but 
is nearly there. Indeed, the creation and adoption of reliable and relatively simple models 
of transcription regulation and metabolic flux analysis are on the verge of enabling a 
dramatic increase in the productivity of researchers and engineers tasked with improving 
strains for industrial use or exploring the limits of pathway engineering. 
 
For example, it is now routine to sequence a bacterial genome and within a few weeks 
have a basic understanding of the organism’s metabolism. It is also becoming feasible to 
reconstruct a bacterial transcription regulatory network from gene expression and 
transcription factor binding experimental data in a few months with existing levels of 
computing.  And it is becoming possible to reconstruct a genome from environmental 
sequence data even if we cannot yet culture the organism.  The vision is to integrate 
reconstructions in a series of models at various levels of abstraction, ranging from flux 
models (constrained optimization models) to full network time-dependent PDE [define] 
models with parameter estimation that can be used for a variety of predictive simulations. 
With access to next-generation computing systems it will be possible not only to build 
more complex models but also to optimize them for a variety of engineering purposes, 
enabling the era of computer-aided design of organisms for both science and industry.  
 13 
Findings and Recommendations 
 
The findings and recommendations are organized in three groups related to the charge 
questions. 
Charge Question 1 
 
Is the current ASCR long-term goal too ambitious, given the status and buy-in 
from the community? 
 
The committee did not find the ASCR long-term goal to be too ambitious. However, two 
factors suggest that it should be modified.   
 
The first is the observation that many of the projects funded by the GTL program have 
not ranked the development of integrative modeling and simulation as a key strategy for 
advancing the scientific goals of their research. Therefore, it is unlikely that many of 
those projects would spontaneously achieve the ASCR goal. This is not to say that no 
community is willing and able to do so; rather, those groups that are committed to 
advancing the goal of predictive modeling and simulation for biological systems of 
interest to DOE have not yet been a specific target of GTL funding. 
 
The second is that the wording of the ASCR long-term goal is ambiguous and not easily 
subject to measurement. Thus, it may not be the ideal statement of a goal that would be 
subject to monitoring or assessment. 
 
Finding #1. Modeling and simulation clearly are beginning to play a critical role in 
integrating the understanding of biological mechanisms at multiple levels, including 
specific cellular subsystems such as metabolism, motility, signaling, regulation, 
differentiation, and development—all of which are critical areas of understanding 
relevant to advancing DOE mission areas.  Moreover, the community clearly is ready to 
take big steps in the direction of more complete models incorporating more detailed 
biological mechanisms and to apply these models to more areas of biological science. It 
should also be noted that integrative modeling of biological systems complements the 
relatively well-developed field of atomistic modeling (e.g., molecular dynamics), which 
can contribute to DOE mission areas in biology but which is not sufficient to meet the 
long-term bioengineering goals alone. 
 
Finding #2. While considerable progress in advancing integrative modeling has 
occurred during the past decade (as witnessed in the high quality of presentations heard 
by the subcommittee), this progress has been driven largely by a relatively small number 
of research groups that have been successful at piecing together research support from a 
number of disparate sources (e.g., NIH, NSF, DOE, DARPA). Currently there is no long-
term research program of appropriate scale aimed explicitly at developing biological 
modeling and simulation capabilities relevant to DOE missions. 
 
 14 
Finding #3.  The ASCR-supported components of the GTL program are not currently 
supporting projects in applied mathematics or computer science primarily targeted at 
developing integrated modeling and simulation capabilities for microbes or plants.  
 
Recommendation 1.  The ten-year OMB PART goal for ASCR and BER for the joint 
modeling and simulation activity of ASCR and BER should be modified to read as 
follows: 
 
(ASCR/BER) By 2018, validate capability to predict phenotype 
from an organism’s genome and to predict 
genotype from an organism’s physiology  
  
 
This PART goal should be accompanied by a specific set of metrics of progress. Such 
metrics could include for a given organism the number of correct metabolic phenotype 
measurements predicted, the fraction of an organism’s genes and gene products included 
in a model, the number of transcription regulatory elements in a model, the number of 
correct gene expression experiments predicted, and the fraction of correct predictions of 
essential genes, number of organisms for which predictive models can be generated. 
 
Recommendation 2.  DOE should develop an explicit research program aimed at 
achieving significant progress on the overarching goal of predictive modeling and 
simulation in DOE relevant biological systems. This program should be a joint effort 
between ASCR and BER and should include a diversity of modeling approaches.  
 
The program should leverage existing experimental activities as well as support the 
development of new experimental activities that are directly tied to the needs of 
developing predictive models. This new research program should be aimed at advancing 
the state of the art of cell modeling directly, should include significant participation from 
biologists and mathematicians, computer scientists, and engineers; and should be 
indirectly coupled to the more applied goals of bioenergy, carbon cycle research, or 
bioremediation.  
 
This program will need to be supported at a large enough scale that a multiple-target 
approach can be pursued that will enable progress on many intermediate goals 
simultaneously by different research groups.  
 
Recommendation 3.  DOE should establish an annual conference that focuses on 
highlighting the progress in predictive modeling in biological systems. This should be an 
open meeting and separate from any programmatic PI meeting.  
 
One goal of the meeting would be to establish a series of scientific indicators of progress 
in predictive modeling, similar to successful indicators associated with the competitive 
assessment of structure prediction (CASP). These types of measures will enable the 
community to benchmark progress on methods and will be critical to assessing the impact 
of the research program on fundamentally advancing the state of the art.  Example 
 15 
metrics could include predicting essentiality in microbial genomes, predicting gene 
expression patterns in novel environments, predicting flux values through key reactions 
in microorganisms, or predicting yields in metabolic engineering scenarios. 
 
Charge Question 2 
 
What are potential intermediate goals that might be more relevant to the two 
programs?  
 
Intermediate goals that could be considered more relevant for the two programs fall into 
two general areas.   
 
The first area is building needed tools, curated databases, and computational and 
collaborative infrastructure that directly accelerate the communities’ ability to develop 
models and simulations. Examples of these are tools for curation of genomes and 
reconstruction of metabolic networks, integrated databases enabling the community to 
share data needed to build and test models and validation datasets, and mathematical 
libraries and core model components that would enable many groups to leverage the 
work of others.  
 
The second area is focusing on a targeted set of biological modeling and simulations 
problems that build on each other and that over time would expand the modeling 
capabilities in the appropriate directions. Examples of these are models of cellular 
metabolism, motility, global transcription regulation and differentiation, and life-cycle 
development. Each of these models could play a role in advancing toward the 
overarching goal of a complete cell model that can be used to predict phenotypic traits or 
behaviors of a cell from genomic and other “omic” data sources. 
 
Finding #4.  Integrative modeling and simulation efforts are highly dependent on the 
curation of genomics data and associated integrated pathway and protein databases that 
support metabolic reconstruction, interpretation of microarrays, and other experimental 
data. These databases are the foundation for the development of models and provide the 
critical biological context for a given organism or problem. Through resources like NIH’s 
NCBI and the dozens of community-led database projects, there is reasonable coverage 
of model organisms (e.g., Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and 
pathogens; however, there is not the same level of support for curating the data associated 
with organisms related to energy and the environment. 
 
Finding #5.  Modeling and simulation in microbial systems have advanced in many 
areas simultaneously. For some systems, there are useful predictive models for core 
metabolism, global transcription regulation, signaling and motility control, and life-cycle 
development and differentiation. However, there are not yet  many integrated models that 
include two or more of these capabilities. Also, the successful examples in each case are 
typically limited to a few model systems and have not been generally extended to the 
hundreds of organisms relevant to DOE whose genomes are now available.  
 16 
 
Recommendation 4. The GTL modeling and simulation research program should be 
supported by an explicit series of investments in modeling technology, databases, 
algorithms, and software infrastructure needed to address the computational challenges.  
 
The appropriate early targets for a comprehensive attack on predictive biological 
modeling are specific functions of microbial organisms (e.g., cellular metabolism, 
motility, global transcription regulation and differentiation, and life-cycle development). 
The focus should include advancing the predictive skill on well-studied models (e.g., E. 
coli, B. subtilis) but begin to extend to those organisms that stretch the capability beyond 
the existing well-studied model systems (e.g., Clostridium, Shewanella, Synechocystis) 
and small consortia (communities) of microorganisms relevant to DOE missions, such as 
those associated with bioremediation, carbon sequestration, and nitrogen fixation and 
fermentation and degradation.  
 
The subcommittee also recommends that lower eukaryotes (e.g., diatoms, 
coccolithopores, single-cell fungi) and plants be included as targets in longer-term 
modeling and simulation goals. Such inclusions will advance the goals of Genomics:GTL 
by strengthening efforts to integrate the modeling and advancing systems-level and 
synthetic knowledge for microbes and plants.  
 
Charge Question 3. 
 
What are the key computational obstacles to developing computer models of the 
major biological understandings necessary to characterize and engineer 
microbes for DOE missions such as biofuels and bioremediation? 
 
Finding #6. A number of obstacles remain to reaching the visionary goal of a 
predictive model useful for engineering of an organism derived largely from its genome 
and related data. Five of the most relevant ones follow. 
 
First, there is a lack of integrated genomics databases and the associated computational 
methods for supporting curation, extension, and visualization of comparative data 
explicitly focused on supporting the development of modeling and simulations for DOE-
relevant organisms.   
 
Second, for current systems-level computational analyses (e.g., flux balance analysis) 
work is needed to further integrate additional cellular physio-chemical constraints into 
modeling frameworks in order to generate computational predictions with greater 
accuracy towards defining the actual physiological state of the cell. 
 
Third, there is a lack of robust mathematical frameworks and software implementing 
those frameworks for integrating models of metabolism with those of gene regulation that 
are two of most highly developed areas of modeling and simulation at the whole cell 
level, but whose mathematical representations are quite different. 
 17 
 
Fourth, the multiscale mathematics and associated software libraries and tools for 
integrating processes in cellular models of disparate scales (e.g., molecular scale to that 
of the whole cell and microbial community) that would enable the modeling community 
to begin development of integrated whole-cell-scale models with atomistic simulations of 
specific mechanisms are lacking. 
 
Fifth, a computational and analytical theory for framing all of computational biology is 
lacking. Such a theory should incorporate evolution as the basis for understanding and 
interpreting the results from comparative analysis. For example,  the algorithms needed to 
make rapid progress on questions such as understanding the major forces governing the 
evolution of metabolism and regulatory networks have not yet been developed. 
Understanding these forces will be critical to creating the stable engineered strains 
needed for large-scale bioproduction of materials.   
 
Recommendation 5.  DOE should establish a mechanism to support the long-term 
curation and integration of genomics and related datasets (annotations, metabolic 
reconstructions, expression data, whole genome screens,  etc.) to support biological 
research in general and specifically the needs of modeling and simulation in particular in 
areas of energy and the environment that are not well supported by NSF and NIH.  
 
This mechanism should target the creation of a state-of-the-art community resource for 
data of all forms that are relevant to organisms of interest to DOE. This should be a joint 
activity of ASCR and BER, with ASCR responsible for the database and computational 
infrastructure to enable community annotation and data sharing. It should also leverage 
the work of established groups. 
 
Recommendation 6. DOE should work with the community to identify novel 
scientific opportunities for connecting modeling and simulation at the organism level to 
modeling and simulation at other space and temporal scales.   
 
Examples that could be investigated include integration of microbial models into ocean 
and terrestrial ecology models which in turn are coupled to global climate models, and 
models of bioremediation environments that can couple organism metabolic capabilities 
to external biogeochemistry.  This multiscale coupling in beginning to be explored, but 
much more can be done, and it is likely to yield significant scientific insight.   
 
Potential Impact according to Budget Levels made available 
 
Of course, a significant commitment of funds would have a large impact and could well 
deliver on the objectives well ahead of schedule.  However, to manage the potential 
difficulties with funding levels, the subcommittee has developed an estimate of what 
might be achieved for a given total funding level, jointly and equally supported by ASCR 
and BER.  See Table 1 and its Addendum. 
 
 18 
 
Table 1. Consideration of Funding Levels and Outcomes for an 
Expanded and Focused 
Office of Science Partnership on GTL 
Level 
($M) 
Recommended Action 
(Funding and HQ effort is assumed as shared equally 
between BER and ASCR offices, save in baseline case) 
5 Initiate next step for GTL Bioenergy Centers: fund a GTL Knowledge Base (KB) by 
adding a Coordination Center (CC) to create GTL KB and a user-friendly interface 
(Portal); CC will work w the three GTL Centers, focusing on their common datasets and 
goals. This is a minimum effort to sustain GTL advances. BER to choose a maximum of 
three pilot projects to meet most important needs. Pilot activities chosen through needs-
analyses by the three BioEnergy Centers. The KB CC will also provide $0.6M to each 
Center. The coordination funds are to work toward common standards and a single 
interface, while immediately providing BioIT support for Internet-based access and also, 
scientific connections to experimentalists. The KB will interact with other major 
knowledge resources. 
10 Expand CC; advance Core Knowledge Environment, include all GTL projects; flexible 
approach adds the capability to add any future GTL Centers exist. The shared DOE 
effort would establish a more powerful GTL KB and the addition of additional pilots. 
GTL could begin funding some modeling activities and the KB would be better linked to 
other major knowledge resources. Include ASCR community collaborations on software 
tool development to improve usefulness of the KB. Increase the amount of annual BioIT 
support from the CC to GTL projects to ensure presence of strong, internal bioIT efforts. 
Initiate funding for some visualization ASCR-supported tools for data analysis. Include 
focus on simulation and modeling within GTL PI Annual Meeting 
30 Expand rapidly the level of support for computational approaches (algorithm and 
software packages) across ASCR community. Provide major funding for well-
interconnected collaborations among experimentalists and quantitative scientists. 
Establish joint Solicitations w other federal agencies to enable more comprehensive 
contributions of computing and apply wide range of biology Advances toward GTL 
goals through a more extensive KB representing the fully needed range of reference data 
beyond GTL data. Expand modeling and simulation to separate annual meeting with a 
validation/CASP-like process and include the broad Biological Community. 
50 Full implement of the opportunities in joint subcommittee report for robust individual 
and group efforts in algorithm and software. Validation of software and of 
computational predictions would be intrinsic to collaborations among GTL biologists 
and computing. Progress would now be driven and focused by a deep engagement 
among the GTL experimentalists and the modeling groups. Extensive collaborations, 
comprehensive validations, and connections to the broader efforts in systems and 
synthetic biology enable GTL KB to contribute to wide range of DOE missions and 
GTL science, as a whole, to serve society 
 
 19 
Table 1 Addenda. Description of the Consequences for DOE GTL
from the Implementation of the Set of Levels of Funding 
Level 
($M) Impact 
5 
The baseline would include only the initiation of the proposed GTL KB, sustaining 
minimal expectation of GTL Bioenergy Centers. There would be NO implementation 
of the findings of the study by the Joint Subcommittee re potential contributions of a 
Science Partnership that would bring computing fully into GTL effort and stimulate 
progress. 
10 
The specifics of the pilot projects to nucleate and build the GTL Knowledge Base 
itself, the coordination activities, the integration of GTL data, and the response to 
needs of the three Bioenergy Centers are given in the GTL KB report for BER. More 
rapid progress by GTL activities, Centers, could now begin, in which key community 
software tools would be provided by ASCR funding. 
15 
At this level, a partnership to accelerate and expand the impact of GTL in meeting 
DOE mission needs can begin. Besides extending GTL modeling and simulation 
research, the KB will be able to work more effectively with the entire biology 
community and with the ASCR computational science community can contribute 
needed software and a powerful, readily accessed, internet based, GTL Knowledge 
Base can be created by the distributed DOE community to enhance the outreach of 
GTL and well as internal progress. 
30 
This funding level, 30M/yr jointly, would provide an increased implementation of the 
goals outlined in this report, and position the DOE to build key partnerships with other 
agencies in order to broaden support for software for systems and synthetic biology, 
which GTL researchers would incorporate and integrate. Contributions in GTL-
empowered biology funded by other agencies would be included in GTL Knowledge 
for enhanced value for DOE investigators and underpin DOE applied mission needs. 
Validation of modeling and simulation by way of open, competitive review at the 
Annual Meeting will enhance recognition by the Experimental Biology community, 
and thus, increasing the GTL impact on science and society and opening new 
collaborations. 
50 
The optimum level, 50M/yr, would allow full delivery for DOE of the opportunities 
for GTL from modeling and simulation; the full GTL effort would now include 
intensive collaborative modeling and simulation efforts; GTL would include the 
integration of the Experimental work and the Computational Modeling and Simulation 
efforts, that is, there would be feedback from computing to the GTL Center’s 
experimental decisions and foci, and GTL experimental findings would inform and 
direct modeling to achieve full Impact. All DOE /energy-related organisms would be 
included in computational effort. At this level, the Office of Science of the DOE would 
play a Leadership role for Nation and significantly catalyze the growth of GTL and its 
impact on the societal goals of DOE mission efforts on bioremediation, carbon 
sequestration and the delivery of the bioenergy vision 
 
 20 
Conclusions 
 
The time is right, given a convergence of the DOE-funded advances in biology and in 
mathematics and computing, for a major effort by the DOE Office of Science to unite the 
disparate accomplishments of the past decade into a larger-scale activity aimed at 
addressing the grand challenges of modeling and simulation for the Genomics: GTL 
program. This new activity can build on advanced capabilities from programs such as 
ASCR’s SciDAC and the base computing research activities, and at the same time, 
couple them with the path-breaking research supported by the Genomics: GTL program. 
This new thrust would provide DOE with a long-term research capability that will help 
realize the community’s Genomics: GTL vision and provide a basis for cooperative 
agreements with agencies such as NIH and NSF in the fast-emerging area of systems and 
synthetic biology. 
 
 21 
Participants and Agenda 
 
Joint ASCAC – BERAC Panel Meeting, October 4-5, 2007  
Site:  the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF) Office, San Francisco 
 
Panel Members: 
Michael Banda ⎯ LBNL  
David Galas ⎯ ISB/Battelle 
Keith Hodgson ⎯ Stanford 
David Kingsbury ⎯ Moore Foundation 
Chris Somerville ⎯ Stanford 
Rick Stevens ⎯ ANL/UChicago 
Barbara Wold ⎯ Caltech 
John Wooley ⎯ UCSD 
Thomas Zacharia ⎯ ORNL 
 
Invited Presenters: 
Nitin Baliga ⎯ ISB/U Washington 
Rich Bonneau ⎯ NYU/Courant 
Paramvir Dehal ⎯ LBNL/UCB 
Justin Donato ⎯ U Wisconsin 
Thierry Emonet ⎯ Yale U 
Adam Feist ⎯ UCSD 
Mick Follows ⎯ MIT 
Peter Karp ⎯ SRI 
Harley McAdams ⎯ Stanford 
Sue Rhee ⎯ Carnegie InstiCtution 
Nagiza Samatova ⎯ ORNL 
 
 22 
Agenda: 
 
Thursday October 4, 2007 
9:-10:00  Executive Session – Coffee etc. will be available 
10-10:45  Sue Rhee 
10:45-11:30  Nitin Baliga 
11:30-12:15  Harley McAdams 
12:15-1:30  Lunch and discussion of the morning sessions 
1:30-2:15  Rich Bonneau 
2:15-3   Thierry Emonet 
3-3:15   BREAK 
3:15-4   Adam Feist 
4-4:45   Justin Donato 
4:45-6   Discussion of the p.m. sessions and wrap up of the first day 
6-   Dinner (location TBD) 
 
Friday, October 5, 2007 
8-8:30   Executive Session – Coffee etc. will be available 
8:30-9:15  Paramvir Dehal 
9:15-10  Mick Follows 
10-10:15  BREAK 
10:15-11  Nagiza Samatova 
11-11:45  Peter Karp 
11:45-1  Lunch and discussion of the morning sessions 
1-4:00   Executive Session, writing, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 23 
 Bibliography    
 
Austin, D. W., M. S. Allen, et al. (2006). "Gene network shaping of inherent noise spectra." Nature 439(7076): 608-
11. 
Baliga, N. S. (2001). "Promoter analysis by saturation mutagenesis." Biol Proced Online 3: 64-69. 
Baliga, N. S., M. Pan, et al. (2002). "Coordinate regulation of energy transduction modules in Halobacterium sp. 
analyzed by a global systems approach." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99(23): 14913-8. 
Baliga, N. S., R. Bonneau, et al. (2004). "Genome sequence of Haloarcula marismortui: a halophilic archaeon from 
the Dead Sea." Genome Res 14(11): 2221-34. 
Baliga, N. S., S. J. Bjork, et al. (2004). "Systems level insights into the stress response to UV radiation in the 
halophilic archaeon Halobacterium NRC-1." Genome Res 14(6): 1025-35. 
Baliga, N. S., S. P. Kennedy, et al. (2001). "Genomic and genetic dissection of an archaeal regulon." Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 98(5): 2521-5. 
Bard, J., S. Y. Rhee, et al. (2005). "An ontology for cell types." Genome Biol 6(2): R21. 
Bare, J. C., P. T. Shannon, et al. (2007). "The Firegoose: two-way integration of diverse data from different 
bioinformatics web resources with desktop applications." BMC Bioinformatics 8: 456. 
Becker, S. A., A. M. Feist, et al. (2007). "Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-based 
models: the COBRA Toolbox." Nat Protoc 2(3): 727-38. 
Berardini, T. Z., S. Mundodi, et al. (2004). "Functional annotation of the Arabidopsis genome using controlled 
vocabularies." Plant Physiol 135(2): 745-55. 
Bernaerts, K., E. Dens, et al. (2004). "Concepts and tools for predictive modeling of microbial dynamics." J Food 
Prot 67(9): 2041-52. 
Bonneau, R., D. J. Reiss, et al. (2006). "The Inferelator: an algorithm for learning parsimonious regulatory networks 
from systems-biology data sets de novo." Genome Biol 7(5): R36. 
Bonneau, R., M. T. Facciotti, et al. (2007). "A predictive model for transcriptional control of physiology in a free 
living cell." Cell 131(7): 1354-65. 
Bonneau, R., N. S. Baliga, et al. (2004). "Comprehensive de novo structure prediction in a systems-biology context 
for the archaea Halobacterium sp. NRC-1." Genome Biol 5(8): R52. 
Boyd, P. W., T. Jickells, et al. (2007). "Mesoscale iron enrichment experiments 1993-2005: synthesis and future 
directions." Science 315(5812): 612-7. 
Cakir, T., C. Efe, et al. (2007). "Flux balance analysis of a genome-scale yeast model constrained by 
exometabolomic data allows metabolic system identification of genetically different strains." Biotechnol 
Prog 23(2): 320-6. 
Caspi, R., H. Foerster, et al. (2006). "MetaCyc: a multiorganism database of metabolic pathways and enzymes." 
Nucleic Acids Res 34(Database issue): D511-6. 
Caspi, R., H. Foerster, et al. (2008). "The MetaCyc Database of metabolic pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc 
collection of Pathway/Genome Databases." Nucleic Acids Res 36(Database issue): D623-31. 
Chen, S. L., W. Lee, et al. (2004). "Codon usage between genomes is constrained by genome-wide mutational 
processes." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101(10): 3480-5. 
Clarke, B., M. Lambrecht, et al. (2003). "Arabidopsis genomic information for interpreting wheat EST sequences." 
Funct Integr Genomics 3(1-2): 33-8. 
Collier, J., H. H. McAdams, et al. (2007). "A DNA methylation ratchet governs progression through a bacterial cell 
cycle." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(43): 17111-6. 
Cordes, E. E., M. A. Arthur, et al. (2005). "Modeling the mutualistic interactions between tubeworms and microbial 
consortia." PLoS Biol 3(3): e77. 
Covert, M. W., C. H. Schilling, et al. (2001). "Metabolic modeling of microbial strains in silico." Trends Biochem 
Sci 26(3): 179-86. 
Crosson, S., H. McAdams, et al. (2004). "A genetic oscillator and the regulation of cell cycle progression in 
Caulobacter crescentus." Cell Cycle 3(10): 1252-4. 
 
 24 
Dassarma, S., S. P. Kennedy, et al. (2001). "Genomic perspective on the photobiology of Halobacterium species 
NRC-1, a phototrophic, phototactic, and UV-tolerant haloarchaeon." Photosynth Res 70(1): 3-17. 
Dehal, P. S. and J. L. Boore (2006). "A phylogenomic gene cluster resource: the Phylogenetically Inferred Groups 
(PhIGs) database." BMC Bioinformatics 7: 201. 
Deich, J., E. M. Judd, et al. (2004). "Visualization of the movement of single histidine kinase molecules in live 
Caulobacter cells." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101(45): 15921-6. 
Edwards, J. S. and B. O. Palsson (2000). "Metabolic flux balance analysis and the in silico analysis of Escherichia 
coli K-12 gene deletions." BMC Bioinformatics 1: 1. 
Emonet, T., C. M. Macal, et al. (2005). "AgentCell: a digital single-cell assay for bacterial chemotaxis." 
Bioinformatics 21(11): 2714-21. 
Facciotti, M. T., D. J. Reiss, et al. (2007). "General transcription factor specified global gene regulation in archaea." 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(11): 4630-5. 
Facciotti, M. T., V. S. Cheung, et al. (2004). "Specificity of anion binding in the substrate pocket of 
bacteriorhodopsin." Biochemistry 43(17): 4934-43. 
Feist, A. M., C. S. Henry, et al. (2007). "A genome-scale metabolic reconstruction for Escherichia coli K-12 
MG1655 that accounts for 1260 ORFs and thermodynamic information." Mol Syst Biol 3: 121. 
Feist, A. M., J. C. Scholten, et al. (2006). "Modeling methanogenesis with a genome-scale metabolic reconstruction 
of Methanosarcina barkeri." Mol Syst Biol 2: 2006 0004. 
Follows, M. J., S. Dutkiewicz, et al. (2007). "Emergent biogeography of microbial communities in a model ocean." 
Science 315(5820): 1843-6. 
Garcia-Hernandez, M., T. Z. Berardini, et al. (2002). "TAIR: a resource for integrated Arabidopsis data." Funct 
Integr Genomics 2(6): 239-53. 
Goo, Y. A., J. Roach, et al. (2004). "Low-pass sequencing for microbial comparative genomics." BMC Genomics 
5(1): 3. 
Goryanin, II, G. V. Lebedeva, et al. (2006). "Cellular kinetic modeling of the microbial metabolism." Methods 
Biochem Anal 49: 437-88. 
Green, M. L. and P. D. Karp (2004). "A Bayesian method for identifying missing enzymes in predicted metabolic 
pathway databases." BMC Bioinformatics 5: 76. 
Green, M. L. and P. D. Karp (2007). "Using genome-context data to identify specific types of functional 
associations in pathway/genome databases." Bioinformatics 23(13): i205-11. 
Heffelfinger, G. S., A. Martino, et al. (2002). "Carbon sequestration in Synechococcus Sp.: from molecular 
machines to hierarchical modeling." Omics 6(4): 305-30. 
Henson, M. A. (2003). "Dynamic modeling of microbial cell populations." Curr Opin Biotechnol 14(5): 460-7. 
Heuett, W. J. and H. Qian (2006). "Combining flux and energy balance analysis to model large-scale biochemical 
networks." J Bioinform Comput Biol 4(6): 1227-43. 
Hottes, A. K., L. Shapiro, et al. (2005). "DnaA coordinates replication initiation and cell cycle transcription in 
Caulobacter crescentus." Mol Microbiol 58(5): 1340-53. 
Hottes, A. K., M. Meewan, et al. (2004). "Transcriptional profiling of Caulobacter crescentus during growth on 
complex and minimal media." J Bacteriol 186(5): 1448-61. 
Hu, P., E. L. Brodie, et al. (2005). "Whole-genome transcriptional analysis of heavy metal stresses in Caulobacter 
crescentus." J Bacteriol 187(24): 8437-49. 
Huala, E., A. W. Dickerman, et al. (2001). "The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): a comprehensive 
database and web-based information retrieval, analysis, and visualization system for a model plant." 
Nucleic Acids Res 29(1): 102-5. 
Ishii, N., M. Robert, et al. (2004). "Toward large-scale modeling of the microbial cell for computer simulation." J 
Biotechnol 113(1-3): 281-94. 
Iyer, R., N. S. Baliga, et al. (2005). "Catabolite control protein A (CcpA) contributes to virulence and regulation of 
sugar metabolism in Streptococcus pneumoniae." J Bacteriol 187(24): 8340-9. 
Jeffries, T. W., I. V. Grigoriev, et al. (2007). "Genome sequence of the lignocellulose-bioconverting and xylose-
fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis." Nat Biotechnol 25(3): 319-26. 
 
 25 
Judd, E. M., L. R. Comolli, et al. (2005). "Distinct constrictive processes, separated in time and space, divide 
caulobacter inner and outer membranes." J Bacteriol 187(20): 6874-82. 
Karp, P. D. (2004). "Call for an enzyme genomics initiative." Genome Biol 5(8): 401. 
Karp, P. D., C. A. Ouzounis, et al. (2005). "Expansion of the BioCyc collection of pathway/genome databases to 
160 genomes." Nucleic Acids Res 33(19): 6083-9. 
Karp, P. D., I. M. Keseler, et al. (2007). "Multidimensional annotation of the Escherichia coli K-12 genome." 
Nucleic Acids Res 35(22): 7577-90. 
Kato Marcus, A., C. I. Torres, et al. (2007). "Conduction-based modeling of the biofilm anode of a microbial fuel 
cell." Biotechnol Bioeng 98(6): 1171-82. 
Kauffman, K. J., P. Prakash, et al. (2003). "Advances in flux balance analysis." Curr Opin Biotechnol 14(5): 491-6. 
Kaur, A., M. Pan, et al. (2006). "A systems view of haloarchaeal strategies to withstand stress from transition 
metals." Genome Res 16(7): 841-54. 
Keseler, I. M., J. Collado-Vides, et al. (2005). "EcoCyc: a comprehensive database resource for Escherichia coli." 
Nucleic Acids Res 33(Database issue): D334-7. 
Klotz, B., D. L. Pyle, et al. (2007). "New mathematical modeling approach for predicting microbial inactivation by 
high hydrostatic pressure." Appl Environ Microbiol 73(8): 2468-78. 
Korobkova, E. A., T. Emonet, et al. (2006). "Hidden stochastic nature of a single bacterial motor." Phys Rev Lett 
96(5): 058105. 
Krummenacker, M., S. Paley, et al. (2005). "Querying and computing with BioCyc databases." Bioinformatics 
21(16): 3454-5. 
Laub, M. T., L. Shapiro, et al. (2007). "Systems biology of Caulobacter." Annu Rev Genet 41: 429-41. 
Le, T. T., S. Harlepp, et al. (2005). "Real-time RNA profiling within a single bacterium." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
102(26): 9160-4. 
Le, T. T., T. Emonet, et al. (2006). "Dynamical determinants of drug-inducible gene expression in a single 
bacterium." Biophys J 90(9): 3315-21. 
Lee, J. M., E. P. Gianchandani, et al. (2006). "Flux balance analysis in the era of metabolomics." Brief Bioinform 
7(2): 140-50. 
Lee, T. J., Y. Pouliot, et al. (2006). "BioWarehouse: a bioinformatics database warehouse toolkit." BMC 
Bioinformatics 7: 170. 
Li, H., A. Coghlan, et al. (2006). "TreeFam: a curated database of phylogenetic trees of animal gene families." 
Nucleic Acids Res 34(Database issue): D572-80. 
McAdams, H. H. (2006). "Bacterial stalks are nutrient-scavenging antennas." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(31): 
11435-6. 
McCollum, J. M., G. D. Peterson, et al. (2006). "The sorting direct method for stochastic simulation of biochemical 
systems with varying reaction execution behavior." Comput Biol Chem 30(1): 39-49. 
McGrath, P. T., H. Lee, et al. (2007). "High-throughput identification of transcription start sites, conserved 
promoter motifs and predicted regulons." Nat Biotechnol 25(5): 584-92. 
McGrath, P. T., P. Viollier, et al. (2004). "Setting the pace: mechanisms tying Caulobacter cell-cycle progression to 
macroscopic cellular events." Curr Opin Microbiol 7(2): 192-7. 
Mohamed, M. M. and K. Hatfield (2005). "Modeling microbial-mediated reduction in batch reactors." Chemosphere 
59(8): 1207-17. 
Mueller, L. A., P. Zhang, et al. (2003). "AraCyc: a biochemical pathway database for Arabidopsis." Plant Physiol 
132(2): 453-60. 
Mukhopadhyay, A., A. M. Redding, et al. (2007). "Cell-wide responses to low-oxygen exposure in Desulfovibrio 
vulgaris Hildenborough." J Bacteriol 189(16): 5996-6010. 
National Research Council (2005), “Mathematics and 21st Century Biology,” a NAS NRC Board on 
Mathematical Sciences’ study committee chaired by M. Olson, plus fourteen others and J. Wooley 
(supported by ASCR). 
 
 26 
National Research Council (2005), “Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing and Biology,” a NAS 
NRC Board on Computer Sciences study committee chaired by J. Wooley, plus ten others and J. 
Schwaber (supported by BER among others). 
National Research Council (2008), “The Role of Theory in Advancing 21st Century Biology,” a NAS NRC 
Board on Life Sciences study committee chaired by D. Galas, plus fifteen others and G. Wagner. 
Ng, W. V., S. P. Kennedy, et al. (2000). "Genome sequence of Halobacterium species NRC-1." Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 97(22): 12176-81. 
Ostrouchov, G. and N. F. Samatova (2005). "On FastMap and the convex hull of multivariate data: toward fast and 
robust dimension reduction." IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 27(8): 1340-3. 
Paley, S. M. and P. D. Karp (2006). "The Pathway Tools cellular overview diagram and Omics Viewer." Nucleic 
Acids Res 34(13): 3771-8. 
Pan, C., G. Kora, et al. (2006). "ProRata: A quantitative proteomics program for accurate protein abundance ratio 
estimation with confidence interval evaluation." Anal Chem 78(20): 7121-31. 
Patnaik, P. R. (2001). "Microbial metabolism as an evolutionary response: the cybernetic approach to modeling." 
Crit Rev Biotechnol 21(3): 155-75. 
Pouliot, Y. and P. D. Karp (2007). "A survey of orphan enzyme activities." BMC Bioinformatics 8: 244. 
Price, M. N., P. S. Dehal, et al. (2007). "Orthologous transcription factors in bacteria have different functions and 
regulate different genes." PLoS Comput Biol 3(9): 1739-50. 
Price, M. N., P. S. Dehal, et al. (2008). "Horizontal gene transfer and the evolution of transcriptional regulation in 
Escherichia coli." Genome Biol 9(1): R4. 
Prommer, H., M. E. Grassi, et al. (2007). "Modeling of microbial dynamics and geochemical changes in a metal 
bioprecipitation experiment." Environ Sci Technol 41(24): 8433-8. 
Ramirez, I. and J. P. Steyer (2008). "Modeling microbial diversity in anaerobic digestion." Water Sci Technol 
57(2): 265-70. 
Reiser, L., L. A. Mueller, et al. (2002). "Surviving in a sea of data: a survey of plant genome data resources and 
issues in building data management systems." Plant Mol Biol 48(1-2): 59-74. 
Reiss, D. J., M. T. Facciotti, et al. (2008). "Model-based deconvolution of genome-wide DNA binding." 
Bioinformatics 24(3): 396-403. 
Reiss, D. J., N. S. Baliga, et al. (2006). "Integrated biclustering of heterogeneous genome-wide datasets for the 
inference of global regulatory networks." BMC Bioinformatics 7: 280. 
Rhee, S. Y. (2000). "Bioinformatic resources, challenges, and opportunities using Arabidopsis as a model organism 
in a post-genomic era." Plant Physiol 124(4): 1460-4. 
Rhee, S. Y. and B. Crosby (2005). "Biological databases for plant research." Plant Physiol 138(1): 1-3. 
Rhee, S. Y., W. Beavis, et al. (2003). "The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR): a model organism database 
providing a centralized, curated gateway to Arabidopsis biology, research materials and community." 
Nucleic Acids Res 31(1): 224-8. 
Schilling, C. H., J. S. Edwards, et al. (2000). "Combining pathway analysis with flux balance analysis for the 
comprehensive study of metabolic systems." Biotechnol Bioeng 71(4): 286-306. 
Schlueter, S. D., M. D. Wilkerson, et al. (2005). "Community-based gene structure annotation." Trends Plant Sci 
10(1): 9-14. 
Schmid, A. K., D. J. Reiss, et al. (2007). "The anatomy of microbial cell state transitions in response to oxygen." 
Genome Res 17(10): 1399-413. 
Shannon, P. T., D. J. Reiss, et al. (2006). "The Gaggle: an open-source software system for integrating 
bioinformatics software and data sources." BMC Bioinformatics 7: 176. 
Shannon, P., A. Markiel, et al. (2003). "Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular 
interaction networks." Genome Res 13(11): 2498-504. 
Shastri, A. A. and J. A. Morgan (2005). "Flux balance analysis of photoautotrophic metabolism." Biotechnol Prog 
21(6): 1617-26. 
Sloan, W. T., S. Woodcock, et al. (2007). "Modeling taxa-abundance distributions in microbial communities using 
environmental sequence data." Microb Ecol 53(3): 443-55. 
 
 27 
Stolyar, S., S. Van Dien, et al. (2007). "Metabolic modeling of a mutualistic microbial community." Mol Syst Biol 
3: 92. 
Thimm, O., O. Blasing, et al. (2004). "MAPMAN: a user-driven tool to display genomics data sets onto diagrams of 
metabolic pathways and other biological processes." Plant J 37(6): 914-39. 
Tyler, B. M., S. Tripathy, et al. (2006). "Phytophthora genome sequences uncover evolutionary origins and 
mechanisms of pathogenesis." Science 313(5791): 1261-6. 
Vallino, J. J. (2003). "Modeling microbial consortiums as distributed metabolic networks." Biol Bull 204(2): 174-9. 
Viollier, P. H., M. Thanbichler, et al. (2004). "Rapid and sequential movement of individual chromosomal loci to 
specific subcellular locations during bacterial DNA replication." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101(25): 9257-
62. 
Wahr, J. A., M. Gerber, et al. (2001). "Allosteric modification of oxygen delivery by hemoglobin." Anesth Analg 
92(3): 615-20. 
Weston, A. D., N. S. Baliga, et al. (2003). "Systems approaches applied to the study of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
and Halobacterium sp." Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 68: 345-57. 
Whitehead, K., A. Kish, et al. (2006). "An integrated systems approach for understanding cellular responses to 
gamma radiation." Mol Syst Biol 2: 47. 
Yu, G. X., B. H. Park, et al. (2005). "An evolution-based analysis scheme to identify CO2/O2 specificity-
determining factors for ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase." Protein Eng Des Sel 18(12): 
589-96. 
Yu, G. X., B. H. Park, et al. (2005). "In silico discovery of enzyme-substrate specificity-determining residue 
clusters." J Mol Biol 352(5): 1105-17. 
Yu, G. X., G. Ostrouchov, et al. (2003). "An SVM-based algorithm for identification of photosynthesis-specific 
genome features." Proc IEEE Comput Soc Bioinform Conf 2: 235-43. 
Zhang, B., N. C. VerBerkmoes, et al. (2006). "Detecting differential and correlated protein expression in label-free 
shotgun proteomics." J Proteome Res 5(11): 2909-18. 
 
 
 28 
Charge Letter 
 
 
 29 
 

