Survey on Modeling and Simulation of Multiphysics Systems
John G. Michopoulos ∗
Center for Computational Material Science
Special Projects Group
Computational Multiphysics Systems Laboratory
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory
Washington DC, 20375
john.michopoulos@nrl.navy.mil
ASME member
Charbel Farhat
Mechanical Engineering and
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305
cfarhat@stanford.edu
ASME fellow
Jacob Fish
Dept. of Civil, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Rensseleaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY, 12180
fishj@rpi.edu
ASME member
April 15, 2005
Abstract
This paper presents a retrospective on the evolution of modeling and simulation (M&S) as they relate
to multiphysics systems. The context space of M&S is defined in terms of number of fields, number of
domains, length scale, and computational technologies involved. Representative past and the present
efforts on each one of these contexts and some of their combinations are described and their relationship
to the product development efforts of ASME’s Computer and Information in Engineering (CIE) division
is identified. The general procedures for developing multi-field formulations are given first. Then the
multi-domain progress is given with an emphasis on fluid-structure interaction problems pertaining to
linear and non-linear aeroelasticity and aerothermoelasticity. Multi-scale methodologies follow, and the
computational technologies associated with model generation and simulation is also presented. Potential
future anticipated trends and directions are identified and conclude this survey.
∗Address all correspondence to this author.
1
INTRODUCTION
The main goal of the present effort is to present an overview of the past, present and potentially the future
evolution in the field of modeling and simulation (M&S) of multiphysics systems from a product development
perspective.
On one hand, the extensive pluralism of the ever evolving computational technologies and on the other
hand the sharp private focus of individual researchers onto their own subject of interest sometimes prevent
an up-to-date comprehensive understanding of how private efforts relate to global history and trends. Thus,
besides its ceremonial character relative to honoring the 25th anniversary of the Computer and Information
in Engineering (CIE) division of the ASME, the technical component of the motivation for the present work
is to provide a reality check reference point for all practitioners of M&S methodologies and technologies as
they apply to product development.
Here it should be underlined that while utilitarian and economic pressures push for the development of
inexpensive complex products under complex operational conditions, the computational technology evolution
provides an ever improving realm of reducing to practice applied science and engineering knowledge. These
two factors provide us with the opportunity to anticipate fast, efficient and economically viable development
of complex products, the models of which correspond to real-life applications with less simplifications and
assumptions than those used in the past.
It is imperative that for the sake of clarity and disambiguation we provide the operational definitions of
the fundamental terms associated with our topic.
Today’s product development requires the exercise of M&S not only in terms of product appearance
and shape but also in terms of the systemic behavior of a product. The first aspect of M&S for shape and
appearance deals with what traditionally has been associated with Computer Aided Design (CAD) and and
Manufacturing (CAM). However, these are areas explored by another article on the same issue of JCISE [].
Our present effort focuses on examining the evolution of M&S in terms of behavioral models for multiphysics
systems. In particular, by “modeling” here we imply the activity of forming a mathematical representation
(and its algorithmic and computational implementation) of the behavior of the system that captures the
relation between input (stimulus) and response (output) state variables or/and parameters characterizing
this behavior of the system. By the term “simulation” we imply the computational exercise of the model
produced by the “modeling” activity, for the sole purpose of predicting the behavior of the system at hand.
Clearly, since this behavior is in many cases given in terms of contour, vector and color intensity artifacts
painted on the surface or in the volume of the associated systems, the geometric model of them is implicitly
but inextricably associated with the behavioral models.
The usage of the term “multiphysics” has been often used liberally during the past five years by various
2
researchers. However, it has been used in more than one undeclared contexts not always allowing the
occasional consumers of the term to be able to isolate the meaning intended by the originators of the term.
Some of the frequently attributed meanings of the term have been those of: “multi-field” to denote the
simultaneous excitation and response of the system by multiple physical fields; “multi-domain” to denote
the interaction among continuum representations of systems with drastically different properties (e.g. fluid-
structure interaction, moving solidification boundary problems e.t.c.) through sharable boundaries; “multi-
scale” to denote the consistent bridging of various behavioral models of the system at hand, at various
length scales as required by a multitude of scopes ranging from manufacturing process perspective to macro-
behavioral utilization. In addition, any combination of these three semantic possibilities generates four more
meanings of the term “multiphysics” including the one that reflects the co-existence of all three of them.
This suggests the definition of a conceptual attribute space (see Fig. 1) spanned by the three basis attributes
namely, “multi-field”, “multi-domain” and “multi-scale”. All other cases for the potential meaning of the
term “multi-field” are embedded implicitly in this space and can be thought of as linear combinations of the
three base-cases. In addition, the “multi-field” and “multi-domain” bases are endowed with a measure defined
in terms of two discrete increments for “one” and “many”. The “multi-scale” base is similarly endowed by
a measure defined in terms of the discrete increments in the term set {“nano”, “micro”, “macro”} roughly
corresponding to applying these as prefixes to the term “meter” when used as a length unit.
Any discrete volume in this discrete space as shown in Fig. 1, is defined by a triplet of coordinates
originating from each one of these attribute axes, and represents a region encompassing certain classes of
physical problems. This signifies that these problems can be modeled in a multiphysics sense as defined by
their corresponding coordinates. Our description of the M&S retrospective will be based on references in
this space in a manner that corresponds to the authors’ individual experiences as they correspond to these
base cases of this space.
There are many more attributes of the M&S activities as they relate to the interests of the various stake-
holders associated with the production and consumption of M&S methodologies, processes, and products,
that can define their own spaces (e.g. implementation technology, manufacturing, business, human factors,
technology transfer, direction of modeling, maintainability, software engineering etc.) in a manner similar to
the one used above for describing the term “multiphysics”. Example base cases for the economical business
subspace would be the total cost of ownership, the return on investment and the production cost. Example
base cases for the manufacturing subspace would be total production time, yield and efficiency. Examples
base cases for the human factors subspace would be confidence measures such as qualification, verification
and validation, and usability measures such as slope and length of learning curve etc. However, it falls
outside the scope of this paper to address these and the rest of the subspaces mentioned in more detail.
3
Figure 1: Multiphysics attribute space.
In addition to the three base cases described for the defining the therm “multiphysics”, here we will focus
only on one of these additional subspaces. This will be the “computational technology implementation”
subspace. Activities in this subspace are intimately associated with the progress on M&S as a discipline in
its own right because they often provide a motivational pulling mechanism for reducing to practice advances
of the associated methodologies and implementations. Space limitations do not allow further decomposition
of this attribute space to base cases (e.g. distributed technologies, semantic technologies, data exchange
technologies etc.)
Product development efforts based on the research activity efforts on multiphysics systems are far less
compared to the “single” physics system modeling, mainly due to the inherent complexity associated with
them. Therefore, this paper will be focusing less on the history and more on the available methodologies and
technologies as opportunities for future product development via the catalytic leveraging of the independent
progress of the computational technologies.
Therefore, this paper contains descriptions of the evolution of M&S in terms of the four base cases of
multi-field, multi-domain, multi-scale formulations and computational technologies. We initially define the
abstract formulation context for these cases in order to facilitate the development of their retrospective views.
Our survey will address all four of them in separate sections and will cover the past and the present state of
affairs. The speculated future evolution of these areas will be discussed in the next section. The paper will
close with appropriate conclusions.
4
Figure 2: Interacting multi-domain and multi-filed continuum systems idealization.
MULTI-FIELD MULTI-DOMAIN FORMULATION CONTEXT
Figure 2 depicts two (out of possibly many) interacting continua under the influence of multiple fields. We
are using this figure to present a general formulation of a mathematical model describing the behavior of
multiple interacting continua under multi-field conditions at a given length scale as the following system of
generally coupled equations,
Ddi(q̂dj , p̂dj ; ˙̂qdj , ˙̂pdj) = 0, on Ωd (1)
. Here the indices are defined by, i ∈ [1, ne], j ∈ [1, nf ] and d ∈ {a, b, . . . , nd}, where ne, nf and nd are
the number of equations, the number of conjugate field pairs and the number of domains respectively. The
operator Ddi (usually differential) expresses some conservation law and is defined per equation per domain
while it represents the nature of the behavior of the system as defined by conjugate state variable pairs
< p̂dj , q̂dj > and for some cases their time derivatives < ˙̂pdj , ˙̂qdj >. Algebraic closure of Eqs. In most
cases in the bibliography, the quantities p̂dj and q̂dj reflect the dependent and independent variables of the
formulation, or the input-output variables of the system. They can be components of tensor variables of
any order, but usually are scalars, vector components, or second order tensor components. This intention is
represented by the hat-bold notation used.
To fully determine the 2 × nf field variables, algebraic closure of the system of Eqs. (1) requires that
ne ≥ 2×. The factor 2 appears because the field variables and their derivatives occur in conjugate pairs
(e.g. < stress, strain >,< temperature, entropy >, etc.) Since the number of conservation laws that end
up providing (in most cases) these equations is small and independent of the particular problem, it is evident
that additional relations between the state variables are needed. This is where the constitutive field theory
(CFT) generation process has to be invoked in terms of the determination of constitutive nd×nf functionals
Cdj that usually relate the first member of the conjugate state variable pair with the second one according
5
to,
q̂dj = Cdj(p̂dj ; ˙̂pdj), in Ωd (2)
.
After proper term elimination and rewriting this equation reduces the field Eqs. (1) in the form,
Ddi(q̂dj ; ˙̂qdj) = 0, in Ωd. (3)
Algebraic closure of this system requires that ne ≥ nf . Sometimes, either because the corresponding
CFT does not succeed in algebraically completing the set of Eqs. (1) by providing an adequate number
of equations, or because special formalistic restrictions are required (i.e. fading material memory, frame
reference invariance etc.), additional axioms may be introduced. The term reduction/rewriting procedure
mentioned earlier, always requires that the system of Eqs. (1) and (2) is equivalent with the system of Eqs.
(3).
Either of these formulations is typically equipped with their corresponding Dirichlet and Neumann bound-
ary conditions applicable on both the interacting (shared) manifolds Γa1 = Γb1 ⊂ ∂Ωa∩∂Ωb of the domains,
and the non-interacting ones Γab ⊂ ∂Ωa−∂Ωa∩∂Ωb and Γbb ⊂ ∂Ωb−∂Ωa∩∂Ωb, where the second subscript
of all Γs is defined by b ∈ [1, nnsbd] where nnsbd is the number of non shared boundary domains. Typically,
fields present to both domains express boundary conditions over the sharable interacting boundary manifold
in the form of transmission conditions preserving conservation principles and they are usually of the type,
p̂ai · n = p̂bi · n + T on Γa1 = Γb1 (4a)
˙̂pa(i+1) = ˙̂pb(i+1) on Γa1 = Γb1. (4b)
Here, n denotes the unit normal vector on Γa1 = Γb1, and T the disturbance vector normal to Γa1 = Γb1
that may appear due to not interaction related reasons.
Most multi-field and multi-domain applications involving interacting systems that can be represented
as deformable continua with shared boundary manifolds can be captured from the above presented set of
generalized equations.
MULTI-FIELD RETROSPECTIVE
There is a plethora of contemporary devices that are used as sensors and actuators. It is often forgotten
that these devices along with their associated application methodologies always exploit some form of field
coupling. Typical examples are displacement and/or strain sensors and actuators that use electro-elastic
6
coupling. However, this is almost always done in the context of very simple ( mostly one-dimensional)
systems with only single field coupling capability (i.e. strain gauges, piezo-electric load cells etc.) On the
other hand, today’s demands for complex multifunctional systems in combination of continuously tightening
economical requirements beg for a drastic reconsideration of product development practices. For example,
establishing design allowables on an complex engineering structure that is exposed to mechanical, thermal
and humidity stimulus, like the composite material skin of an aircraft, by only considering the influence
of each of the stimuli separately and subsequently superimposing the design recommendations produced
by each one of the modeling practices for each one of these stimuli, almost always results to over-designed
and non optimized systems. It is therefore imperative to re-examine the often forgotten assumptions of
non interacting fields on the structure and consider the employment of coupled-field M&S practices and
methodologies.
The evolution of multi-field modeling of deformable media has seen a variety of approaches that were
motivated by a wide range of interests, and were based on a wide range of backgrounds and techniques.
Multi-field modeling problems are represented by area (1,2,3) when only one one domain is involved (single
system) in the context space presented by Fig. 1.
The first coupled-field phenomena had been experimentally observed for thermoelectricity by Seebeck
on 1821 (Seebeck Effect) and Peltier on 1834 (Peltier Effect) [1]. Soon after this, Duhamel gave the first
multi-field (though uncoupled) formulation for the case of thermoelasticity and postulated the coupled case
[2].
The first fully developed multi-field formulation for a deformable medium was given by Navier who
gave the well known Navier-Stokes equations for an incompressible fluid in 1821 [3] and a viscous fluid in
1822 [4]. Maxwell in his classical and foundational work on electrodynamics [5, 6] gave the second fully
developed multi-field formulation. This formulation did not address the idea of a “deformable” continuum
explicitly, but it was formulated upon the assumption that a continuum called “aether” occupied the space
between conductors and insulators. This work though by contemporary standards constitutes the basis of
the fundamental theory of electrodynamics of continua, it was originally viewed and evolved as a theory for
electromagnetics for its applicability to wave propagation and field force applications.
The first truly coupled multi-field formulation for deformable solids contains the heat conduction equation
endowed with strain terms and was given by Voigt [7] and Jeffreys [8] and thermal stresses solution were
given by Papkowitch [9] and Sokolnikoff [10]. However the real development of coupled thermoelasticity
started with Biot [11]. This effort has been based on irreversible thermodynamics as it was founded a few
years earlier by Onsanger [12, 13] and popularized by Prigogine [14] and de Groot [15] who were able ro
show that non-equilibrium thermodynamics are needed to capture the irreversible character of heat and mass
7
diffusion. Their work represents the first systematic efforts for coupled multi-field formulation and it was
motivated from chemically reacting species diffusion combined with heat conduction in a continuum system.
After this foundational work, the actual area of multi-field modeling for deformable continuum systems has
evolved starting mainly from the mid-1950s, with short periods of intensification. It was mostly motivated
from the need to develop complete and thorough constitutive models for various material systems at the
continuum level with no particular application in mind for most of these attempts. The field has evolved with
the development and maturation of two-field modeling theories such as those of thermoelasticity [16, 17, 18],
electroelasticity [19, 20], piezoelasticity [21] and magnetoelasticity [22]. It continued with the three-field
theories of magnetothermoelasticity [23, 24], thermoelectroelasticity [25], hygrothermoelasticity [26], the
four-field theory electromagnetic thermoelasticity [27] and finally, the five-field theory of electromagnetic
hygrothermoelasticity [28]. Here we have only cited representative works that are not meant to be inclusive
of all work done on the field but they contain more extensive citations on the corresponding theories.
The entire body of work on the multi-field formulation can be classified to belong to one of seven distinct
classic approaches. Here we are presenting the three more popular and dominant ones. Their classification
is based on the fundamental assumptions employed.
The first group of works is based on assuming that (i) the conservation laws of mass, momentum, mo-
ment of momentum, and energy, are holding, (ii) that there exists a thermodynamic potential function that
implicitly encapsulates all constitutive equations defining all state field variables, (iii) that entropy as the
conjugate scalar field variable of temperature, is governed by an entropy balance law (expressed as a continu-
ity equation) that contains positive definite entropy production, and (iv) that there exist phenomenological
forces and fluxes responsible for the irreversible processes involved that obey Onnsager’s relations. Extensive
exposition of this approach has been given in the 60s [29, 30] and republished later [31, 32].
The second group of works is based on assumptions (i) and (ii) as above but it does not require assump-
tions (iii) and (iv), while the role of the second law of thermodynamics is played by the Clausius-Duhem
inequality [33, 34, 35] (v). The most rigorous, elegant and axiomatically founded formulation of this ap-
proach is exemplified by the work of Eringen and his co-workers [27] on electrodynamics of continua. This
approach also systematized the usage of the so-called axioms of constitutive theory. These are the axioms of
“causality”, “determinism”, “equipresence”, “objectivity”, “material invariance”, “neighborhood”, “fading
memory”, and “admissibility”. The admissibility axiom postulates that the CFT has to satisfy the conser-
vation laws and therefore, it really a meta-axiom in that allows the researcher to postulate the rest of the
axioms.
The third group of works comes from the school that attempted and succeeded in axiomatically and very
elegantly formalizing all field theories of continua. This approach still uses assumptions (i) and (v), but does
8
not require assumptions (ii) (though this assumption was introduced later for the special case of Elasticity
and Hyperelasticity), (iii) and (iv). While at NRL (1948-51) Truesdell and Toupin solidified this approach
that first appeared on 1952 [36] and then it was expanded and presented in the foundational work of “The
Classical Field Theories” in 1960 [37]. After the seminal work of Coleman and Noll [38, 39, 40] who used the
entropy inequality to construct a unified theory for thermoelasticity and material thermodynamics in general,
Truesdell and Noll extended material field theories in the non-linear regime with the equally foundational
work of “Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics” [41]. It is important to underline here the fact that this
work begins with the construction of constitutive relation functionals independent of any thermodynamic
potential. However, later the internal strain energy density is used for recovering the constitutive equations,
thus reintroducing assumption (ii).
Finally, the fourth group of works is based only on the energy conservation principle (i.e. partial usage
of i) while the rest of the conservation laws including conservation of local entropy are all derivable from the
energy conservation principle. This is the most recent approach and was formulated by Green and Naghdi
[42, 43, 44]. In our view this approach entails the elegance of the fewest possible assumptions and axioms.
An example of following the practices from the first and second groups was recently given for the case of
2-species-hygro-electro-thermo-elastic modeling of ionic polymer-metal composites (IPMC) used for artificial
muscle applications. This system’s behavior is described by 32 field variables (16 conjugate pairs) governed
by 16 field PDEs and 16 equations for the CFT. Introducing equilibrium conditions for many of these fields
and Lagrange strains to account for large deformations the case of an electro-elastic isotropic plate becomes
a non-linear system of the generalized Von-Karman equations [45, 46]:
∇2∇2w + (1 + ν)∇2V = h
N
(
q
h
+ F,22w,11 − 2F,12w,12 + F,11w,22), (5a)
∇2∇2F + E∇2V = E[(w,12)2 − w,11w,22], (5b)
1− ν
2E
(∇2δij − ∂i∂j)Fδij +∇2V = 0. (5c)
Here w, F, V are the deflection, the Airy stress function and the electric potential variables and δij , ν, E, h, N, q
are Kronecker’s delta, Poisson’s ratio, the modulus of elasticity, the plate thickness, the flexural rigidity and
the distributed load respectively.
In terms of ASME’s CIE division activities in this area only recently there were presentations of work in
the context of electroactive ionic polymers behavior motivated by artificial muscle system design [45], as well
as fire simulation driven reactive flow [47]. It is forceable that efforts in this area have not been presented in
the CIE fora as much, because traditionally CFT modeling has been associated with the activities and fora
of the Applied Mechanics division.
9
MULTI-DOMAIN RETROSPECTIVE
There is a large variety of applications that fall in the category of multi-domain problems. These include
multi-phase flaw (e.g. fluidized beds, geomechanics, etc.), phase transformation (e.g. solidification, welding,
dendritic growth, material processing etc.), and moving boundaries problems (e.g metal forming, crystal
growth, Hele-Shaw flow, Stokes flow, fluid-structure interaction etc.). To report on the evolution of all of
these application areas falls well outside the scope and the space available for this paper. Four reasons justify
our decision to focus on the fluid-structure interaction problem in the present paper. The first one is its
significant importance to product development for a wide variety of applications extending from the design
of naval and aero-space structures, to reactive flow induced structural degradation applications. The second
one is the fact that its mathematical formulation represents arguably a large subset of moving boundary
problems. The third one is that it lends itself to become a vehicle of demonstrating its potential to capture
not only the multi-domain aspects of multiphysics modeling but the multi-field one as well. The fourth
and final reason stems from the fact that it provides an opportunity to demonstrate that for multi-domain
modeling sometimes capturing the physics of the interacting domains may not be enough, and special fields
have to be introduced for artificial field-entities applied to discretization-induced entities (i.e. mesh of the
fluid domain surrounding the structural domain), in order to preserve the validity of various conservation
laws that enforce appropriate field transmission conditions across common boundaries.
Multi-domain modeling problems are represented by area (1,2,3) when only one one field is involved
(single physics) in the context space presented by Fig. 1.
Motivation for the Two-domain Multiphysics of Aeroelasticity
A large amount of work on the area of multi-domain multiphysics modeling with moving boundaries has
its roots to Aeroelasticity. Aeroelasticity is the theory that models the effects of aerodynamically induced
forces on elastic bodies. These effects occasionally lead to serious consequences on the general structural
response and stability characteristics for both static and dynamic cases. Consequently, these effects may
have a great impact on performance and safety issues, and they have led aeroelasticity to become one of the
most important considerations in aircraft design.
Historical literature on aeroelasticity is mostly focused to analytical models where the motion of a gas
or a fluid past a structure, the deformation and vibration of that structure, and more importantly, the
fluid-structure interaction phenomenon itself, are described with linear mathematical concepts [48, 49]. In
the aerospace industry, aeroelastic phenomena are often predicted by linear numerical models and methods
that operate in the frequency domain [50, 51]. These methods proloferated quickly because of their high
performance and low memory requirements. In the subsonic regime, most if not all of these linear aeroe-
10
lastic tools rely on the doublet-lattice method [52] for predicting the unsteady aerodynamics of an aircraft.
This method was developed over thirty years ago, and remains today the most frequently used method for
predicting behavior of unsteady subsonic flows in production environments, especially for analysis involving
load and flutter. Furthermore, in the supersonic regime, various linear methods related to the old piston
theory [53], are still used today for the prediction of the unsteady aerodynamics acting on an aircraft. For
these and various other reasons [54], it can be concluded that no major developments in computational
aeroelasticity have occurred since the advent of the piston theory and doublet-lattice methods, and no new
major advancements are needed or can be expected.
However, today’s high-performance military aircraft while at high dynamic pressure, are often flutter-
critical in the transonic speed range. The associated mixed subsonic-supersonic flow patterns and shock
waves in this regime lender invalid the linear flow theory in general – and the doublet-lattice method in
particular –. They cannot predict the unsteady aerodynamic forces acting on an aircraft. As a result, flutter
testing of a scaled model in a transonic wind tunnel has always been used to generate corrections to flutter
speeds computed by linear methods. The design, construction, and testing of a wind tunnel flutter model, and
the analysis of the resulting data, are very laborious and typically require over a year’s time. This explains
why recently domain experts have suggested that the results of a finite number of (nonlinear) Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) solutions could be used as a surrogate to wind tunnel testing, provided a validated
code would be available. Experience had proven that existing CFD codes should be able to compute five
flutter solutions in one year [55].
Furthermore, modern military aircraft equipped with external storage tanks and/or weapons are in
a flow regime leading to shock waves and on onset of separation, they exhibit Limit Cycle Oscillations
(LCO) at transonic Mach numbers. LCO is a nonlinear aeroelastic behavior characterized by periodic
oscillations that maintain constant amplitude over time for a given set of flight conditions. Hence, whereas
flutter can be catastrophic and must be avoided at all costs, LCO is essentially inducing an accumulation
of degradation (e.g. it induces fatigue for metal aircraft components and damage for composite aircraft
components) that can have far reaching material degradation consequences leading to acceleration of aging.
Linear flutter analysis appears to adequately identify the oscillation frequency and modal composition of the
LCO mechanism. However, it predicts unbounded oscillations whereas flight-tests reveal limited amplitude
oscillations. More importantly, linear aeroelastic tools fail to predict the onset and severity of LCO which
are of prime importance in the certification of external storage tanks and weapon configurations on fighter
aircraft [56].
In addition, linear aeroelastic tools are not reliable for high-angle of attack flight conditions. These
conditions are sometimes encountered during maneuvering and the flow can separate while its fluctuations
11
can cause severe buffeting.
Eventually, nonlinear aeroelastic computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tools emerged two decades ago to
address local transonic effects, LCO, high-angle of attack flight conditions, buffeting, as well as many other
nonlinear aeroelasticity phenomena [57] that cannot be predicted reliably by linear aeroelastic numerical
methods. Initially, attention was focused almost exclusively on computational algorithms for transonic
unsteady aerodynamics, and applications to simplified linear structures [58]. Subsequently, the scope of
nonlinear computational aeroelasticity expanded to address the coupling of individual fluid and structural
analysis codes [59], and the exchange of aerodynamic and elastodynamic data between such codes [60]. The
recent advances in computational sciences and parallel processing have contributed towards the emergence
of complete and real aircraft configurations [61, 62, 63, 63, 64, 56].
In order to provide a description of the current status of approaches for designing and assembling a general
purpose nonlinear aeroelastic computational simulation technology, we provide the overview of a particular
approach. This approach is based on the three-field, two-domain mathematical formulation of aeroelastic
problems and was introduced ten years ago [65]. This three-field formulation exhibits versatility as it can
address many aeroelastic problems besides flutter, LCO, and buffeting. These include, the prediction of
steady and unsteady loads, the evaluation of control surface effects in level-flight and during maneuvering
[66], the prediction of roll damping, aeroelastic tailoring [67, 68], and performance analysis. In this nonlinear
aeroelastic formulation and associated computational technology, the aerodynamic forces acting on an aircraft
are determined from the solution of the compressible Euler or Navier-Stokes equations with turbulence
modeling. Important benefits of this approach are that the aircraft motion is not restricted to harmonic
vibrations with small displacement amplitudes, and is not necessarily represented by a truncated modal
basis. When appropriate, nonlinear geometric and free-play effects are properly accounted for. Furthermore,
no restriction is imposed on the nature of the fluid-structure coupling that is numerically modeled by suitable
fluid-structure transmission conditions.
The Three-Field, Two-Domains Formulation of Aeroelastic Models
Motion of some of the fluid domain boundaries is a common characteristic of a large variety of nonlinear
fluid-structure interaction problems that are of concern to aerospace, mechanical, civil, and biomedical
engineering (i.e. aircraft flutter, flow-induced pipe vibrations, stability of suspension bridges, atrial flutter).
The effect of small amplitude motion on the solution of the problem can be handled by simple transpiration
techniques [69]. On he other hand, when the amplitude is large, it may become necessary to explicitly
address the motion of at least the fluid-structure interface, by a “level set” method [70], or solve the fluid
equations on a moving and possibly deforming grid. Such a grid is often referred to as a dynamic mesh in
12
the computational aerodynamics literature. Many techniques have been developed for solving fluid-structure
interaction problems on dynamic meshes, including the Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) method [71],
the co-rotational approach [72, 73], and space-time formulations [74, 75]. Generally , all of these methods can
be used to express the fluid-structure problem of interest as a two domain and three- rather than two-field
problem [65].
In fact, if we let χ̃t denote a continuous mapping from a reference fluid configuration ΩF (t)|t=0 ⊂ R3 to
a current fluid configuration ΩF (t) ⊂ R3 such that
χt : ΩF (t)|t=0 −→ ΩF (t), x(ξ, t) = χt(ξ), (6)
where t ∈ [0,∞] denotes time, x(ξ, t) denotes time-dependent position vector of a fluid point, and ξ its
position in reference configuration, while J = |∂x/∂ξ| denotes the Jacobian determinant of the deformation
gradient, then the system of Eqs. (1) for this case takes the specific form,
∂(Jw)
∂t
∣∣∣∣
ξ
+ J∇x · (F (w)− ∂x
∂t
∣∣∣∣
ξ
w) = J∇x ·R(w) + JS(w), in ΩF (7a)
ρS
∂2uS
∂t2
−∇xσ̃S(²̃S) = b, in ΩS (7b)
ρf
∂2x
∂t2
∣∣∣∣
ξ
−∇ξσ̃f (x− x|t=0) = 0, in ΩF (7c)
Equation (7a) represents the ALE form of the Navier-Stokes equations where w denotes the conservative fluid
state vector, F and R denote the vectors of convective and diffusive fluxes respectively and S(w) denotes
the source term associated with a potential turbulence model. Equation (7b) is the equation governing
the dynamics of the structure represented by its domain ΩS(t) ⊂ R3. In this equation ρS , σ̃S , ²̃S , uS
and b are the density, the second order stress and strain tensors, and the displacement and body forces
vectors respectively. Relationship σ̃S(²̃S) represents the constitutive functional introduced by the general
case earlier through Eq. (2) for the conjugate pair < σ̃S , ²̃S >. When it is linear, then it is known as Hooke’s
constitutive law, and the set of Eqs. (7) represent aeroelasticity. If it is not linear then the set of these
equations represent a more general case that allows accounting for degrading materials to the extend that
the CFT formulation captures the nonlinearities of such phenomena.
The third of the above equations does not have direct physical origins since it models the dynamics of
the fluid mesh motion by assimilating it with a fictitious or pseudo-structural subsystem. The fluid mesh
is an artifact of the discretization needed for the integrating the fluid state vector equation and therefore is
not a physical quantity. However, the heterogeneous nature and origins of the meshes used for the structure
13
Figure 3: Fluid (a) and structural meshes of the wet surface od an F/A-18 model.
and the fluid (see Fig. 3), introduces the issue of maintaining kinematic compatibility between them while
at the same time the conservation laws are not violated. These requirements are indirectly inducing physical
meaning of a deformable body on the fluid mesh in a manner that completes the system of equations. An
alternative interpretation of this equation is that of a governing equation of a fictions field acting on the
fluid. In this last equation, subscript f designates the fictitious nature of the continuous subsystem and its
properties, and the initial position of the dynamic fluid-mesh, x(0), is given, while the field to be determined
is the current position x(t) of the fluid-mesh. Tilded symbols denote second order tensor field state variables.
The above equations are completed with their Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions, that are
coupled at the moving fluid-structure boundary Γ(t) = ∂ΩF ∩ ∂ΩS by the conditions
σ̃S · n = (−p + σ̃F ) · n + T), on Γ(t), (8a)
∂u
∂t
= v, on Γ(t), (8b)
where n denotes the unit normal to Γ(t), p the fluid pressure, σ̃F ) the viscous (deviatoric) stress tensor of the
fluid, v the fluid velocity vector field, and T the tractions due to external forces of non aerodynamic origin.
For invicid flows these equations have a slightly different form [56]. In addition, the following compatibility
conditions hold:
x(t)− x(t)|t=0 = u, on Γ(t), (9a)
∂x
∂t
=
∂u
∂t
= v, on Γ(t), (9b)
The three-field formulation has shed new light on the mathematical understanding of the numerical be-
havior of various numerical methods that were designed for the solution of coupled fluid-structure problems,
and has enabled the development of faster aeroelastic solution algorithms. It led into the development of
space and time integration techniques that can exploit efficiently various parallel computational infrastruc-
14
Figure 4: Vortex bursting behavior during buffet analysis of a F/A-18 platform.
tures. This has in turn led into the development of simulation technology that exploits the three-field-based
nonlinear aeroelastic formulation and is currently sufficiently efficient and mature to be considered at least
as the core technology for a reliable simulation environment for some of the critical flight conditions of a
high-performance aircraft. A typical example of the capabilities of this technology is shown in Fig. 4 where
vortex bursting is shown during buffet analysis of a F/A-18 platform [56].
The three field, two domains aeroelasticity modeling can be classified to belong in the (2,1,3) region of
the space defined in Fig. 1 because it involves one field per domain and the deformation of the fluid domain
mesh is introduced as a fictitious entity. On the other hand, if one persists on being literal then it could be
classified to belong in the (2,2,3) region.
The Four-Field, Two-Domains Formulation of Aerothermoelastic Models
The previously described formulation, provides an opportunity to examine the realization of the exten-
sion of the previously described aeroelastic model from a multi-domain to a multi-field and multi-domain
formulation, by incorporating thermal effects that generalized to aerothermoelasticity.
Aerodynamically induced heating can play a dramatic role in the design of of supersonic and hyper-
sonic vehicles due to its potential effect on the stresses, deformations and temperature distributions on the
corresponding structures. This can have a direct and significant influence on the material selection and
15
construction. The end-effects of aerodynamic heating can range from simple deformations that may lead
to structural buckling, to potentially serious alteration of the aeroelastic behavior of the aircraft. Early
experimental work has demonstrated [76] these effects in an an unexpected – for the time – manner where
flutter was induced on a the AGARD wing when exposed to a stagnation temperature of 260C◦ while in a
wind tunnel providing and airflow of Mach = 2. When the stagnation temperature was reduced to 37C◦ then
no flutter was observed. The first simulation of of fully coupled fluid-structure-thermal interaction problems
has been reported by E. Thornton [77] and has been followed by R. Loehner et al. [78].
The first complete formulation of the nonlinear aerothermoelasticity as a four-field two domains extension
of the three field two domain formulation represented by Eqs. (7), was given by Tran and Farhat [79] by the
amendment described by:
ρScpS
∂TS
∂t
+ ∇x · (−λ̃S∇xTS)− σ̃S ∂²̃
∂t
−Q− qΓ = 0, in ΩS , (10a)
ρS
∂2uS
∂t2
−∇xσ̃S(²̃S , TS) = b, in ΩS (10b)
where cpS , λS ,TS , Q, qΓ are the specific heat, heat conductivity tensor, temperature field, internal heat source,
and boundary heat flux of the structure. Equation (10a) expresses the heat conduction evolution in the
structure while Eq. (10b) is used in place of Eq. (7b) and is identical to it, except of the fact that the stress
tensor in now a function of not only the strain tensor, but also of the temperature field as well.
The boundary conditions for this case are extended to include the thermal boundary conditions given by,
TS = TF , on Γ(t), (11a)
λS∇TSn = −λF ∇TF n, on Γ(t), (11b)
where the thermal conductivities have been considered assuming isotropic material for the structure and the
fluid and therefore they are written in tensor notation.
The four field, two domains aerothermoelasticity modeling can be classified to belong in the (2,2,3) region
of the space defined in Fig. 1.
An example of the ability that this formulation is shown in Fig. 5 where the simulated distribution of
the aerodynamically induced temperature is shown for the skin surface of the F-16 fighter jet.
CIE-related contributions on the topic of multi-domain applications are limited and are contributed on
the application areas of combustion [80, 81], fluid-structure interaction [82, 83], and phase transformation
[84, 85].
16
Figure 5: Aerodynamically induced temperature distribution on the skin of the F-16 fighter.
MULTI-SCALE RETROSPECTIVE
To understand the motivating needs for a multi-scale modeling agenda we will compare two engine systems
defined in different scales. The size of a jet engine is of order of meters. Its continuum behavior description
is traditionally captured by means of partial differential equations, and consequently, discretization methods
such as finite elements, finite volume or finite differences can be used to determine the state variable fields
associated with it. On the other hand, a rotary motor that drives Salmonella and E. coli bacteria has a
diameter of 30 nm. This motor is rotating at approximately 20,000 rpm, consumes about 10-16 W and
exhibits an energy conversion efficiency close to 100% [86]. A continuum description for this nano-engine
is not equipped to account for predominant surface effects and if applied, it would result in unrealistically
stiff behavior. Alternatively, a brute force approach of modeling the rotary motor entirely on atomistic scale
would necessitate an impractically high number (billions) of unknowns. Thus, the employment of a multiscale
computational paradigm where important atomistic features could be captured at a fraction of computational
cost required by atomistic simulation of the entire system [87] becomes a potentially appropriate approach.
One of the main barriers in developing such a rigorous discrete-to continuum scale-bridging framework, is
the increased uncertainty and complexity introduced by small scales that expose the discrete character of
matter constituents.
Application context often determines how extensively multiscale methods can be used. For example, in
case of metal matrix composites (MMC) with almost periodic arrangement of fibers, introducing finer scales
might be advantageous since the bulk material typically does not follow normality rules and developing a
17
phenomenological coarse scale constitutive model might be challenging at best. The behavior of each phase
is well understood and obtaining the overall response of the material from its fine scale constituents can be
obtained using homogenization. On the other hand, in brittle ceramics composites (CMC), the microcracks
are often randomly distributed and characterization of their interface properties is difficult. In this case, the
use of fine scale models may not be beneficial.
Here we focus on a bridging continuum and discrete scales, which encompasses most of the issues as-
sociated with continuum-to-continuum scale bridging. For an excellent exposition of various continuum-
to-continuum scale bridging approaches we refer to [88]. In what follows we present a brief description of
available methods for multiscale modeling from two perspectives.
The first perspective involves the information passing between models on different scales defined within
a range that extends from discrete to continuum formalisms. In addition, the discrete scale is modeled
first, such that its gross response is subsequently infused into the continuum scale. Therefore, information
follows a one-way path from discrete to continuum scale models. The second perspective involves concurrent
modeling of both the discrete and continuous scales. For the sake of comprehensive completeness we refer
to the review articles [89, 90] and to a comprehensive study on adaptive control of multiscale models [91].
Multi scale modeling can be classified to belong in the (1-2,1,1-3) region of the space defined in Fig. 1
because it usually involves single field activation of multiple domains over at least two length scales. The
two categories of multiscale approaches can be described by extending the system of coupled Eqs. Eq. (1)
to include variable indexes for length scale in the form
Ddi(q̂djk, p̂djk; ˙̂qdjk, ˙̂pdjk) = 0, on
nlc⋃
d=1
Ωd, (12)
with k ∈ [1, nli] and d ∈ [1, nlc], where nli is the number of length scales treated by one of the information-
passing multiscale approaches and nlc is the number of concurrent mathematical models represented by
different scales.
Information-passing multiscale methods
Calculations at finer scales, are used to evaluate certain quantities (i.e. discrete system state variables) for
use in approximate or computational models defined within longer length/time scales in all information-
passing multiscale methods. A direct implication of performing calculations in a finer scale is the high
computational complexity predicated by the multiplicative effect of the computed quantities for a volume of
the material shared by both the finer and the coarser scale models. This type of scale bridging is also known
as sequential, serial or parameter passing. However, for nonlinear problems fine and coarse scale models are
two-way coupled, i.e., the information continuously flows between the models in different scales. Here we
18
Figure 6: Comparison of GMH with classical (spatial) homogenization and molecular dynamics (MD) sim-
ulations.
present several information passing bridging techniques.
Generalized Mathematical Homogenization (GMH): The GMH theory [92, 93] constructs an equivalent
continuum description directly from molecular dynamics (MD) equations. In this method the displacement
field is constructed as simultaneous asymptotic expansion of multiple space-time scales. This approach
allows the decomposition of the coarse scale models to a sequence of discrete unit cell problems and various
order continuum problems with multiple scales [93]. The sequence of discrete unit cell problems can be
interpreted as molecular statics problems where a unit cell is subjected to various order of macroscopic
fields. Continuum equations can be combined to construct a nonlocal continuum description [92, 94, 95],
or alternatively, a closed-form solution for slow time scales can be obtained leading to algebraic system of
equations with a single time scale [93]. Figure 6 compares the GMH, with spatial homogenization [96] and
molecular dynamics simulation for wave propagation in a layered lattice structure [93]. It can be seen that
GMH provides a comparable accuracy to MD simulation despite significant reduction in degrees-of-freedom.
To this end we note that for the GMH to be valid both the temporal and spatial scales have to be separable.
For instance, if the essential events of the faster fine scale model occur on the same time scales as the details
of processes computed using the slower coarse model, then the time scales cannot be separated. Likewise,
when the wavelength of the traveling signal is of the order of magnitude of the fine scale features, then
separation of spatial scales cannot be accomplished.
Quasicontinuum (QC): QC method involves a continuum description where constitutive equations are
constructed directly from atomistic considerations rather than from a phenomenological or thermodynamically-
based constitutive model. The atomistically enabled constitutive model is adequate as long as continuum
fields are varying slowly over a unit cell domain. In its original form [97] the QC method was formulated for
19
simple Bravais crystals assuming uniform deformation of atoms. In a more general case with heterogeneous
interatomic potentials, a unit cell problem has to be solved instead [98]. In this more general scenario, the
QC method resembles GMH and as such it can be viewed as an engineering counterpart of the mathematical
theory. Note that both the ”engineering” and mathematical homogenization methods involve solution of an
atomistic unit cell problem and subsequently feeding the continuum problem with effective properties.
Multiscale Enrichment based on the Partition of Unity (MEPU): The MEPU method [99] can be con-
sidered as a generalized combination of the GMH [93] and the Partition of Unity [100, 101, 102] methods.
MEPU is suitable for enriching coarse scale continuum description or coarse-grained discrete formulations.
It is primarily intended to extend the range of applicability of the mathematical homogenization theory to
problems where scale separation may not be valid, such as in the case on non-periodic solutions or problems
where the coarse solution may rapidly vary over the domain of the unit cell domain. MEPU can be classified
in the category of methods that employ hierarchical decomposition of the approximation space. To reduce
the computational cost, homogenization-like integration scheme is devised. The value of a function at a
gauss point of a coarse scale element is replaced by an average computed over a unit cell domain centered at
a Gauss point. It has been proved that the accuracy of the integration scheme is of order O(1/n) where n is
the number of unit cells in the coarse scale element domain. The molecular model of a polymer subjected to
uniform macroscopic fields the polymer has been modeled using a single MEPU element with nine degrees
of freedom per node [22]. The error in L2 norm of displacements was 2% compared to the 9% when using
the QC method.
Variational Multiscale Method (VMS): The VMS method [103], can be viewed as an equivalent coarse
scale element builder method. It was originally developed for enriching continuum solutions with fine scale
continuum description. Most common implementation of the method assumes the fine scale enrichment
to be a residual free bubble vanishing on coarse scale element boundaries. Based on this assumption, the
enrichment functions can be condensed out on the element level to give effective coarse scale elements as
opposed to effective material properties as they appear in the GMH approach. Alternatively, a better
accuracy can be obtained by enforcing enrichment functions to vanish on the element boundaries in the
weak sense. VMS can be easily extended to enriching coarse grained descriptions, such as for instance in
QC. According to this scenario the coarse-grained description which amounts to interpolating the solution
between the representative atoms, (element nodes in Fig. 7) can be enriched using kinematics of individual
atoms in the areas where such enrichment in necessary. Since positions of atoms may not coincide with the
coarse scale element boundaries, homogeneous boundary condition of atoms residing in the vicinity close to
the element boundaries can be enforced as shown in Fig. 7.
Heterogeneous Multiscale Method (HMM): The foundational idea behind the HMM method is the ap-
20
Figure 7: VMS for enriching coarse grained models.
proximation of the coarse scale integrands by data computed from the auxiliary fine scale problem [104].
The auxiliary fine scale problem is an atomistic cell subjected to boundary conditions extracted from the
coarse scale solution. HMM can be viewed as a method to construct effective integrands based on the fine
scale data as opposed to effective properties in GMH or to effective elements in VMS.
Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics (CGMD): The CGMD method develops coarse-grained Hamilton’s
equations from MD equations under fixed thermodynamic conditions [87, 105]. The representative atoms
are enforced to preserve an average position and momenta of the fine scale atoms (similar to those em-
ployed in the QC method). The corresponding coarse-grained Hamiltonian is defined as an average of the
thermodynamically calibrated fine scale Hamiltonian, in the displacement-momenta space.
Discontinuous Galerkin (DG): The DG method constructs discontinuous enrichment of the displacement
field in a manner that resembles mathematical homogenization, but it does not introduce multiple spatial
coordinates. This causes a C−1 continuous approximation of the solution. To control the errors resulting
from the discontinuity the oversampling idea of Babuska [106] is used. A generalization of the DG formulation
for embedding fine scale features at the continuum level into coarse scale descriptions was given in [107].
Equation-Free Method (EFM): The fine scale problem is evolved at some sampling points in the coarse
scale domain according to EFM [108]. These sampling points are represented by a unit cell in the atomic
scale. Unlike the aforementioned information-passing methods the coarse problem is assumed to be unknown
in EFM. Once the solution in two subsequent time steps on the fine scale is computed and then restricted to
the coarse scale, then the coarse scale solution at t+∆t is obtained by projective integration or extrapolation
in time domain. The fine-to-coarse scale operators are well defined, but the definition of the information
flow from the coarse to the fine scale remains to be a challenge. The EFM may be suitable for complex
bio-systems whose coarse scale behavior is often unknown.
Other Information-Passing methods: Several useful information-passing procedures have a semi-empirical
nature [109, 110, 111, 112]. A popular example is kinetic Monte Carlo for surface growth, where barriers to
adatom motion are computed with density functional theory. Similarly, for discrete dislocation dynamics,
21
mobilities are computed using atomistic simulations.
Concurrent multiscale methods
A class of multiscale approaches for systems whose behavior depends on physics at multiple scales is presented
in thissection. Examples of problems that belong into this category are turbulence, crack propagation,
friction, and problems involving nano-devices are prime examples. For the case of fracture the crack tip
bond breaking can be described with a quantum-mechanical model of bonding, while the rest of the sample
is described with empirical potentials. For the case of friction it might be necessary to describe surface
interaction using quantum-chemical approaches while using continuum elasticity to simulate the contact
forces. These problems, require that multiple scales have to be simultaneously resolved in different portions
of the problem domain. Multiscale methods based on the concurrent resolution of multiple scales are often
coined as embedded, concurrent, integrated or hand-shaking multiscale methods. Several domain bridging
methods [113, 114, 115, 116], multigrid methods [117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123] and local [124, 125,
102, 126, 99] are used to communicate the information between the subdomains represented by different
mathematical models often defined in various scales.
Matching conditions at the interface between different mathematical models is an aspect of concurrent
methods. For example, at the MD/continuum interface, according to MD phonons are generated that are
not representable in the continuum region and therefore they might be reflected at the continuum/MD
interface. This suggests incorporation of interfaces with phonon absorbing properties. Methos to achieve
this include damping [113], Langevin equation [127], precomputing exact absorbing boundary conditions for
harmonic potentials [128], approximating exact absorbing boundary conditions and calibrating coefficients
to minimize reflection [129], matching the properties of continuum and MD at the interface [130], and the
bridging domain method [115, 131]. The refinement of the finite element mesh to atomistic scale at the
interface [113] may circumvent the phonon reflection issue. A review of various interface formulations can be
found in [114], while concurrent bridging between discrete dislocations and continuum region can be found
in [132, 133].
Buildup of temporal interfaces is another important aspect of concurrent bridging. In a typical atomistic-
continuum problem the time scale for integrating MD equations is dictated by the interatomic spacing and
highly heterogeneous interatomic connections. However, the time step at the continuum scale could be
much larger especially because the stiff connections have been homogenized and the spacing between the
discrete points (for instance, FE nodes) could be substantially larger. To aleviate this problem temporal
interfaces can be built using various multi-time-step methods [134] and local enrichment functions in time
domain [135], whereas the space-time interfaces can be constructed using space-time Discontinuous Galerkin
22
Figure 8: : (a) coexisting domains and (b) overlapping domains.
(DG) method [136]. The multi-step technique developed in [115] preserves stability of time integrators and
minimizes spurious reflections from the interfaces as well.
Notable concurrent multiscale methods are the Domain Bridging-based Concurrent Multiscale (DBCM)
[113, 115, 131], the Local Enrichment Concurrent Multiscale (LECM) [99, 126, 124, 125], and the Multi-Grid-
based Concurrent Multiscale (MGCM) [117, 118, 137]. It is important to make the distinction that these
multiscale methods are concerned with a concurrent bridging of dissimilar mathematical models representing
different scales, as opposed to the classical domain decomposition, multigrid and enrichment methods, that
are primarily concerned with efficient solution of a single scale models.
The basic ideas outlining all of these methods can be described with the help of Fig. 8. In the DBCM
approach the fine Ωf and coarse Ωc scale subdomains could either overlap or just be coexistent as shown in
Fig. 8. The interface, Γ, could be a manifold of the same or lower dimensionality with that of the boundary
manifold of course scale ∂Ωc.
In the MGCM and LECM approaches the subdomains are coexisting (Fig. 8a). The interface, Γ ⊂ Ωf ,
is a subdomain in Ωf defined to be in the vicinity close to the boundary ∂Γ as shown in Fig.8a.
The activities in this area in terms of ASME’s CIE division has mainly focused only on multigrid methods
for mechanics applications [138, 139, 140, 141, 142].
COMPUTATIONAL AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RET-
ROSPECTIVE
Computational technology has played a pivotal role into alleviating the complexity and efficiency associated
with the multi-field and multi-domain model generation, computational implementation and predominately
systemic simulation. The term will be used here to contain: (i) methods and techniques for model devel-
opment; (ii) their algorithmic encapsulation and implementation; and (iii) computational machinery and
information technology specifically developed to alleviate the complexity and of the associated formalisms in
23
Figure 9: Unified workflow of major modeling and simulation activities along with the computing spaces
they are embedded in.
a manner that practitioners of various disciplines (including product development) can extract utility from
these models.
In order to describe the context where computational and information technologies are currently con-
tributing relative to the automation they provide on replacing and/or improving human activities, we need
some specification of these human activities and their relationship from the M&S perspective. In respond-
ing to this need, we present a workflow of the major activities associated with M&S of continuum systems
that is capable of carrying the intensions of all multiphysics methods mentioned earlier in this survey. This
figure also presents how these activities relate to the “head & paper”, “symbolic” and “numerical” types of
computing that indicate employment of manual labor, symbolic algebra computing and numerical methods
computing respectively. The greatest percentage of the total work done in the computational multiphysics
(and even in the single-physics) M&S area falls onto the green activities of numerically solving the appropri-
ate PDEs and visualizing the simulated results after the appropriate formulation of the relevant boundary
value problem. This involves the development of algorithmic discretization and integration schemes, their
implementations – that often employ distribution of communicating codes over various computational in-
frastructures –, and execution acceleration methodologies like space and time domain decomposition and
distribution over various computational infrastructures. A much less amount of work has been reported in
the area of computational automation of the governing equation derivation activity as well as the activities
that this process is based on – like the conservation laws tailoring, the constitutive theory derivations and
the formulation axioms enrichment activities. Although a significant amount of work exists on the area
of constitutive modeling, very little computational automation has been employed in this effort. As our
ability to synthesize and process new materials more often than in the past increases, our need to model
their behavior also requires accelerating the activity of developing constitutive models and field theories that
describe their behavior. This makes the computational automation of this activity increasingly important
and almost necessary for the applications of the future.
Traditionally, software tools that integrate algorithms and methodologies, for solving and applying solu-
24
tions of systems of PDEs representing behavioral models of continuum systems, fall in the category of the
“Multidisciplinary Problem Solving Environments” (MPSEs). There are two very distinct schools of thought
associated with the philosophy, implementation details and intentions of MPSEs.
One reflects those systems that originated from the domain experts in multiphysics modeling and they
are the outgrowth of various codes used for research. These are the codes that usually have the strength
that they implement the most recent solution algorithms and methodologies and therefore represent the
cutting edge of research capability in the field and can produce the most efficient and accurate results.
However, they suffer from the weaknesses of being usable practically only by their developers, since they are
– in most cases – undocumented, unstable, buggy, and unverified (in the software sense). Their continuous
state of evolution plagues them with unreliability for general purpose problem solving and that renders
them practically unusable by the general practitioners from the product design community. On of the best
validated and recent representatives of this category has been proven to be the AERO-suite of codes [63, 143].
The second category of MPSEs is originating from the computer science and applied mathematics com-
munities that are also responsible for this naming [144]. These systems are designed to address a wide variety
of problems and they have been developed with more emphasis on user-centered utilization. They are also
more stable and more well documented. Their problem is that they are not optimized for high performance
for specific vertical applications and therefore they are more useful for educational purposes than they are
for focused highly targeted and optimized utilization.
The orthogonality between these two categories of MPSEs is apparent and has been identified and the
need for bridging the gap has been stressed out and pursued [145, 146].
Essential elements of progress within the context of the first category of MPSEs is subsequently described
for the multi-field and multi-domain efforts respectively.
Progress on Computational Multiphysics Modeling Technologies
Progress on Multi-Field Modeling :
During the 1970s and 1980s the emergence and significant evolution of symbolic algebra systems like
MACSYMA [147] and Mathematica [148], provided researchers with the opportunity to perform the very
rigorous and elaborate computations associated with the constitutive theory derivation process. This was
realized early enough by Noor and his colleagues [149] that gave the general the impetus for identifying
the opportunity and the challenge associated with this approach by the late 1980s [150]. Representative
examples of this practice was given for single-physics formulations for various CFT cases – mostly focused
in the area of viscoplasticity – [151, 152, 153, 154].
Progress on Multi-Domain Modeling :
25
The simultaneous solution of nonlinear fluid, fluid-mesh, and structural equations of motion is computa-
tionally intensive since it involves space-time integration of the coupled system of PDEs presented earlier. It
has been discussed elsewhere [56] that computational speed – which is essential for production environments
– favors implicit integration schemes and large computational steps, which underscores the importance of
paying special attention to the numerical stability properties of the scheme designed for time-integrating the
coupled fluid/structure equations of motion.
Time-accuracy is another crucial requirement when simulating a nonlinear aeroelastic phenomenon in
the time-domain, not only for performance objectives as outlined above, but also for fidelity reasons. In the
context of the three-field formulation of nonlinear aeroelastic problems, this is to be understood as a time-
accuracy requirement for the solution of the coupled equations 7. However, whether these governing equations
are solved by a monolithic, partitioned, strongly-coupled, or loosely coupled algorithm, a more time accurate
aeroelastic solution implies a more time-accurate time-stepping during the solution of the semi-discrete fluid
equation of motion [56] on dynamic meshes. Typically, a time-integration algorithm for solving the ALE fluid
equation is constructed by combining a preferred time-integrator for fluid-grid computations and an ad-hoc
procedure for evaluating the geometric quantities arising from the ALE formulation. Unfortunately, such an
approach for designing an ALE time-integrator does not necessarily preserve the order of time-accuracy of
its fixed-grid counterpart. This issue has been rarely recognized in the literature and among practitioners of
nonlinear computational aeroelasticity. To address this issue, two different methods for extending to moving
grids a preferred time-integrator, while preserving its order of time-accuracy established on fixed grids were
presented [155, 64].
Methods and algorithmic implementations for achieving both numerical stability and time accuracy have
been two of many features associated with the AERO suite of codes [63, 143] that originated development
at university of Colorado at Boulder and continuing at Stanford university. Besides this system of codes
various other software tools and systems for the parallel finite element analysis of single discipline and
multidisciplinary problems, including the Finite Element Tear and Interconnect (FETI) solver [156] and
the TOP/DOMDEC visualizer and mesh partitioner [157] have been developed and are very popular in
production engineering environments.
Progress on Multi-Scale Modeling :
To our knowledge as of today, there is no general-purpose multiscale code in existence. Nevertheless, com-
mercial packages, such as ANSYS, ABAQUS, DYNA among others, can be utilized to implement information-
passing multiscale algorithms through user-defined material models (USERMAT/UMAT) routines. By this
approach, the custom-made UMAT makes calls to either a user-provided numerical code or to a commercial
code itself. The former, has been used for modeling composite material and structures [158, 159], while the
26
latter has been employed for resolving multiple temporal scales associated with fatigue life predictions [160].
Multiscale enrichment schemes [99] can be implemented through a user-defined element (UEL) routines pro-
vided by most of the commercial finite element codes. By this approach finite elements with arbitrary number
of degrees-of-freedom representing fine scale enrichment features have been developed and implemented in
ABAQUS [99]. On the discrete level, the Network for Computational Nanotechnology [161] developed mul-
tiscale software with emphasis on micro-electronics. Coventor [162] is developing integrated multiscale tools
for MEMS and micro-fluidic devices with emphasis on continuum modeling tools. An integrated multiscale
framework that links continuum and discrete codes is currently under development at Rensselaer.
Regarding the progress associated with the second of the two categories of MPSEs as described earlier,
that originate from Computational Science groups are: the GasTurbnLab [163, 164] MPSE for gas turbine
engine design, the WebPDELab [165] PSE for solving systems of PDEs, user specific domain knowledge
efforts have also been implemented to empower users in the selection of need-based scientific software for
modeling and solving physical problems such as PYTHIA-II [166]. The most comprehensive contribution
on this area has been performed at Purdue University with many additional agent- and non-agent based
systems [167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177].
Information Technology Infrastructure Progress
The plethora of available choices on computational infrastructure (hardware, software, networking) along
with specific domain of application and user specific backgrounds and needs have introduced a large number
of research issues associated with the computational implementation of Multidisciplinary Problem Solving
Environments (MPSEs). The most important of these issues are: (1) ability and optimization for compu-
tation over distributed resources, (2) ability for dynamic migrating component distribution, (3) adaptive
modeling capability, (4) user dependent customization, (5) collaborative knowledge representation and inter-
activity, (6) dealing with heterogeneity of legacy and new code, and finally (7) ability to sustain component
fault tolerance.
During the last decade there was a strong current of efforts that attempted to address as many as of
the issues as possible. These systems can be classified according to particular features of their use by the
following categories:
(1) Systems for interactive program construction: Systems in this category provide support for interactive
program construction based on a two dimensional data-flow diagramming approach that in many cases
maps onto the workflow diagram representing the sequencing of activities of the researcher when designing,
building and executing all the necessary operations for obtaining final simulation results. Noted systems in
this category are SCIRun [178],
27
(2) Systems for remote application configuration and deployment: These systems use existing high perfor-
mance back-end resources and provide powerful visual authoring toolkits to configure and deploy distributed
applications. Therefore, they are an extension of the previous category in that computational modules need
not be restricted within one execution environment within one machine. The CoG Kits [179] provide com-
modity access to the Globus [180] metacomputing environment. The WebFlow [181] and Gateway [182]
systems provide support for configuring, deploying and analyzing distributed applications. More recently
systems like ICENI [183], Taverna and MyGrid [184], Teuta and Askalon [185, 186], and finally Kepler [187].
(3) Systems for interactive run-time steering and control:
Event based steering systems: In these systems, monitoring and steering actions are based on low-level
system ”events” that occur during the course of program execution. The Progress [188] and Magellan [189]
systems use this approach and require a server process executing in the same address space as the application
to enable interaction. The Computational Steering Environment (CSE) [190] uses a data manager as a
blackboard for communicating data values between the application and the clients.
Systems with high-level abstractions for steering and control: The Mirror Object Steering System (MOSS)[191]
provides a high-level model for steering applications and the DISCOVER [192] control network extends this
approach.
Collaboration groupware: These systems primarily focus on enabling collaboration but occasional they
can also provide support for problem solving [192].
Some efforts to bridge the gap between the two schools of thought for MPSEs while satisfying the
available computational technology and focusing on the multiphysics characteristics, – but for the application
context aircraft design – have originated by the proposed architecture and initial implementations of Virtual
Wind Tunnel Environment (VWT) based on nonlinear material behavior [193, 194, 195]. These efforts have
culminated into the even more recent effort of the Data Driven Environment for Multiphysics Applications
(DDEMA) [145, 47, 196, 197, 146] that extended the VWT motivations to include other multiphysics design
contexts such that of a combination of sensor and computational grids for modeling fire dynamics evolution
and and implementing the first responders decision support solutions. Some of this work has also been
reported during the CIE activities [45].
Additional work done under the auspices of the CIE division activities has been performed in various areas
that although they were not explicitly related to multiphysics efforts, nevertheless they were very supportive
on many fundamental contexts that are always present in single-physics M&S efforts. Thus, many (if not
all) of the efforts of the Finite Element Techniques and Computational Technologies (CTFE) subcommittee
that has been recently expanded its scope and was renamed to Computational Technologies for Engineering
Science Applications (CTESA) fall in this category. In particular, a significant amount of progress has been
28
reported to various PDE discretization techniques including Finite Element analysis methods and associated
technologies. In the period between 1987 and 2004 the CIE conference proceedings include 15 papers in the
combustion modeling area, 89 papers in the computational mechanics area, 10 papers in the computational
fluid dynamics area, and 24 papers in the flow and heat transfer area.
Heterogeneity of involved codes, software and hardware architectures continuously strains the data ex-
change capabilities of modelers utilizing the above mentioned technologies. This need has been recognized
and particular efforts have been experienced within CIE to develop and utilize technologies that contribute
to intra- or inter-application integration and data exchange transparency [198, 199].
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The history of predicting the future evolution of technology has been replete from famous disappointments
and failures. In 1899 W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin) asserted that “radio has no future”, “heavier than air flying
machines are impossible”, and “X-rays will prove to be a hoax” [200]. In 1943 IBM’s T. Watson expressed
that “I think there is a world market for maybe five computers” [200]. Their future has been our past for a
long time, enough for us to know that these and many other examples demonstrate how easily very capable
researchers and technologists – with distinguished domain expertise – can be proven wrong.
Therefore, in an effort to avoid similar disappointments, we are going to avoid far reaching predictions
relative to the topic of this survey and we shall rather focus on the emerging and continuing trends. However,
we will not refrain from expressing a short outline on where we feel it would be wiser that the future of M&S
modeling evolves.
Arguably the one certainty in our considerations about the future will have to take into account three
fundamentally undeniable driving factors. The first one is that computational technology will continue
improving in anticipated and unanticipated manner. We call this factor the “technology opportunity”. The
second one refers to the product development and operation economic pressures for reducing total cost of
ownership and increasing return on investment. We call this factor the “economic realism”. The third one
refers to the ever increasing need for holistic cradle-to-grave product development of non-simplified full and
detailed complete systems, tailored for maximum efficiency in supporting multidisciplinary missions and
needs. We call this factor “technical realism” factor. It is characteristic that any combination of two of
these three factors is antagonistic to the remaining one factor. This realization has been referred to as the
“principle of technological aggravation” [201] and has been recognized as the nemesis of technology products
mostly from the business perspective.
Defeating this “principle” defines implicitly the context of where we feel things might evolve. Practices,
technologies, methodologies, algorithms, software, hardware, simulations, and models that contribute to-
29
wards product development of multiphysics systems, must be able to allow simultaneous satisfaction of the
three factors mentioned.
In particular, we anticipate that instead of trying to improve multiphysics product development from
each one of these factors’ perspective separately, the practices of the future should consider the holistic
context of the problem and the counter-activity between the factors . Below we describe specialized trends
from each one of the three areas for multiphysics system product development.
For multi-field M&S perspective, it is essential that experimentally-based massive and multi-dimensional
data-gathering to drive automated modeling via the support of extensive symbolic-algebra machinery imple-
menting theorem proving methods and inverse methods via generalized global optimization techniques, will
be a potential area of evolution. This will not only increase confidence of model prediction (since models will
be based on measured data expressing solid quantification of behavioral aspects of the respective physical
systems), but it will also help managing representational complexity of associated models and reduce the
time of development of these models as well.
For multi-domain M&S perspective, it is inevitable that the evolution of computational power provides
opportunities for increasing the number of domains and fields that participate in any model formulations of
the future for more comprehensive physical problems. Reduced order modeling techniques in conjunction
of precomputation methodologies for simulation synthesis, will improve our ability to perform real-time or
near-real-time simulation of very large and complex systems. Combining parallelism in space and time for
attacking integration of the PDEs for very large problems will be extended from single- to multi-physics
formulations, thus further contributing to computational efficiency.
For the multi-scale M&S perspective, it is essential that two particular issues are addressed globally
and in harmony with the previous two areas. First, connections have to be established between system
manufacturing processes (i.e. material processing) and the various scales of modeling, if we want to extend
the idea of “materials by design” to the idea of “multiphysics systems by design” so it would become possible
to tailor manufacturing processes to desired performance characteristics along all scale levels. Secondly, scale
modeling coupling has to be extended such equivalence of behaviors in various scale levels can be formally
proven to allow intra-scalar parameter identification through data-driven model formation from experiments
within all possible scales.
Another direction applicable to all three multiphysics perspectives is the ever important measures against
maintenance of degrading multiphysics systems. Clearly, nonlinear dissipative modeling will become more
and more prevalent in order to allow aging conditions for automated maintenance of multiphysics systems
important to most if not all infrastructure, industrial and defence sectors. Systemic in-line processing and
self-healing technologies and prototypes may appear in the next 10 years to address the general maintenance
30
issue associated with the chronic degradation of various systems leading to their multi-functional aging.
In terms of the computational technology associated with the generation, management and exploitation
of M&S approaches, in conjunction with the dynamic and fast evolution of technology, it is expected that:
(1) additional contexts of interest will become a part of the holistic design process, to address not only the
concerns of the various stake-holders associated with the creation and utilization of multiphysics systems;
(2) will provide some permanent knowledge representations that either remain common for all interested
parties or are dynamically transformable to match the user customization needs without costly replication
of effort. Independence of point of view
In the immediate future we anticipate technologies that contribute to intra- or inter-application integra-
tion and data exchange transparency will be developed and evolved as more and more contemporary tools
facilitate their exploitation from third party users.
The recently announced initiative on “Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems” by the National
Science Foundation [202] is a clear indicator that these trends are not only anticipated but are fostered as
well.
CONCLUSIONS
In the present paper we have defined the context space of multiphysics applications from the M&S perspective
in terms of the number of fields domains and scales involved. A survey of activities for each one of these
areas was presented accompanied by a retrospective on the computational technologies involved for M&S.
Finally, a near future description of the anticipated direction of research concludes the main part of the
present paper. Special attention has been given into outlining the contributions of ASME’s CIE division
activities mostly through the conferences held from 1987 until today.
In closing, it should be mentioned that the efforts by the CIE division of ASME have demonstrated
an open minded attitude that has been extremely beneficial for the wide audiences and has exposed many
technologists to many of the issues mentioned or implied in the present paper.
Acknowledgement. The authors acknowledges the support by the National Science Foundation under grants
ITR-0205663, CMS-0310596, 0303902, Sandia contract DE-ACD4-94AL85000, and ONR contract N00014-97-1-
0687.
References
[1] D. M. Rowe. CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1995.
31
[2] J. M. C. Duhamel. Second memoire sur les phenomenes thermo-mecaniques. J. de l‘Ecole Polytechnique,
15:1, 1837.
[3] C. L. M. H. Navier. Sur les lois des mouvement des fluides, en ayant egard a l’adhesion des molecules.
Ann. Chimie, 19:244–260, 1821.
[4] C. L. M. H. Navier. Sur les lois des mouvement des fluides, en ayant egard a l’adhesion des molecules.
Bull. Soc. Philomath., 298:75–79, 1822.
[5] J. C. Maxwell. A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, CLV:459–512, 1864.
[6] J. C. Maxwell. A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1873.
[7] W. Voigt. Lehrbuch der Kristallohysik. Teubner, Leipsig, 1910.
[8] H. Jeffreys. The thermodynamics of an elastic solid. Proc. Cambr. Phill. Soc., Cambridge, 1930.
[9] P. F. Papkowitch. On the general solution of thermal stresses (in russian). Prikl. Mat. Mekh., 1 and
2, 1937.
[10] M. Sokolnikoff. Thermal stresses in elastic plates. Trans. Amer. Amth. Soc., 45:235, 1939.
[11] M. A. Biot. Thermoelasticity and irreversible thermodynamics. J. Appl. Phys., 27:240, 1956.
[12] L. Onsanger. Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. i. Phys. Rev., 37:405, 1931.
[13] L. Onsanger. Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. ii. Phys. Rev., 38:2265–2279, 1931.
[14] I. Prigogine. Etude Thermodynamique des Phenomenes Irreversible. Desoer, Liege, 1947.
[15] S. R. de Groot. Thermodynamics of irreversible processes. North Holland Publ. Co., Amsterdam, 1951.
[16] W. Nowacki. Dynamic Problems of Thermoelasticity. Nordhoff International Publishing, Leyden, The
Nederlands, 1975.
[17] W. Nowacki. Thermoelasticity. Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, 2nd edition, 1986.
[18] G. A. Maugin and A. Berezovski. Material formulation of finite-strain thermoelasticity and applica-
tions. J. of Thermal Stresses, 22(4-5):421–49, 1999.
[19] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz. Electrodynamics of Continuous Media. Pergamon Press, Oxford,
UK, 1960.
[20] R. A. Toupin. A dynamical theory of elastic dielectrics. Int. J. Eng. Sci., 1:101, 1963.
32
[21] C. Z. Rosen, B. V. Hiremath, and R. Newnham. Piezoelectricity (Key Papers in Physics). Amer. Inst.
of Physics, 1991.
[22] F. C. Moon. Magneto-Solid Mechanics. John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, USA, 1984.
[23] J. B. Ablas. Electro-magneto-elasticity. In J. L. Zeman and F. Ziegler, editors, Topics in Applied
Continuum Mechanics, pages 72–114, Wien, Germany, 1974. Springer-Verlag.
[24] P. Puri. Plane waves thermoelasticity and magnetothermoelasticity. Int. J. of Engng. Sci., 10:467–477,
1972.
[25] H. F. Tiersten. On the nonlinear equations of thermo-electroelasticity. Int. J. Eng. Sci., 9:587, 1971.
[26] G. C. Sih, J. G. Michopoulos, and S. C. Chou. Hygrothermoelasticity. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers
(now Kluwer Academic), 1986.
[27] A. C. Eringen and G. A. Maugin. Electrodynamics of Continua I. Foundations and Solid Media.
Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, USA, 1990.
[28] J. G. Michopoulos and G. C. Sih. Coupled theory of temperature moisture deformation and electro-
magnetic fields. Technical Report IFSM-84-123, 1984.
[29] S. R. de Groot and P. Mazur. Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics. North Holland Publ. Co., Amster-
dam, 1962.
[30] R. Haase. Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes. Addison Wesley Publishing Co. Inc., Reading,
Mass., 1969.
[31] S. R. de Groot and P. Mazur. Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics. Dover Publications Inc., New York,
1984.
[32] R. Haase. Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes. Dover Publications Inc., New York, 1990.
[33] R. Clausius. Uber eine veranderte form des zweiten hauptsatzes der mechanischen warmetheorie.
93:481–506, 1854.
[34] R. Clausius. Uber die anwendung des satzes von der aequivalenz der verwandlungen auf die innere
arbeit. 116:73–112, 1862.
[35] P. Duhem. Recherches sur l’hydrodynamique. Ann. Toulouse, 3:315–377, 1901.
[36] C. Truesdell. The mechanical foundations of elasticity and fluid mechanics. J. Rational Mech. Anal.,
1:125–171,173–300, 1952.
33
[37] C. Truesdell and R. Toupin. The Classical Field Theories, volume 1 of Handbuch der Physik ( Her-
ausgegeben con S. Flugge) Bd. III. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 1960.
[38] B. D. Coleman and W. Noll. The thermodynamics of elastic materials with heat conduction and
viscocity. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal., 13:167–178, 1963.
[39] B. D. Coleman. Thermodynamics of materials with memory. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal., 17:1–46,
1964.
[40] B. D. Coleman. On thermodynamics, strain impulses, and viscoelasticity. Arch. Rational Mech. Anal.,
17:230–254, 1964.
[41] C. Truesdell and W. Noll. The Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics, volume 3 of Handbuch der
Physik ( Herausgegeben con S. Flugge) Bd. III. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 1965.
[42] A. E. Green and P. M. Naghdi. A unified procedure for construction of theories of deformable media.
i. classical continuum physics. Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. A, 448(1934):335–356, 1995.
[43] A. E. Green and P. M. Naghdi. A unified procedure for construction of theories of deformable media.
ii. generalized continua. Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. A, 448(1934):357–378, 1995.
[44] A. E. Green and P. M. Naghdi. A unified procedure for construction of theories of deformable media.
iii. mixtures of interacting continua. Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. A, 448(1934):379–388, 1995.
[45] J. G. Michopoulos. Numerical solution of multiphysics large deflection plates for ionic polymeric
artificial muscle applications. In ASME 2003 Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers
and Information in Engineering Conference, Chicago, volume I668CD. ASME Press, 2003. Paper-
No.:DETC2003/CIE-48207.
[46] John Michopoulos. Computational modelling of multi-field ionic continuum systems. In Marian Bubak,
G. Dick van Albada, Peter M. A. Sloot, and Jack Dongarra, editors, Computational Science - ICCS
2004, 4th International Conference, Kraków, Poland, June 6-9, 2004, Proceedings, Part IV, volume
3039 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 621–628. Springer, 2004.
[47] J. Michopoulos, P. Tsompanopoulou, E. Houstis, J. Rice, C. Farhat, M. Lesoinne, and F. Lechenault.
Design architecture of a data driven environment for multiphysics applications. In ASME 2003 De-
sign Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference,
Chicago, volume I668CD. ASME Press, 2003. Paper-No.:DETC2003/CIE-48268.
[48] R. L. Bisplingho and H. Ashley. Principles of Aeroelasticity. Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1962.
34
[49] Y. C. Fung. An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity. Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1969.
[50] R. Dat and J. L. Meurzec. Sur les calculs de flottement par la method dite du “balayage” en frequence
reduite. La Recherche Aerospatiale, 133, 1969.
[51] H. J. Hassig. An approximate true damping solution of the utter equation by determinant iteration.
Journal of Aircraft, 8:885–889, 1971.
[52] E. Albano and W. P. Rodden. A doublet-lattice method for calculating lift distribution on oscillating
surfaces in subsonic flow. AIAA Journal, 7:279–285, 1969.
[53] H. Ashley and G. Zartarian. Piston theory - a new aerodynamic tool for the aeroelastician. Journal
Aeronautical Sciences, 23:1109–1118, 1956.
[54] E. Livne. The future of airplane aeroelasticity. In International Forum on Aeroelasticity and Structural
Dynamics, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 4-6 June 2003. Pineridge Press International Limited.
[55] R. N. Yurkovich, D. D. Liu, and P. C. Chen. The state-of-the-art of unsteady aerodynamics for
high performance aircraft. In 39th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 8-11
January 2001. AIAA Paper No. 2001-0428.
[56] C. Farhat. Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics, chapter CFD-Based Nonlinear Computational
Aeroelasticity. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2004.
[57] E. H. Dowell. Nonlinear aeroelasticity. AIAA Paper No. 90-1031, 1990.
[58] J. W. Edwards and J. B. Malone. Current status of computational methods for transonic unsteady
aerodynamics and aeroelastic applications. Computing Systems in Engineering, 3:545–569, 1992.
[59] C. Farhat and M. Lesoinne. On the accuracy, stability, and performance of the solution of three-
dimensional nonlinear transient aeroelastic problems by partitioned procedures. In 37th Structural
Dynamics Meeting, Salt Lake City, Utah, 15-17 April 2001. AIAA Paper No. 96-1388 1996.
[60] M. J. Smith, C. E. S. Cesnik, and D. H. Hodges. Evaluation of some data transfer algorithms for
noncontiguous meshes. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 13:52–58, 2000.
[61] M. Patil, D. H. Hodges, and C. E. S. Cesnik. Nonlinear aeroelastic analysis of complete aircraft in
subsonic flow. Journal of Aircraft, 37:753–760, 2000.
[62] P. M. Hartwich, S. K. Dobbs, A. E. Arslan, and S. C. Kim. Nonlinear aeroelastic analysis of complete
aircraft in subsonic flow. Journal of Aircraft, 38:239–247, 2001.
35
[63] C. Farhat, P. Geuzaine, and G. Brown. Application of a three-field nonlinear fluid-structure formulation
to the prediction of the aeroelastic parameters of an f-16 fighter. Computer and Fluids, 32:3–29, 2003.
[64] P. Geuzaine, C. Grandmont, and C. Farhat. Design and analysis of ale schemes with provable sec-
ondorder time-accuracy for inviscid and viscous flow simulations. Journal of Computational Physics,
191:206–227, 2003.
[65] M. Lesoinne and C. Farhat. In 11th AIAA Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference, pages AIAA
Paper No. 93–3325 1993, Orlando, Florida, 6-9 July 1993. AIAA.
[66] C. Farhat, K. Pierson, and C. Degand. Multidisciplinary simulation of the maneuvering of an aircraft.
Engineering with Computers, 17:16–27, 2001.
[67] K. Maute, M. Lesoinne, and C. Farhat. Optimization of aeroelastic systems using coupled analytical
sensitivities. In 38th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 10-13 January 2000.
AIAA Paper No. 2000-0560 2000.
[68] K. Maute, M. Nikbay, and C. Farhat. Coupled analytical sensitivity analysis and optimization of
three-dimensional nonlinear aeroelastic systems. AIAA Journal, 39:2051–2061, 2001.
[69] C. H. Stephens and A. S. Arena Jr. Cfd-based aeroservoelastic predictions with comparisons to bench-
mark experimental data. In 37th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 11-14
January 1999. AIAA Paper No. 99-0766 1999.
[70] S. Osher and R. P. Fedkiw. Level set methods: an overview and some recent results. Journal of
Computational Physics, 169:463–502, 2001.
[71] J. Donea. An arbitrary lagrangian-eulerian finite element method for transient fluid-structure interac-
tions. Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engng., 33:689–723, 1982.
[72] O. A. Kandil and H. A. Chuang. Unsteady vortex-dominated ows around maneuvering wings over a
wide range of mach numbers. In 26th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, Nevada,
11-14 January 1988. AIAA Paper No. 88-0317 1988.
[73] C. Farhat and T. Y. Lin. Transient aeroelastic computations using multiple moving frames of reference.
In AIAA 8th Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Portland, Oregon, 20-22 August 1990. AIAA Paper
No. 90-3053 1990.
[74] T. Tezduyar, M. Behr, and J. Liou. A new strategy for finite element computations involving moving
boundaries and interfaces - the deforming spatial domain/space-time procedure: I. the concept and the
36
preliminary numerical tests. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 94:339–351,
1992.
[75] A. Masud and T. J. R. Hughes. A space-time galerkin/least-squares finite element formulation of the
navier-stokes equations for moving domain problems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 146:91–1261, 1997.
[76] H L. Dryden and J. E. Duberg. Aeroelastic effects of aerodynamic heating. In Fifth AGARD General
Assembly, Canada, 15-16 June 1955. AGARD.
[77] E. Thornton ad P. Dechamphai. Coupled flow, thermal, and structural analysis of aerodynamically
heated panels. Journal of Aircraft, 25:1052–1059, 1988.
[78] R. Loehner, C. Yang, and J. Cebral et al. Fluid-structure-thermal interaction using a loose coupling
algorithm and adaptive unstructured grids. In 29th AIAA Fluid Dynamics Conference, Albuquerque,
NM, 15-18 June 1998. AIAA.
[79] H. Tran and C. Farhat. An integrated platform for the simulation of fluid-structure-thermal interaction
problems. AIAA J., (in press).
[80] F.A. Wyczalek. Elementary computer modeling applied to twa 800 fuel tank forensic issues. In
ASME 1998 Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering
Conference, volume I416CD. ASME Press, 1998. Paper-No.:DETC98/CIE-6021.
[81] R. S. Amano and S. N. Singh. Combustion process in perforated porous mat flow in a turbine com-
bustor. In ASME 1999 Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in
Engineering Conference, volume I433CD. ASME Press, 1999. Paper-No.:DETC99/CIE-9052.
[82] C. W. S. To and M. A. OGrady. Response of submerged structures by the finite element-cum-boundary
element method. In ASME 2001 Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Infor-
mation in Engineering Conference, volume I499CD. ASME Press, 2001. Paper-No.:DETC2001/CIE-
21274.
[83] M. T. Shervani-Tabar. Dynamics of a pulsating bubble beneath a free surface. In ASME 2002 Design
Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, volume
I572CD. ASME Press, 2002. Paper-No.:DETC2002/CIE-34471.
[84] W. Schreiber and J. Kuo. A computational study of the interaction of melting soil with moisture trans-
port in the native soil. In ASME 1998 Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and
37
Information in Engineering Conference, volume I416CD. ASME Press, 1998. Paper-No.:DETC98/CIE-
6037.
[85] D. Wang, H. S. Whitesell, and T.Overfelt. Two-dimensional combined radiation and conduction tran-
sient heat transfer in directional solidification. In ASME 1999 Design Engineering Technical Con-
ferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, volume I433CD. ASME Press,
1999. Paper-No.:DETC99/CIE-9050.
[86] K. Namba. Revealing the mystery of the bacterial flagellum - a self-assembling nanomachine with fine
switching capability. Japan Nanonet Bulletin, pages 93–97, 2004.
[87] R.E. Rudd and J.Q. Broughton. Coarse-grained molecular dynamics and the atomic limit of finite
elements. Phys. Rev. B, 58:93–97, 1998.
[88] T. Zohdi and P. Wriggers. Introduction to computational micromechanics. In Lecture Notes in applied
and Computational Mechanics. Springer, 2004.
[89] W.A. Curtin and R.E. Miller. Atomistic/continuum coupling in computational materials science.
Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 11:R33–R68, 2003.
[90] J. Fish. Multiscaling in Molecular and Continuum Mechanics, chapter Discrete-to-Continuum Multi-
scale Bridging, page To appear. Springer, 2006.
[91] J. Tinsley Oden, S. Prudhomme, A. Romkes, and P. Bauman. Multi-scale modelling of physical
phenomena: Adaptive control of models. Technical Report ICES Report 05-13, ICES, University of
Texas Austin, 2005.
[92] J. Fish and C. Schwob. Towards constitutive model based on atomistics. Journal of Multiscale Com-
putational Engineering, 1:43–56, 2003.
[93] W. Chen and J. Fish. A generalized space-time mathematical homogenization theory for bridging
atomistic and continuum scales. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 2005.
submitted for publication.
[94] J. Fish, W. Chen, and G. Nagai. Nonlocal dispersive model for wave propagation in heterogeneous
media. part 1: One-dimensional case. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
54:331–346, 2002.
[95] J. Fish, W. Chen, and G. Nagai. Nonlocal dispersive model for wave propagation in heterogeneous
media. part 2: Multi-dimensional case. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
54:347–363, 2002.
38
[96] P. W. Chung. Computational method for atomistic homogenization of nano-patterned point defect
structures. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 60:833–859, 2004.
[97] E. B. Tadmor, M. Ortiz, and R. Phillips. Quasicontinuum analysis of defects in crystals. Phil. Mag.,
A 73:1529, 1996.
[98] E. B. Tadmor, G. S. Smith, N. Bernstein, and E. Kaxiras. Mixed finite element and atomistic formu-
lation for complex crystals. Phys. Rev. B, 59, 1999.
[99] J. Fish and Z. Yuan. Multiscale enrichment based on partition of unity. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering, 62(10):1341–1359, 2005. in print.
[100] I. Babuska, G. Caloz, and J. E. Osborn. Special finite element methods for a class of second order
elliptic problems with rough coefficients. SIAM. J. Numer. Anal., pages 945–981, 1994.
[101] J. M. Melenk and I. Babuska. The partition of unity finite element method: Basic theory and appli-
cations. Comp Methods in Appl. Mech and Engnr., 139:289–314, 1996.
[102] N. Moes, J. Dolbow, and T. Belytschko. A finite element method for crack growth without remeshing.
Int. J. Num. Meth. Engnr., 46:131–150, 1999.
[103] T.J.R. Hughes. Multiscale phenomena; green’s functions, the dirichlet-to-neumann formulation, sub-
grid scale models, bubbles and the origins of the stabilized methods. Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engrg.,
127:387–401, 1995.
[104] W. E and B. Engquist. The heterogeneous multiscale methods. Comm. Math. Sci., 1:87–132, 2002.
[105] R.E. Rudd. Coarse-grained molecular dynamics for computer modeling of nanomechanical systems.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 2, 2004.
[106] I. Babuska and J. E. Osborn. Generalized finite element methods: their performance and their relation
to mixed methods. SIAM. J. Numer. Anal., 20:510–536, 1983.
[107] C. Farhat, I. Harari, and L.P. Franca. The discontinuous enrichment method. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 190:6455–6479, 2001.
[108] I.G. Kevrekidis. Equation-free coarsegrained multiscale computation: enabling microscopic simulators
to perform system-level tasks. Communications in Mathematical Sciences, 1:715–762, 2003.
[109] C. Picu. On the functional form of non-local elasticity kernels. JMPS, 50:1923–1939, 2002.
39
[110] M. Grujicic, G. Cao, and P.F. Joseph. Multiscale modelling of delamination and fracture of poly-
crystaline lamellar γ - tial + α 2 - ti3al alloys. International Journal of Multiscale Computational
Engineering, 1:1–22, 2003.
[111] C. Picu. A nonlocal formulation of rubber elasticity. International Journal of Multiscale Computational
Engineering, 1:23–32, 2003.
[112] H. T. Johnson, R. Bose, B.B. Goldberg, and H.D. Robinson. Effects of externally applied stress on
the properties of quantum dot nanostructutres. International Journal of Multiscale Computational
Engineering, 1:33–42, 2003.
[113] J. Q. Broughton, F. F. Abraham, N. Bernstein, and E. Kaxiras. Concurrent coupling of length scales:
Methodology and application. Phys. Rev. B, 60:57–72, 1999.
[114] R. E. Miller. Direct coupling of atomistic and continuum mechanics in computational material science.
International Journal of Multiscale Computational Engineering, 1:57–72, 2003.
[115] T. Belytschko and S. Xiao. Coupling methods for continuum model with molecular model. International
Journal of Multiscale Computational Engineering, 1:115–126, 2003.
[116] G. J. Wagner, E. G. Karpov, and W. K. Liu. Molecular dynamics boundary conditions for regular
crystal lattices. Computer Method in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 193:1579–1601, 2004.
[117] J. Fish and V. Belsky. Multigrid method for a periodic heterogeneous medium. part 1: Convergence
studies for one-dimensional case. Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engng., 126:1–16, 1995.
[118] J. Fish and V. Belsky. Multigrid method for a periodic heterogeneous medium. part 2: Multiscale
modeling and quality control in mutidimensional case. Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engng., 126:17–38,
1995.
[119] J. D. Moulton, J. E. Dendy, and J. M. Hyman. The black box multigrid numerical homogenization
algorithm. J. Comput. Phys., 141:1–29, 1998.
[120] S. Knapek. Matrix-dependent multigrid-homogenization for diffusion problems. SIAM. J. Numer.
Anal., 20:515–533, 1999.
[121] D.K. Datta, R.C. Picu, and M.S. Shephard. Composite grid atomistic continuum method: An adaptive
approach to bridge continuum with atomistic analysis. International Journal of Multiscale Computa-
tional Engineering, 2, 2004.
40
[122] J. Fish and W. Chen. Discrete-to-continuum bridging based on multigrid principles. Computer Method
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 193:1693–1711, 2004.
[123] H. Waisman and J. Fish. Space-time multigrid for bridging discrete scales. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering, 2005. in preparation.
[124] J. Fish and S. Markolefas. The s-version of the finite element method for multilayer laminates. Inter-
national Journal of Multiscale Computational Engineering, 33:1081–1105, 1992.
[125] J. Fish, S. Markolefas, R. Guttal, and P. Nayak. On adaptive multilevel superposition of finite element
meshes. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 14:135–164, 1994.
[126] T. Strouboulis, I. Babuska, and K. Copps. The generalized finite element method. Int. J. Num. Meth.
Engnr., 190:4081–4193, 2001.
[127] G. J. Wagner and W. K. Liu. Coupling of atomic and continuum simulations using a bridging scale
decomposition. J. Comput. Phys., 190:249–274, 2003.
[128] W. Cai, M. de Koning, V. Bulatov, and S. Yip. Minimizing boundary reflections in coupleddomain
simulations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 85:3213–3216, 2000.
[129] W. E and Z. Huang. Matching conditions in atomistic-continuum modeling of materials. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 87:135501, 2001.
[130] K. Muralidharan, P. A. Deymier, and J. H. Simmons. A concurrent multiscale finite difference
time/domain/molecular dynamics method for bridging an elastic continuum to an atomic system.
Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 11:487–501, 2003.
[131] H. Ben Dhi. Multiscale mechanical problems: the arlequin method. CR Acad. Sc., Paris, 326 Ser-II
b:899–904, 1998.
[132] L. E. Shilkrot, R. E. Miller, and W. A. Curtin. Coupled atomistic and discrete dislocation plasticity.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 89:025501–1–025501–4, 2002.
[133] H. M. Zbib and T. Diaz de la Rubia. A multiscale model of plasticity. Int. J. Plast., 18:1133–1163,
2002.
[134] T. Belytschko, P. Smolinski, and W. K. Liu. Multi-stepping implicit-explicit procedures in transient
analysis. In International Conference on Innovative Methods for Nonlinear Problems. Pineridge Press
International Limited, 1984.
41
[135] C. L. Bottasso. Multiscale temporal integration. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-
neering, 191:2815–2830, 2002.
[136] L. Yin, A. Acharya, N. Sobh, R. Haber, and D. Tortorelli. A Spacetime Discontinuous Galerkin Method
for Elastodynamic Analysis. Discontinuous Galerkin Methods: Theory, Computation and Applications.
Springer, 2000.
[137] J. Fish and V. Belsky. Generalized aggregation multilevel solver. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 40:4341–4361, 1997.
[138] I.D.Parsons and J. F. Hall. A multigrid method for the finite element solution of some solid mechanics
problems. In ASME 1987 Information in Engineering Conference, volume G0399C, page 407. ASME
Press, 1987.
[139] T.Hwang and I.D.Parsons. Solution of structural dynamics problems using a multigrid method. In
ASME 1989 Information in Engineering Conference, volume G502B, page 1. ASME Press, 1989.
[140] I.D.Parsons. A parallel multigrid algorithm for solid mechanics problems. In ASME 1990 Information
in Engineering Conference, volume G515B, page 455. ASME Press, 1990.
[141] Y. Pressburger, R. Perucchio, and D. A. Field. A parallel multigrid algorithm for solid mechanics
problems. In ASME 1991 Information in Engineering Conference, volume G0639B, page 61. ASME
Press, 1991.
[142] G. E. Cardew, G. M. Seed, and W. K. Koh. Applications of a local multigrid approach to the finite
element analysis of a crack-microcrack problem. In ASME 1998 Design Engineering Technical Con-
ferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, volume I416CD. ASME Press,
1998. Paper-No.:DETC98/CIE-6036.
[143] P. Geuzaine, C. Harris, G. Brown, and C. Farhat. Aeroelastic dynamic analysis of a full f-16 configu-
ration for various flight conditions. AIAA Journal, 41:363–371, 2003.
[144] E. Gallopoulos, E. N. Houstis, and J. R. Rice. Computer as thinker/doer: Problem solving environ-
ments for computational science. IEEE Comp. Sci. Engr., 1:11–23, 1994.
[145] John Michopoulos, Panagiota Tsompanopoulou, Elias N. Houstis, John R. Rice, Charbel Farhat, Michel
Lesoinne, and Frederic Lechenault. Ddema: A data driven environment for multiphysics applications.
In Computational Science - ICCS 2003, International Conference, Melbourne, Australia and St. Pe-
tersburg, Russia, June 2-4, 2003. Proceedings, Part IV, volume 2660 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 309–318. Springer, 2003.
42
[146] J. Michopoulos, P. Tsompanopoulou, E. Houstis, C. Farhat, M. Lesoinne, J. Rice, and A. Joshi. On
a data-driven environment for multiphysics applications. Future Generation Computer Systems, 21,
April 2005.
[147] W. A. Martin and J. Moses. Mathlab (MACSYMA). MAC Programming Report V, July 1969 to
December 1970 1970.
[148] Stephen Wolfram. Mathematica: A System for Doing Mathematics by Computer. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, USA, 1988.
[149] A. K. Noor and C. M. Andersen. Computerized symbolic manipulation in structural mechanics —
progress and potential. Computers and Structures, 10:95–118, 1979.
[150] R. H. Lance. The potential of symbolic computation in engineering education: the opportunity and
the challenge. In A. K. Noor, I. Elishakoff, and G. Hulbert, editors, Symbolic computations and their
impact on mechanics, pages 339–360, New York, NY, USA, 1990. American Society of Mechanical
Engineers.
[151] H. Q. Tan and X. Dong. Symbolic derivation of visco-plastic material equations. In Proc. Beijing Int.
Conf. on System Simulation and Scientific Computing, pages 969–973, Beijing, China, 1989.
[152] S. M. Arnold, A. F. Saleeb, H. Q. Tan, and Y. Zhang. Explicit robust schemes for implementation of
general principal value-based constitutive models. Comp. & Struct., 53(6):1437–1451, 1994.
[153] V. A. Palmov. Large strains in viscoplacity. Acta Mechanica, 125:129–139, 1997.
[154] A. Niemunis and M. Cundy. On hyperelasticity for clays. Computers and Geotechnics, 23:221–236,
1998.
[155] B. Koobus and C. Farhat. Second-order time-accurate and geometrically conservative implicit schemes
for flow computations on unstructured dynamic meshes. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 170:103–130, 1999.
[156] C. Farhat, K. Pierson, and M. Lesoinne. The second generation of feti methods and their application
to the parallel solution of large-scale linear and geometrically nonlinear structural analysis problems.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 184:333–374, 2000.
[157] C. Farhat, S. Lanteri, and H. D. Simon. Top/domdec, a software tool for mesh partitioning and parallel
processing. Journal of Computing Systems in Engineering, 6(1):13–26, 1995.
43
[158] J. Fish and K. L. Shek. Finite deformation plasticity of composite structures: Computational models
and adaptive strategies. Comp. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engng., 172:145–174, 1999.
[159] J. Fish and Q.Yu. Multiscale damage modeling for composite materials: Theory and computational
framework. Int. Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 52(1-2):161–1–92, 2001.
[160] C. Oskay and J. Fish. Multiscale modeling of fatigue for ductile materials. International Journal of
Multiscale Computational Engineering, 2(3):1–25, 2004.
[161] Network for computational nanotechnology. http://ncn.purdue.edu/.
[162] Coventor. http://www.coventor.com/.
[163] S. Fleeter, H. N. Houstis, J. R. Rice, C. Zhou, and A. Catlin. Gasturbnlab: A problem solving
environment for simulating gas turbines. In Proc. 16th IMACS World Congress, number 104-5, 2000.
[164] E. N. Houstis, A. C. Catlin, P. Tsompanopoulou, D. Gottfried, G. Balakrishnan, K. Su, and J. R.
Rice. Gasturbnlab: A multidisciplinary problem solving environment for gas turbine engine design on
a network of non-homogeneous machines. Proceedings of 15th Toyota Conference, October 2001 and
special issue on the J. of Computational Engineering and Mathematics, 149(1):89–100, Nov. 2002.
[165] E. N. Houstis, A. C. Catlin, N. Dhanjani, and J. R. Rice. The webpdelab server: A problem solving
environment for partial differential equations applications. In (Proc. of IMACS World Congress, volume
104, 2000.
[166] A. C. Catlin, J. R. Rice, V. S. Verykios, N. Ramakrishnan, and C. Houstis. Pythia-ii: A knowl-
edge/database system for managing performance data and recommending scientific software. ACM
Transactions for Scientific Software, 26(2):227–253, 2000.
[167] H. S. McFaddin and J. R. Rice. Collaborating pde solvers. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 10:279–295,
1992.
[168] J. Michopoulos, R. Badaliance, T. Chwastyk, L. Gause, P. Mast, C. Farhat, and M. Lesoinne. Coupled
multiphysics simulation of composite material softening in a virtual wind tunnel environment. In
Proceedings of Sixth U.S. National Congress on Computational Mechanics, pages 521–, Dearborn MI,
USA, 2001.
[169] M. Mu and J. R. Rice. Modeling with collaborating pde solvers - theory and practice. Contemporary
Mathematics, 180:427–438, 1994.
44
[170] E. N. Houstis, A. Joshi, J. R. Rice, T. T. Drashansky, and S. Weerawarana. To-
wards multidisciplinary problem solving environments. HPCU Journal, 1(1), May 1997.
http://www.hpcu.org/hpcunews/vol1/issue1.
[171] E. N. Houstis, J. R. Rice, S. Markus, and S. Weerawarana. Network based scientific problem solving
environments. HPCU Journal, 1(1), May 1997.
[172] J. R. Rice, P. Tsompanopoulou, and E. A. Vavalis. Interface relaxation methods for elliptic differential
equations. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 32:219–245, 1999.
[173] P. Tsompanopoulou, L. Boloni, D. Marinescu, and J. R. Rice. The design of software agents for a
network of pde solvers. In Proc. Agents’ 99: Third Intl. Conf. Autonomous Agents. ACM Press, 1999.
[174] T. T. Drashansky, E. N. Houstis, N. Ramakrishnan, and J. R. Rice. Networked agents for scientific
computing. Assoc. Comp. Mach., 42(3):48–54, 1999.
[175] L. Boloni, D. C. Marinescu, J. R. Rice, P. Tsompanopoulou, and E. A. Vavalis. Agent based scientific
simulation and modeling. Concurrency: Practice and Experience, 12:845–861, 2000.
[176] E. N. Houstis, G. Balakrishnan, A. C. Catlin, N. Dhanjani, S. Lalis, M. Stamatogiannakis, J. R.
Rice, and C. Houstis. Network-based scientific computing. In R. F. Boisvert, P. Tak, and P. Tang,
editors, The Architecture of Scientific Software, pages 3–28, Norwell, MA, USA, 2001. Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
[177] J. R. Rice, P. Tsompanopoulou, and E. A. Vavalis. Fine tunning interface relaxation methods for
elliptic differential equations. Applied Numerical Mathematics, 43(4):459–481, Nov. 2002.
[178] S. G. Parker and C. R. Jonhson. Scirun: A scientific programming environment for computational
steering. In Proceedings of Supercomputing ’95, 1995.
[179] G. von Laszewski, I. Foster, J. Gawor, W. Smith, and S. Tuecke. CoG Kits: A Bridge Between Commod-
ity Distributed Computing and High Performance Grids. Mathematics and Computer Science Division,
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA. http://www.mcs.anl.gov/laszewsk/cog.
[180] I. Foster and C. Kesselman. Globus: A metacomputing infrastructure toolkit. Inter. J. of Supercom-
puter Applications, 11(2):115–128, 1997.
[181] E. Arkarsu, G. Fox, W. Furmanski, T. Haupt, H. Ozdemir, and Z. Odcikin. Building Web/Commodity
Based Visual Authoring Environments For Distributed Object/Component Applications - A Case Study
Using NPAC WebFlow Systems. http://www.npac.syr.edu/Projects/WebSimulation/WebFlow.
45
[182] B. Asbury, G. Fox, T. Haupt, and K. Flurchick. The Gateway Project: An Inter-
operable Problem Solving Environments Framework for High Performance Computing.
http://www.osc.edu/kenf/theGateway.
[183] S. McGough, L. Young, A. Afzal, S. Newhouse, and J. Darlington. Workflow enactment in iceni. In
UK e-Science All Hands Meetin, pages 3045–3054, 2004.
[184] Tom Oinn, Matthew Addis, Justin Ferris, Darren Marvin, Martin Senger, Mark Greenwood, Tim
Carver, Kevin Glover, Matthew R. Pocock, Anil Wipat, and Peter Li. Taverna: A tool for the
composition and enactment of bioinformatics workflows. Bioinformatics Journal, 20:894–900, 2004.
[185] Thomas Fahringer, Alexandru Jugravu, Sabri Pllana, Radu Prodan, Clovis Seragiotto Junior, and
Hong-Linh Truong. Askalon: A tool set for cluster and grid computing. Concurrency and Computation:
Practice and Experience, 17(2-4), 2005. http://dps.uibk.ac.at/askalon/.
[186] Radu Prodan Jun Qin Alex Villazon Marek Wieczorek Rubing Duan, Thomas Fahringer. Real World
Workflow Applications in the Askalon Grid Environment. In European Grid Conference (EGC 2005),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Verlag, February 2005.
[187] Ilkay Altintas, Adam Birnbaum, Kim Baldridge, Wibke Sudholt, Mark Miller, Celine Amoreira,
Yohann Potier, and Bertram Ludaescher. A framework for the design and reuse of grid workflows.
In Proceedings of Intl. Workshop on Scientific Applications on Grid Computing (SAG’04), volume
LCNS 3458, 2005.
[188] J. Vetter and K. Schwan. Progress: A toolkit for interactive program steering. In Proceedings of the
1995 International Conference on Parallel Processing, pages 139–149, 1995.
[189] J. Vetter and K. Schwan. Models for computational steering. In Third International Conference on
Configurable Distributed Systems. IEEE, 1996.
[190] R. van Liere, J. Harkes, and W. de Leeuw. A distributed blackboard architecture for interactive data
visualization. In D. Ebert, H. Rushmeier, and H. Hagen, editors, Proceedings of IEEE Visualization’98
Conference. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1998.
[191] G. Eisenhauer and K. Schwan. Mirror Object Steering System.
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/systems/projects/MOSS.
[192] V. Mann, V. Matossian, R. Muralidhar, and M. Parashar. Discover: An environment for web-based in-
teraction and steering of high performance scientific applications. Concurrency: Practice & Experience,
00:1–19, 2000.
46
[193] J. Michopoulos, R. Badaliance, T. Chwastyk, L. Gause, P. Mast, C. Farhat, and M. Lesoinne. Strain
induced material nonlinearity for agard wing 445.6 in a virtual wind tunnel environment: Results
from coupled multiphysics simulation. In DoD HPC User Group Conference 2000, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, USA, 2000.
[194] J. Michopoulos, R. Badaliance, T. Chwastyk, L. Gause, P. Mast, and R. A. Foerch. Data driven non-
linear optimization for automated user material subroutine computation and utilization. In Proceedings
of the ANSYS User Group. Malett Technologies Inc., October 2 2001. invited paper.
[195] J. Michopoulos, C. Farhat, M. Lesoinne, P. Mast, R. Badalance, T. Chwastyk, and L. Gause. Material
softening issues in a multiphysics virtual wind tunnel environment. In 40th Aerospace Sciences Meeting
and Exhibit, number AIAA Paper 2002-1095, Reno, Nevada, USA, 2002.
[196] John Michopoulos, Panagiota Tsompanopoulou, Elias N. Houstis, and Anupam Joshi. Agent-based
simulation of data-driven fire propagation dynamics. In Marian Bubak, G. Dick van Albada, Peter
M. A. Sloot, and Jack Dongarra, editors, Computational Science - ICCS 2004, 4th International
Conference, Kraków, Poland, June 6-9, 2004, Proceedings, Part III, volume 3038 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 732–739. Springer, 2004.
[197] John Michopoulos, Charbel Farhat, and Elias N. Houstis. Dynamic-data-driven real-time compu-
tational mechanics environment. In Marian Bubak, G. Dick van Albada, Peter M. A. Sloot, and
Jack Dongarra, editors, Computational Science - ICCS 2004, 4th International Conference, Kraków,
Poland, June 6-9, 2004, Proceedings, Part III, volume 3038 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 693–700. Springer, 2004.
[198] J. G. Michopoulos. Development of the finite element modeling markup language. In ASME 2002
Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference,
volume I572CD. ASME Press, 2002. Paper-No.:DETC2002/CIE-34406.
[199] J. Lubell, R. S. Peak, V. Srinivasan, and S. C. Waterbury. Step, xml, and uml: Complementary tech-
nologies. In ASME 2004 Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information
in Engineering Conference, volume I710CD. ASME Press, 2004. Paper-No.:DETC2004/CIE-57743.
[200] Leon A. Kappelman. The future is ours. Commun. ACM, 44(3):46–47, 2001.
[201] John G. Michopoulos. International Conference on Computational Sciences 2004 – Conference Guide,
chapter Pathology of High Performance Computing, pages 21–22. Poligrafia at Computing Communi-
cation and Network Securty – poligrafia@ccns.krakow.pl, Krakow Poland, June 6-9 2004.
47
[202] Frederica Darema. Dynamic data driven applications systems: A new paradigm for application sim-
ulations and measurements. In Marian Bubak, G. Dick van Albada, Peter M. A. Sloot, and Jack
Dongarra, editors, International Conference on Computational Science, volume 3038, pages 662–669.
Springer-Verlag, 2004.
48

