THE WORLD OF
M&S
A PRIMER ON
MODELING AND SIMULATION
What is Modeling & Simulation?
A Brief History of Modeling & Simulation
Modeling & Simulation Workforce
Modeling & Simulation Applications
The Value of Modeling & Simulation
The Future of Modeling & Simulation
Last Word

Today, modeling and simulation is more important than at any time in our nation’s history
to provide the critical technology baseline and distributed infrastructure necessary to solve the
myriad of serious problems facing the very security of the country.
In July 2007, U.S. House Resolution 487 officially recognized Modeling and Simulation (M&S) as a
National Critical Technology. This was official acknowledgement of nearly seven decades of contribu-
tions by M&S to varied areas such as nuclear testing and disarmament, space exploration, homeland
security, and economic development. These contributions have helped nurture and secure the U.S. status
as a global leader.
The U.S. has led the world in the application of M&S to several sectors, particularly in defense, where
M&S technologies have been used to support analyses of strategic operations and training of military
forces. Estimates range from $4 billion to $7.5 billion spent each year by the U.S. Department of De-
fense (DoD) on M&S tools, processes, and products.
The U.S. has also leveraged M&S in the commercial sector, applying M&S technologies to support
training, decision-making, and management practices. As computing resources become more affordable
and M&S capabilities more advanced, M&S will offer even greater, farther-reaching benefits throughout
industry, government, and society.
Despite the scope and prevalence of M&S in society today, for many Americans, M&S is still a bit of a
mystery. What exactly is it? What does it do? How does M&S benefit our economy, society, and quality
of life? At the request of Congressman Randy Forbes, the National Training and Simulation Associa-
tion has assembled some information to address these questions. The contents of this work provide an
overview of M&S for a better understanding of what M&S is and its economic and functional impact.
It offers a brief historical perspective of M&S contributions across many disciplines, discusses the work-
force required to support M&S applications and growth, and describes where and how M&S is being
employed today and where and how it may be used tomorrow.
Preface

Table of Contents
Section 1: What is Modeling and Simulation? ..............................................................................................3
Section 2: A Brief History of Modeling and Simulation ..............................................................................5
Section 3: M&S Workforce .............................................................................................................................9
Creating a Specialized Modeling & Simulation Workforce .....................................................................9
Section 4: Modeling & Simulation Applications .........................................................................................11
Training ........................................................................................................................................................11
Production and Delivery ............................................................................................................................13
Decision-Making .........................................................................................................................................13
Research and Testing ..................................................................................................................................13
Environmental Monitoring ........................................................................................................................13
Section 5: The Value of Modeling & Simulation ........................................................................................15
Section 6: The Future of Modeling & Simulation ......................................................................................19
Healthcare Education & Treatment .........................................................................................................19
Virtual World Integration Spaces for National Security ........................................................................19
Mobile Simulations and Cloud Computing .............................................................................................21
New Media Environments .........................................................................................................................22
Robots and Thinking Machines ................................................................................................................22
Modeling & Simulation in K-12 Education ............................................................................................23
Section 7: L ast Word ......................................................................................................................................25

3
The terms “modeling” and “simulation” are sometimes used interchangeably. In reality, they are distinct,
though related, terms.
Modeling is the representation of an object or phenomena, which is used by simulation. Models may be
mathematical, physical, or logical representations of a system, entity, phenomenon, or process.1 Models
are, in turn, used by simulation to predict a future state.
Simulation is a representation of the functioning of a system or process. Through simulation, a model
may be implemented with unlimited variations, producing complex scenarios. These capabilities allow
analysis and understanding of how individual elements interact and affect the simulated environment.
Generally, people most readily associate Modeling and Simulation (M&S) with training. M&S tools are
used to train astronauts, commercial and military aircrews, nuclear power specialists, healthcare workers,
and maintenance specialists, just to name a few professions. M&S provides rehearsal environments for
civilian first responder and military personnel. Repeated rehearsal of procedures improves performance,
saving countless lives as well as aircraft, ships, and other vehicles. Also, training individuals before allow-
ing them to use actual equipment improves the safety of the individuals undergoing training, the partici-
pants around them and the safety of the actual equipment.2
While training is perhaps the most visible of M&S applications, M&S can be used to study any system
or process. This ranges from human bodily systems and transportation networks, to vehicle systems,
communities, and product design or manufacturing. M&S tools and processes help solve pressing issues
across government, industry, and academic domains. M&S can answer “what if ” questions or provide a
robust experimentation or training environments that may not be otherwise realized.3
1 DoD Modeling & Simulation Glossary, Jan 98 Did You Know Version 4.0
http://www.inventionreaction.com/famous-inventions/Internet
2 CPT Boh Choun Kiat, “Advancement in Simulation Technology and its Military Application,” Journal of the Singapore Armed Forces, V25 N2, April-June 1999,
http://www.mindef.gov.sg/safti/pointer/back/journals/1999/Vol25_2/5.htm
3 DoD Modeling & Simulation Glossary, Jan 98 Did You Know Version 4.0
 http://www.inventionreaction.com/famous-inventions/Internet
S E S S I O N  1
What is Modeling and
Simulation?

5
Models and simulations have been used to solve problems for centuries. The first known simulation, the
game Chaturanga,4 was a predecessor to modern chess. It simulated battlefield tactics in 7th century
India. The birth of Monte Carlo simulation is credited to George Louis Leclerc, Compte de Buffon in
1777 who posed the problem of throwing needles randomly onto a plane with parallel lines in order to
estimate pi.5
Mathematical models have been the centerpiece of scientific attempts to describe and predict the physi-
cal world, used in determining such theories as Kepler’s Law of Planetary Motion in the 17th century.
In the U.S., M&S has a strong history of application to space exploration and national defense. It is safe
to conclude that many of humankind’s achievements, such as landing on the moon, would not have been
possible without M&S contributions.
S E C T I O N  2
A Brief History of Modeling and
Simulation
4 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaturanga accessed 20 March 2011
5 Goldsman, Nance, Wilson, “A Brief History of Simulation Revisited”, Proceedings of 2010
Modeling
and 
Simulation
Timeline
1910 Aviators experimented 
with ground based machines 
that could be used to teach 
powered flight. The outbreak 
of World War I accelerated the 
need to quickly train pilots. 
Devices such as the Ruggles 
Orientator and those of Lender 
and Heilderberg were early 
simulators used in flight training.
http://homepage.ntlworld.com/bleep/SimHist2.
html accessed 22 March 2011
1910
6
During World 
War I, wooden 
mechanical horse 
simulators were 
used for cavalry 
training.
http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Simulation, accessed 22 
March 2011.
1927-1929 Edwin Link 
designed his trainer to move 
on all three axes in response 
to the pilot’s control input. 
Shortly after this, Link outfitted 
his trainer with navigational 
instruments and pilots were 
able to simulate instrument 
flying.
http://inventors.about.com/cs/
inventorsalphabet/a/ed_limk.htm, accessed 
15 June 2011.
1948 The first computerized
simulation, an “air defense 
simulation” was created by 
the Army Operations Research 
Office (ORO) at Johns Hopkins 
University. The “Air Defense 
Simulation” was used to study 
North American air defense 
capabilities and naval anti-
aircraft guided missile systems.
(Shrader, C. (2006). History of 
Operations Research in the US 
Army. 
Available at http://www.history.army.mil/html/
books/hist_op_research/CMH_70-102-1.pdf
1946 Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam used computational 
modeling in the development of the hydrogen bomb.
19100 1920 1930 1940 1950
Commissioned during WWII, the invention of the 
revolutionary electronic computer, ENIAC I, took one year 
to design, 18 months to build, and cost $500,000 tax 
dollars. The ENIAC contained 17,468 vacuum tubes, 70,000 
resistors, 10,000 capacitors, 1,500 relays, 6,000 manual 
switches, and 5 million soldered joints. It weighed 30 tons 
and consumed 160 kilowatts of electrical power.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ENIAC, accessed 15 June 2011.
7
1961 Space War! 
– the first known 
computer-based 
simulation—was 
created at MIT. It 
allowed players to 
maneuver ships on a 
circular monitor and 
fire missiles at each 
other. 
Smith, Roger, Mastering 
Simulation: Past, Present, Future,
www.modelbender.com
The DoD began the process of adapting business processes from industry 
to the government with systems analysis, enabled by computers and large, 
detailed cost models in the early 1960’s.
Silicon-based computer-chips reduced the size and cost of computing 
platforms, setting the stage to a computer and technology revolution.
1953 Drs James Watson and Francis Crick 
presented their model of DNA as a double helix. 
Watson and Crick build physical stick and ball 
models to test their theories about the possible 
structure of DNA.
http://nobelprize.org/educational/medicine/dna_double_helix/
readmore.html, accessed 22 March 2011.
The Lunar Excursion Model Simulator at
Langley’s Lunar Landing Research Facility 
enabled astronauts to practice lading on the 
lunar surface for Apollo 11 flight to the moon.
http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/factsheets/Apollo.html,
accessed 15 June 2011.
Photo source: NASA
Photo source: NASA
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
1990s The Boeing Corporation pioneered a new technique of 
designing a passenger jet entirely using computer modeling and 
simulation.
http://www.cds.caltech.edu/conferences/1997/vecs/tutorial/Examples/Cases/777.htm accessed 21 
March 2011.
Visual “realism” has become one of the primary components in the 
realm of military training and education simulation. Visualization 
capabilities have evolved dramatically in the past 40 years, from 
the ability to create and manipulate wireframe models to fully 
shaded and textured images with realistic movement and lighting 
physics.
1990-1991 Troops with 
simulator training exceeded the 
performance of soldiers without 
simulator experience during the 
Gulf War.
http://www.flightglobal.com/
articles/1995/11/08/21165/virtual-combat.html
2007 House Resolution 487 officially recognized Modeling and
Simulation (M&S) as a National Critical Technology .
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030
9
Developing and using M&S technology relies on the intellectual capi-
tal of professionals with unique job skills, professional education, and
training in M&S careers.6 The M&S workforce is characterized by
above average salaries, benefits, and levels of training and education
which contribute positively to economic growth and stability. The pros-
perity of companies that employ M&S workers and success of schools
that educate and train these workers, positively impact the state and lo-
cal tax bases. Aspects of the M&S industry have been called “recession
proof ” in recent tough economic times. For example, the computer
M&S industry has continued to expand and offer high-paying jobs.
Creating a Specialized Modeling & Simulation Workforce
The M&S industry continues to grow in importance in every area of
the country, providing well-paying jobs and bolstering the economy,
but the development of a qualified M&S workforce has been a chal-
lenge for industry, government, and academia. The broad nature of
M&S application calls for a wide range of skills in practitioners—
beyond mathematics, engineering, or computer science alone. This
creates difficulty in identifying M&S with a single profession or fol-
lowing a clear course of education and M&S career path. It is also
difficult for companies, managers, human resource professionals,
and customers to identify the products and services they need from
M&S or even the need for M&S professionals as a specialty beyond
their particular domain expertise.
Several key initiatives have been identified to motivate and foster
M&S workforce development. These M&S grand challenge projects
could provide educational opportunities for the emerging pool of
M&S professionals.
6 H. Res. 487, In the House of Representatives, U. S., paragraph 2, July 16, 2007
Academic degrees are offered at 
leading accredited colleges and 
universities, as well as technical 
trade schools and institutes 
focused on M&S. Programs draw 
upon expertise from Mathematics, 
Engineering, Computer 
Engineering, Computer Science, 
Psychology, and Occupational 
and Technical Studies. Core M&S 
course load focuses on simulation 
systems modeling principles 
and paradigms, exploration of 
specific simulation methodological 
approaches (e.g., discrete event 
and dynamic system simulation), 
and human–computer interaction. 
This may be supplemented by 
specialized instruction in fields such 
as simulation based instructional 
systems, animation, computer-
aided design, analysis and decision 
making, operations research, and 
virtual and immersive environment 
simulations.
Old Dominion course catalogue, available at http://
www.vmasc.odu.edu/
S E C T I O N  3
Modeling & Simulation Workforce

11
The use of M&S applications is wide-spread and varied. M&S en-
ables training, research, environmental monitoring, economic pro-
duction and decision making.
Training
Flight simulators, used in military and commercial aviation training,
may be the most well known type of training simulation.  There are
many other uses for M&S in training in healthcare, transportation,
first responder, and homeland security, just to name a few.
M&S applications are used to address multiple facets of military
training, including cultural, social, and combat training.  For example,
the DoD uses sophisticated campaign simulations (i.e., wargames)
to plan and refine battle strategies.  Army and Marine forces have
used simulators to train for fire-fights engaged in from Humvees and
other urban combat vehicles and the Navy uses different mock-ups
to train crews on ship operation and functioning.  Also, interactive
simulators provide experience to commanders in counseling by hav-
ing a virtual military member “approach” them with an issue.
Today, simulations come in three forms:  live, virtual and construc-
tive.  People operating in the simulation may not be totally aware
of these differences, because they approach each training exercise as
they would a real life scenario.
Live simulation involves real personnel training on ranges with ac-
tual assets.  A live environment can be augmented with virtual scenes
through “augmented reality”.
S E C T I O N  4
Modeling & Simulation 
Applications
Live Simulation
Constructive Simulation
Virtual Simulation
12
Virtual simulation calls for the use of simu-
lators that enable an individual or team to
perfect their skills in a virtual world, before
confidently performing them in reality.
Constructive simulation is used to display
groups of forces and vehicles on the battle-
field and for training, analysis, planning and
mission rehearsal exercises.
These three methods, in combination with
state-of-the-art technology, offer tools to
deliver some of the most effective and ad-
vanced training possible.  This is particularly
true in the case of team-oriented training.
For example, new networking technologies
have created training situations where mul-
tiple trainees operate together in a simulated
environment and battlefield, confronting a
common threat.  Today, four F-16 fighter
pilots can practice together in simulators
stationed at different locations. In addition,
ships, submarines, aircraft, tanks, personnel
carriers, and even dismounted infantry can
be added to the battlefield.  They can all en-
gage in the same exercise.
Simulation is changing the way we educate
and train workers in the healthcare industry.
Medical simulation provides education and
training in medical procedures and emer-
gency response.  In particular, the development of Emergency Room Simulation suites and Paramedic
Vehicle Simulators, such as Florida’s Mobile Simulation Lab , has shown to produce many benefits in
training emergency room teams and paramedic squads.7 Simulators train communication skills and team
approaches necessary to handle crisis situations.
Simulations are used to replicate emergency situations resulting from terrorism attacks, nuclear detona-
tions, hurricanes, and pandemic flu outbreaks.  They provide the capability to train the responder, track
learner response to the simulated emergency event, and identify choke points in response plan imple-
mentation.
7 http://www.emlrc.org/pr30-112108.htm accessed 22 March 2011
13
M&S also plays a vital role in training civilian transportation personnel including air traffic controllers,
commercial pilots and maintenance personnel, bus drivers, and train conductors.
Production and Delivery
M&S enables efficient production and delivery of many services.  Automated models have been used
in everything from power distribution over our national grid to provision of clean drinking water and
wastewater treatment.
As applied to production and delivery of goods and services, M&S is used to evaluate performance
boundaries.  In the past, many systems had to be tested until they failed in order to understand their
safe operating boundaries and limitations.  Today, models and simulations are set up to locate the peaks
and valleys in performance envelopes, so systems and supporting components can be optimized prior to
development.  Virtually building an aircraft in 3D
prior to any physical mock-up has now become the
standard for aircraft design.
Decision-Making
M&S can be utilized to evaluate strategies at the na-
tional, market, industry, and corporate levels. M&S
can also be used in a decision support role where
M&S tools can authoritatively represent many op-
erational, information driven environments. This
facilitates decision making in finance, healthcare,
the military, transportation, and other areas. For
example, today the DoD employs M&S as a key
tool in determining cost tradeoffs and supporting
major decisions from a wide spectrum of functional
areas. All major DoD programs must be supported
by cost benefit analyses that provide insights into
cost tradeoffs and overall savings over the life of the
proposed system or force structure enhancement.
In acquisition, the process is supported by detailed
analyses and M&S tools, from the beginning stage
of military operational requirements to concept de-
sign, to initial prototyping, and finally to detailed
design development and production decisions.
Research and Testing
M&S is frequently employed in research and test-
ing. Applications complement or replace experi-
Modeling & Simulation Improves 
Manufacturing Design Efficiency
In the 1990s, the Boeing Corporation 
pioneered a new technique of designing 
a passenger jet entirely using computer 
modeling and simulation. Compared 
with traditional design methods used for 
the Boeing 757 and 767 designs, which 
involved physical mock-ups, the virtual 
design process resulted in the following 
design efficiencies:
requests (6000 to 600)
engineering change request
for fuselage.
http://www.cds.caltech.edu/conferences/1997/vecs/tutorial/
Examples/Cases/777.htm accessed 21 March 2011.
14
mentation where experimentation is hazardous, expensive, or impossible. It is frequently cheaper and
safer than using a prototype of the real thing. For example, M&S has played a significant enabling role in
nuclear research and atomic testing.
Environmental Monitoring
M&S is frequently used in environmental monitoring and protection. M&S allows researchers to gain
insight into climate changes, predict volcanic activity, and anticipate earthquake effects.  M&S contribu-
tions are as diverse as forecasting the weather and protecting rivers, waterways and endangered species.
For example, the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) hydrology Dynamic Stream Simulation
and Assessment Model predicts impact on water quality for the Truckee River, including its effect on
Lake Tahoe and other portions of its basin.
15
The benefits of using M&S include saving resources such as time and money, promoting public safety
and well-being, and ensuring economic strength and vitality.
In areas such as healthcare, aviation, and energy production and conservation, significant cost savings
have been realized from the widespread use of model-based design, development, and testing of prod-
ucts. M&S applications have reduced system development costs, shortened time-to-market, and im-
proved initial product quality, durability, and survivability. The ability to model key exploration and
manufacturing processes from a global perspective can produce even greater cost savings as our nation
enters a period of critical fiscal constraints.
M&S provides significant benefits to training, improving overall training efficiency and effectiveness
while reducing costs. M&S training applications improve performance, save lives and other resources,
and compress time required to develop skills in training. M&S provides a means to create realistic train-
ing conditions that can either not be physically attained, or are considered too dangerous or economi-
cally infeasible to create. In some cases, simulators can even provide more effective training than other
methods can.
M&S offers a number of advantages over other forms of training such as classroom lectures, drills, or
live exercises. M&S enables instructors to control training content and to monitor student performance.
This can increase training effectiveness and shorten the training cycle. Students can achieve the expected
level of competence before actually having hands-on experience with an actual device or system. A valida-
tion exercise done by the South African Army showed that students going through a gunnery training
simulator achieved 30% to 40% quicker reaction time and scored 14% better on their first hits than those
who did not use a simulator.8
The financial cost of operating a simulator is routinely only a fraction of the cost of operating an aircraft
or other actual vehicle for numerous reasons (e.g. fuel and manpower expenditures). For example, a mili-
tary fighter pilot can practice firing weapons many times at a substantially lower cost in comparison with
firing a live missile. Furthermore, using simulators in training reduces costs associated with actual equip-
8 Helmoed-Romer Heitman. “Core Element of SA Army Simulation.” Jane’s Defence Weekly, Jan 1997, pp 9
S E C T I O N  5
The Value of Modeling & 
Simulation
16
ment maintenance. Cost can also be saved because networked simulators can link activities for trainees
thousands of miles apart, instead of transporting individuals to a central location to perform exercises
together.
Simulation training positively impacts the healthcare industry. Simulations pose no risk to actual patients
and recreate uncommon scenarios that provide training for rare events. By training medical profession-
als prior to performing high-risk procedures or those uncommonly encountered, performance improves.
The cost of health care decreases in correlation with a decrease in the odds of a poor performance by a
medical professional. For example, medical malpractice insurance rate discounts are provided to anesthe-
siologists and obstetricians who include simulated procedures in their biennial training requirements.9
M&S applications enable comprehensive planning for national disaster and emergency preparedness
response, improving response time and coordination efficiency.
M&S provides the ability to cope with environmental limitations, overcoming availability issues and
constraints. In the case of military training for example, databases can be created which replicate overseas
environments which might be encountered on future deployments by military troops, and enable train-
ing despite airspace limitations. Units and individuals can train at their home base without the need to
travel to other areas located many miles away, and can train to “fire” weaponry without causing damage
to the environment. This also allows units to undertake mission rehearsal exercises where actual combat
missions can be pre-fought.9 The same benefits can be realized for first responder and other types of
training.
M&S promotes environmental protection and conservation. M&S serves as a foundational element of
the Stockpile Stewardship Program, which has enabled the certification of the safety, security, and reli-
ability of the nuclear stockpile for more than ten years without the use of live nuclear testing. This dem-
onstrates the nation’s commitment to nuclear nonproliferation.11
M&S has played key roles in operations analysis and systems engineering processes, enabling smart ac-
quisition, planning, and development. Modeling coupled with the traditional simulation of aerodynam-
ics, stress loading, and flight characteristics has minimized design time and increased reliability in aircraft
production. The economic benefits are impressive, including significantly accelerated time to market,
drastically increased employment opportunities, whole-market growth and innovative new products.
Yet, this is only a glimpse of the potential impact M&S can have. It has been documented12,13 that M&S
can realize:
9 H. Res. 487, In the House of Representatives, U. S., paragraph 2, July 16, 2007
10 CPT Boh Choun Kiat, “Advancement in Simulation Technology and its Military Application,” Journal of the Singapore Armed Forces, V25 N2, April-June 1999,
http://www.mindef.gov.sg/safti/pointer/back/journals/1999/Vol25_2/5.htm
11 H. Res. 487, In the House of Representatives, U. S., paragraph 2, July 16, 2007
12 SMLCPublicPrivatePartnership.pdf, version 1, 12/23/2010 as published by the Smart Manufacturing Leadership Coalition,
www.smart-process-manufacturing.ucla.edu
13 Council on Competitiveness, Case Studies in American Manufacturers Adopting HPC, various.
17
The environments encountered today challenge decision makers with uncertainty, complexity, and rapid
change. M&S offers great potential to inform thinking by enabling the examination of complex prob-
lems. M&S offers an efficient and effective way to inform individuals at every level, from large industrial
headquarters to small organizations and individuals in every national sector. Application to business
decision-making at the strategic level enhances American competitiveness on the world market by en-
abling faster product delivery, at less cost to end users.
It has been widely documented that M&S with analysis provides end users with the ability to better un-
derstand “what if ” and “so what” questions.  As systems become more complex, so do M&S applications
that support and analyze them. For this reason, M&S will continue to play a role in future strategizing,
planning and execution.14
14 Fargnoli, Thomas, Common Modeling & Simulation Framework Services, Lockheed Martin MS2 White Paper, 2008

19
The next ten years presents even greater potential for M&S utilization. This is due largely to the reach
and power of the Internet. Below are a few areas where M&S is poised to have a significant impact on
our society and our lives.
Healthcare Education & Treatment
Simulation products developed for military and video gaming
have largely focused on representing hard objects engaged in
combat. This has driven the design of software algorithms,
rendering technologies, computer graphics cards, and global
networks. These advances have the potential to address much
more challenging problems, specifically dynamic visual mod-
els of the human body.
Surgical M&S will open up entirely new options for surgical
education without the use of the human and animal tissue
which has been standard for centuries. There have been logi-
cal and mathematic models of the functioning of the human
body for many years. However, the accurate visual and be-
havioral representation of tissue in a real time simulation has
remained beyond the reach of computer hardware and mod-
eling techniques. Today, it is possible to represent this soft tis-
sue in great detail and give it all of the dynamic properties of
real tissue. It will be soon possible for a surgeon in training
to manipulate models of internal organs and see them move,
bleed, and twitch, just as they do during a real operation.
Virtual World Integration Spaces for National Security
M&S is well positioned to support the DoD’s Key Mission Areas (KMAs) for military forces. In light
of these KMAs, it is evident that new business models are needed for the DoD to operate in the 21st
S E C T I O N  6
The Future of Modeling &
Simulation
Hard objects are relatively easy, soft 
objects are more difficult to model.
20
century, particularly given the challenges the U.S faces economically as well as militarily. M&S, through
virtual worlds and immersive integration on the Internet, enables the creation of new business models
for the DoD.
Whether defending our homeland or supporting remote contingency operations, warfighters must plan
and train collaboratively to solve complex tasks and problems. Immersive technology’s power lies in its
integration across all aspects of modern warfare by providing access and collaboration for decision-mak-
ing and operations. Full exploitation of immersive visualization, training, and simulation requires further
imagination and experimentation. This includes widespread deployment of virtual worlds, integration
with social networking, and the use of mobile internet devices.
KMA 1: Defend the U.S. and Support Civil Authorities at Home
A wide variety of potential threats and, the large strata of jurisdictions, and varied responsibilities make
Homeland defense complex, necessitating real-time collaboration and extensive planning. Immersive
simulation can provide the common playing field for exploring potential threats while building team-
work and partnership among separate agencies.
Today it is feasible to model every city in the U.S. High resolution terrain and imagery data are now
available for every major city and can rapidly create virtual cities. When integrated with high resolution
physics models (e.g. blast, dispersion), the immersive environments can be powerful training and exercise
tools for both military commanders and civilian leaders. Both DHS
and DoD are exploring virtual worlds and immersive simulators in a
number of different use cases.15
KMA 2: Succeed in Counterinsurgency, Stability, and
Counterterrorism Operations (COIN)
DoD is engaged in research of COIN immersive training. Multi-
player gaming technology has demonstrated that immersive environ-
ments can be used to train individuals and teams. Critical to achiev-
ing the use of immersive environments for COIN training are the
development of adaptive models and of human behavioral simula-
tions. The construction of a knowledge base of different cultures and
the translation of that information into realistic, virtual humans, spe-
cific to a culture, will be key in enabling soldier training in environ-
ments prior to deployment.
KMA 3: Build the Security Capacity of Partner States
Immersive technology can aid in developing language skills and cul-
tural understanding for U.S. forces and our partners, through remote
training across the globe. Research using gaming technology can be
15 http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/blog/Lists/Posts/Post.aspx?ID=165
DHS is using a virtual world 
for a component of the 
National Level Exercise 
2011, and is conducting 
research into the use of 
the technology for virtual 
emergency operations 
centers. In another example, 
the Federal Law Enforcement 
Training Center is working 
in partnership with the DoD 
simulation community, and 
has adopted many of virtual 
techniques and technologies 
from the military.
21
applied to both U.S. forces and our allies bringing them together vir-
tually, unhampered by distance, establishing long-term relationships
in the virtual world versus periodic interaction during missions.
KMA 4: Deter and Defeat Aggression in Anti-Access
Environments
Immersive technology origins go back to early command and con-
trol systems for missiles and aircraft. Immersive technology remains
essential to the preparation for long range strikes, as M&S based
training exercises have advanced, more closely approximating actual
missions than ever before. The capabilities provided by these applica-
tions have become increasingly important given the expanded lethal-
ity, precision, and range of U.S. weapon systems, such as Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). Future research must address how training
applications and command and control systems can more fully uti-
lized immersive environments, one day realizing training scenarios
which have no difference between the virtual and the “real” one.
KMA 5: Prevent Proliferation and Counter Weapons of Mass Destruction
The U.S. Army has funded much of the technology presently used for immersive medical training. A
key area has been the development of a virtual world for chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and
high explosive (CBRNE) training. There is a significant opportunity to provide both hospital and first
responder communities with simulation-based training using avatars for CBRNE events.
KMA 6: Operate Effectively in Cyberspace
Immersive technology will be necessary for the rapid formation of teams and their global operation in cyber-
space, and a key element for effective cyberspace use. Immersive technologies leverage capabilities and reach to
provide training and rehearsal. The same kind of virtualization can be achieved in cyberspace with the addi-
tion of immersive training and virtual worlds. As our
dependency on cyberspace increases, so does the risk
of cyber-warfare. Key to combating cyber-warfare is
an experienced human operator. These operators, dis-
tributed globally, are in high demand, and it is neces-
sary to have them participate virtually.
Mobile Simulations and Cloud
Computing
Information Technology (IT) advances have brought
mobile devices with very good visual capabilities and
excellent network connectivity. Together with cloud
One example of using 
immersive technologies in 
cyberspace is the virtual 
mission operation center 
(VMOC) for space operations 
managed by Navy Research 
Labs. VMOC is a collaborative 
environment designed to 
eliminate the command 
and control stove pipes 
found in traditional space 
environments.
22
computing technologies, any government official, military leader, business analyst, or game player will be
able to run complex simulations on a personal mobile device such as a smart phone or tablet. Cloud com-
puting services handle heavy computations and large databases, while menus, graphs, 3D images, and flow
charts can be displayed on any cell phone or tablet computer connected to the cloud network.
This structure makes it possible to access and run any model in the world as long as it is hosted on a
computer connected to an open network. Cloud computing and mobile computing provide a degree of
access not previously available, providing complex “just in time” training, data, and resources to support
both civilian and military needs. Models and simulations could be used by a variety of people regardless
of location. This technology also creates a new business, distributing development and maintenance costs
across multiple users. Customers no longer need to purchase a full license for a complex simulation, but
can instead rent the model just for the time that they need it. A mobile device is a portal into all of the
computing power and all of the software applications in the world. In the near term, increased access and
reduced cost will allow users to access models of traffic flow, construction processes, surgical education,
military operations, or weather changes, just to name a few applications.
New Media Environments
Simulation is quickly becoming a major element of new media envi-
ronments. Games already abound in social media such as Facebook,
but simulation technology is becoming more feasible for novel and
rapidly growing applications. Devices like smart phones and tablets
have created a form of digital newspaper that can support full-color
and dynamic animation. Popular children’s books and movies have
already introduced the idea of animated newspapers in which the
printed pictures are actually looping movies—this no longer requires
magic, but can be done through simulation.
Simulation embedded into media could increase the information
provided and actually educate readers. For example, a news report
on a hurricane bearing down on the outer banks of North Carolina
could include a simulation driven by multiple hurricane models. Readers could alter model parameters
to see the projected path of the storm under various conditions. Simulations could also accompany news
reports of man-made or natural disasters, instructing the public on the underlying factors and conditions
of the event. Such capabilities could potentially turn every American into an avid news reader again.
People might spend just as much time thinking about how the world works as they would when interact-
ing with friends on social networking pages.
Robots and Thinking Machines
Robots were originally envisioned as autonomous, artificially intelligent machines that could replace
humans. Engineers in the 1960’s felt that it was just a few short steps to make machines dexterous, safe,
23
and smart enough to operate without human control. Today, robots are machines built for a specific job,
with almost every robotic action controlled by human operators. This model can be seen very clearly in
ground combat robots and those used to perform surgeries.
M&S technologies can be applied to robots to produce more “intelligent” machines with a reduction
in reliance on human operators. Unlike virtual entities that can move within the environment, observe
objects, and make basic decisions and reactions to those objects, robots today lack algorithms that de-
termine how to react to surroundings. Further development of these “intelligence” technologies can be
applied to robots used in physical environments.
Medical researchers are applying the same principles to make robotic surgery more autonomous. Open
heart surgeons typically spend 20 minutes opening a chest cavity and splitting the sternum before beginning
an operation. The procedure is well-suited to automation with a robot. The exact location of the ribs and
sternum can be captured with a Computed Tomography (CT) scan and loaded into a simulation environ-
ment. This 3D representation of the patient can then guide a robot to perform the procedure under the ob-
servation of a surgical technician, but in the absence of the heart surgeon that it is programmed to emulate.
This kind of automation may not be necessary for every patient, but the technology would be invaluable for
operating on patients at a distance - such as a soldier on the battlefield or an astronaut in orbit.
M&S in K-12 Education
M&S is poised to have a profound impact on American K-12 Education, particularly in Science, Technol-
ogy, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Converging factors of lower costs, networked
schools, IT-capable teachers and students, and M&S tools relevant to education are coming together to
create new instructional strategies for American students.
M&S is particularly well-positioned to support inquiry-based education. Since 1961, the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) has consistently supported inquiry-based, hands-on approaches to elementary
24
American students’ declining 
interest and achievement 
in STEM education is 
well-documented.a 
STEM education is a vital 
component of America’s 
economic vitality and stability. 
The 1990s saw a dramatic 
shift in the United States’ 
standing as a producer of 
high-technology products. 
The US trade balance in high-
technology products shifted 
from a positive $54 billion 
balance in 1990 to a negative 
$50 billion balance in 2001.b 
This trend has continued – in 
2001 China overtook the 
US to become the leading 
exporter of information-
technology products.c 
Americans’ declining interest 
and achievement in STEM 
related disciplines can 
logically be correlated with 
this declining leadership role 
in technological production 
and innovation.
(K-8) science education. The broad efficacy of inquiry-based science
education is widely endorsed by educator groups, academics, and na-
tional standards. Despite this support, the adoption of inquiry-based
approaches remains limited. Its use in classrooms, peaking at 33% in
the mid-1970s, steadily declined to an estimated 20% in 2006.16
M&S-based Multi-User Virtual Environments (MUVEs) allow
students to interact with a virtual environment and test hypothe-
ses, key requirements of inquiry-based learning. For example, River
City, a promising MUVE developed at Harvard University with
NSF funding, has taught principles of acute disease epidemiology
by investigating a disease outbreak in a virtual 19th century frontier
town. Students learned in the virtual environment by maneuvering
through the town, collecting evidence, testing hypotheses, and inter-
acting with avatars representing other students or computer-gener-
ated entities.
M&S technologies are also well-suited to teach other concepts in
math and science. Simulations are used to create visual representa-
tions of mathematical equations. They also allow students to ma-
nipulate factors associated with scientific processes and observe the
outcome of multiple influences. Virtual laboratories have been cre-
ated allowing students to conduct experiments that would otherwise
be impossible due to time, resource, or safety constraints.
Another example of how M&S is being used in education is Micro-
soft’s Worldwide Telescope. It is a web-based software application
anyone can download to a local personal computer. It stitches togeth-
er images from the world’s best ground- and space-based telescopes
to enable a seamless exploration of the universe. This tool is particu-
larly powerful because it allows educators to produce planetarium-
like “tours,” which can be accessed by any user.
Together, M&S tools have the potential to transform tomorrow’s
education through interactive lessons. M&S capabilities can provide
virtual environments for safe experimental exploration of math and
science concepts and can reach students regardless of geographic
location, providing opportunities that may not be otherwise
accessible in a local school environment.
a National Academy of Sciences. (2007). 
Committee on Prospering in the Global 
Economy of the 21st Century: An Agenda for 
American Science and Technology, National 
Academy of Sciences, National Academy of 
Engineering, Institute of Medicine.
b National Science Board. (2004). Science and 
Engineering Indicators 2004. NSB 04-01. 
Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.
c Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development. (2005). China Overtakes 
U.S. as World’s Leading Exporter of 
Information Technology Goods. Available at: 
http://www.oecd.org/.
16 Pine , Jerome, Aschbacher, P., Roth, E., Jones, M, McPhee, C., Martin, C., Phelps, S. Kyle, T., Foley, B.
(2006). Fifth graders’ science inquiry abilities: A comparative study of students in hands-on and textbook
curricula. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(5).
25
The computer in your cell phone today is a million times cheaper, a thousand times more powerful, and
about a hundred thousand times smaller than the computer built at MIT in 1965.  Micro and Nano
technologies continue to miniaturize the physical size required to house computer components. Accord-
ing to Ray Kursweil,17 inventor and futurist at the core of advances in Artificial Intelligence, what used to
fit in a building now fits in your pocket, and what fits inside your pocket now will fit inside a blood cell
in 25 years. With investment in future M&S activities, applications will become increasingly powerful in
the immediate and long-term future, and continue to revolutionize and transform the world in which we
learn, train, analyze, build, and live.
S E C T I O N  7
Last Word
17 CNET Interview, Q@A: Kurzweil on tech as a double-edge sword, November 19, 2008 http://news.cnet.com/8301-11386_3-10102273-76.html
This Primer is the result of efforts of members of the  
Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Stakeholders Committee.
Benn Aaronson, M&S Consultant
Lt Gen Thomas L. Baptiste, USAF (Ret.), National Center for Simulation
Dr. Linda Brent, The ASTA Group LLC
Dr. Timothy Cooley, DynamX Consulting
Dr. David Feinstein, Society for Simulation in Heathcare
Tom Frost, Joint and Coalition Warfighting Center
Robert J. Graebener, Alion Science and Technology
Fred Hartman, Institute for Defense Analyses
Steve Husak, Steve Husak Associates
James ( Josh) Jackson, Science Applications International Corporation
Karen Jackson, Deputy Secretary of Technology, Commonwealth of Virginia
Dr. Jonathan Lee, Department of Transportation
James M. McCall, Air Force Research Laboratory
Thomas Mastaglio, MYMIC LLC
Kirk Michaelson, Military Operations Research Society
Thomas Reese, Virginia Modeling and Simulation Consortium, Old Dominion University
John Riley, National Center for Manufacturing Sciences
Rob Reyenga, U.S. Army Simulation, Training and Instrumentation
CAPT Harry Robinson, USN (Ret.), Booz Allen Hamilton
Dr. John A. Sokolowski, Virginia Modeling and Simulation Consortium, Old Dominion University
Dr. Kendall Starkweather, International Technology and Engineering Educators Association
William V. Tucker, The Boeing Company
DeLloyd Voorhees, Jr., L-3 Communications
William F. Waite, AEgis Technologies Group, Inc.
Dr. James Wall, Texas Center for Applied Technology, Texas A&M University System 
 
Editorial Services provided by The ASTA Group LLC
Dr. Tim Buehner, Writer
Natalie Drzymala, Writer
Shannon West, Graphics and Editor

National Training and Simulation Association
www.trainingsystems.org
Publish Date 2011

