European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27
www.elsevier.com/locate/dswStaff scheduling and rostering: A review
of applications, methods and models
A.T. Ernst, H. Jiang, M. Krishnamoorthy *, D. Sier
CSIRO Mathematical and Information Sciences, Private Bag 10, Clayton South MDC, Clayton, Vic. 3169, AustraliaAbstract
This paper presents a review of staff scheduling and rostering, an area that has become increasingly important as
business becomes more service oriented and cost conscious in a global environment.
Optimised staff schedules can provide enormous benefits, but require carefully implemented decision support systems
if an organisation is to meet customer demands in a cost effective manner while satisfying requirements such as flexible
workplace agreements, shift equity, staff preferences, and part-time work. In addition, each industry sector has its own
set of issues and must be viewed in its own right. There are many computer software packages for staff scheduling,
ranging from spreadsheet implementations of manual processes through to mathematical models using efficient optimal
or heuristic algorithms. We do not review software packages in this paper. Rather, we review rostering problems in
specific application areas, and the models and algorithms that have been reported in the literature for their solution. We
also survey commonly used methods for solving rostering problems.
 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Staff scheduling; Personnel scheduling; Rostering1. Introduction
Personnel scheduling, or rostering, is the pro-
cess of constructing work timetables for its staff so
that an organisation can satisfy the demand for its
goods or services. The first part of this process
involves determining the number of staff, with
particular skills, needed to meet the service de-
mand. Individual staff members are allocated to
shifts so as to meet the required staffing levels at* Corresponding author. Tel.: +61-3-545-8044; fax: +61-3-
545-8080.
E-mail address: mohan.krishnamoorthy@csiro.au (M.
Krishnamoorthy).
0377-2217/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserv
doi:10.1016/S0377-2217(03)00095-Xdifferent times, and duties are then assigned to
individuals for each shift. All industrial regulations
associated with the relevant workplace agreements
must be observed during the process.
It is extremely difficult to find good solutions
to these highly constrained and complex prob-
lems and even more difficult to determine optimal
solutions that minimise costs, meet employee
preferences, distribute shifts equitably among em-
ployees and satisfy all the workplace constraints.
In many organisations, the people involved in
developing rosters need decision support tools to
help provide the right employees at the right time
and at the right cost while achieving a high level of
employee job satisfaction. The components of suched.
4 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27a decision support system will typically include
spreadsheet and database tools and possibly ro-
stering tools developed from appropriate mathe-
matical models and algorithms. The rostering tools
are the main focus of this review.
The development of the mathematical models
and algorithms underlying a rostering tool will
involve: (a) a demand modelling study that collects
and uses historical data to forecast demand for
services and converts these to the staffing levels
needed to satisfy service standards, (b) consider-
ation of the solution techniques required for a
personnel scheduling tool that satisfies the con-
straints arising from workplace regulations while
best meeting a range of objectives including cov-
erage of staff demand, minimum cost and maxi-
mum employee satisfaction, and (c) specification
of a reporting tool that displays solutions and
provides performance reports.
In general, the unique characteristics of differ-
ent industries and organisations mean that specific
mathematical models and algorithms must be de-
veloped for personnel scheduling solutions in dif-
ferent areas of application.
There are a large number of commercial soft-
ware packages available to assist with rostering.
We do not provide a review of rostering software
in this paper, but note that those software packages
that provide significant optimisation capabilities
are generally targeted at a specific application area
and cannot be easily be transferred to another
industry, while those designed to be broadly ap-
plicable generally focus more on providing users
with manual editing functions and extensive re-
porting but have limited support for automated
roster generation.
There have been a number of general survey
papers in the area of personnel rostering, these
include [32] and [179]. The latter survey concen-
trates on general labour scheduling models. An
early survey of some application areas and
methodologies is [5]. A survey of crew scheduling
and rostering is given in [36]. Surveys of the liter-
ature in airline crew scheduling and rostering ap-
pear in [17,94,155]. A good survey of tools, models
and methods for bus crew rostering is [190]. A
survey of the nurse scheduling literature is provided
in [37,168]. Call centre rostering is a more recentapplication and articles relating to this market
are found in [101,129]. There have been a few edi-
ted volumes: [61,62,68,153,186,189], arising from
conferences conducted in the area of personnel
scheduling, particularly in the area of public
transport.
In Section 2 of this paper we look at definitions
and notation, and develop a classification of per-
sonnel scheduling problems which we use in the
rest of the paper. We classify the personnel
scheduling literature into various application areas
in Section 3. Section 4 contains descriptions of
solution methods and offers comments on the ap-
plicability of various methods for solving different
problems in the literature. Finally, we consider a
number of possible future trends and offer some
conclusions in Section 5.2. Problem classification and models
In this section we propose a taxonomy of ro-
stering, or personnel scheduling. For the purposes
of this paper we treat rostering and personnel
scheduling as synonymous. The taxonomy is not
intended to be complete, but to provide a general
framework for classifying much of the work that
has been carried out in the area of rostering.
The classification considers two aspects of the
rostering problems addressed in the literature. On
a general level the overall rostering process in-
volves a number of different modules, and within
these modules different models may be needed for
specific applications.
Other classifications have been proposed in the
literature. For example, the authors in [179] divide
the general personnel scheduling problem into five
subproblems, temporal staff requirements, total
staff requirements, recreation and leave, work
schedules, and shift schedules. Similarly, three
stage approaches involving crew pairing genera-
tion, crew pairing optimisation, and crew roster-
ing, are often used in air crew scheduling [17,51].
For general labour scheduling [22], days off, shift,
and tour scheduling are commonly studied in the
literature.
The classification presented here is intended to
be slightly more general than these. We suggest a
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 5number of modules associated with the processes
of constructing a roster. Some or all of these
modules may require consideration in order to
build a roster in a particular application area.
Before discussing our classification, we note
that there are a number of areas that are related to,
though not strictly part of, the rostering process.
Among those that we allude to in this paper are
workforce planning and the sociological and psy-
chological impact of different work patterns.
There is a significant workforce planning litera-
ture dealing with strategic questions relating to the
optimal size or mix of a workforce. While there
may be some flexibility associated with the utili-
zation of permanent and part-time staff, rostering
is primarily concerned with the allocation of jobs
among a given workforce. There is also a large
body of research related to the social and psy-
chological effects of different types of rosters,
particularly those involving shift work or long
periods of duty. These studies may effect the de-
velopment of rosters by influencing the specifica-
tion of appropriate workplace regulations, but we
take such regulations to be existing constraints
within a rostering context.2.1. The rostering process
Our classification presents the rostering process
as a number of modules starting with the deter-
mination of staffing requirements and ending with
the specification of the work to be performed, over
some time period, by each individual in the
workforce. Although the modules suggest a step
by step procedure, the development of a particular
roster may require only some of the modules and,
in many practical implementations, several of the
modules may be combined into one procedure.
Moreover, requirements of different modules de-
pend on applications.Module 1: Demand modelling
The first module in developing a roster is to
determine how many staff are needed at different
times over some planning period, or rostering
horizon. Staff are needed to perform duties that
arise from incidents that occur during the planningperiod. In this context, incidents could be taken to
mean enquiries to a call centre, a specified se-
quence of tasks, the components of an aircraft
flight timetable, or simply a per shift specification
of staff levels.
Demand modelling is the process of translating
some predicted pattern of incidents into associated
duties and then using the duty requirements to
ascertain a demand for staff. There are three broad
incident categories on which staff demand can be
based
Task based demand. In this case demand is ob-
tained from lists of individual tasks to be per-
formed. Tasks are usually defined in terms of a
starting time and duration, or a time window
within which the task must be completed, and the
skills required to perform the task. In some cases
tasks may be associated with locations. Tasks are
often derived from timetables of services to be
carried out by an organisation. An initial demand
modelling step is to combine individual tasks into
task sequences that could usefully be carried out by
one person. Rostering from task based demand is
commonly used in transport applications where the
demand modelling module is associated with crew
pairing generation and crew pairing optimisation.
Flexible demand. In these cases the likelihood of
future incidents is less well known and must be
modelled using forecasting techniques. Requests
for service may have random arrival rates and
possibly random service times. The link between
the requests for service and staffing levels often
takes the form of a service standard applied to a
queuing analysis of the incident arrival distribu-
tions. The outcome is usually a specification of the
numbers of staff required at different times of the
day for each day in the rostering horizon. For ex-
ample, staff levels could be specified for each hourly
interval over a four week planning period. This
rostering to flexible demand is often needed for call
centres, police services and airport ground staff.
Once the flexible demand pattern has been
generated it may be apportioned to shifts that
cover the demand. For example, six morning shifts
may be needed to cover the demand between 6 am
and 2 pm on a given day. Once the shifts are de-
termined they can be scheduled into lines of work.
Alternatively, the demand may be fed directly into
6 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27the later rostering phases as a constraint on the
number of staff working at each time. In this case
suitable penalties may be associated with under
and/or over cover of the demand. In some cases it
may be cost effective to allow under cover and deal
with it using overtime.
Shift based demand. Here the demand is ob-
tained directly from a specification of the number
of staff that are required to be on duty during
different shifts. Shift based demand arises natu-
rally in applications such as nurse scheduling and
ambulance services where staff levels are deter-
mined from a need to meet service measures such
as nurse/patient ratios or response times. Shift
based demand may also be applied as a simplifi-
cation of task based or flexible demand rostering.Module 2: Days off scheduling
This module involves a determination of how
rest days are to be interspersed between work days
for different lines of work. This problem arises
more frequently when rostering to flexible or shift
based demand than when rostering to task based
demand.Module 3: Shift scheduling
Shift scheduling deals with the problem of se-
lecting, from a potentially large pool of candi-
dates, what shifts are to be worked, together with
an assignment of the number of employees to each
shift, in order to meet demand. When rostering
to flexible demand we also need to consider the
timing of work and meal breaks within the limits
allowed by workplace regulations and company
requirements. When rostering to task based de-
mand shift scheduling is usually called crew
scheduling, or crew pairing optimisation, the main
task being to select a good set of feasible duties,
shifts or pairings to cover all tasks. This module is,
obviously, redundant when rostering to shift based
demand.Module 4: Line of work construction
This module involves the creation of lines of
work, which are sometimes referred to as work
schedules or roster lines, spanning the rostering
horizon, for each staff member. The process ofconstructing a line of work depends on the basic
building blocks, typically shifts, duties or stints,
that are used.
If the basic building blocks are shifts, then any
shift can be assigned to an individuals work days.
There may be some additional constraints limiting
the valid shift patterns, for example it might not be
possible to immediately follow a sequence of night
shifts with a day shift. Duties arise from tasks
which may take up only part of a shift or may span
several shifts. Each duty can be included exactly
once in the roster. Stints are predefined sequences
of shifts and rest days. They may be the result of
an aggregation of tasks during the demand mod-
elling module, or simply predefined patterns that
reflect workplace rules and regulations.
This module involves a consideration of both
the rules relating to lines of work and the pattern
of demand. The former ensures the feasibility of
individual lines of work while the latter ensures
that, taken together, they satisfy the work re-
quirements at all times in the rostering horizon.
Line of work construction is usually called
tour scheduling when dealing with flexible de-
mand, and crew rostering when dealing with crew
pairings.Module 5: Task assignment
It may be necessary to assign one or more tasks
to be carried out during each shift. These tasks
may require particular staff skills or levels of se-
niority and must therefore be associated with
particular lines of work.Module 6: Staff assignment
This module involves the assignment of indi-
vidual staff to the lines of work. Staff assignment
is often done during construction of the work
lines.
The procedures outlined in Modules 1–6 above
provide a general framework within which dif-
ferent rostering models and algorithms may
be placed. In the remainder of this section we ela-
borate on how this classification can be used to
differentiate many of the rostering solutions pre-
sented in the literature.
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 72.2. Common decompositions of the rostering prob-
lem
It is usually not computationally practical to
deal simultaneously with all the modules required
to generate a roster, though such an approach is
desirable from the perspective of creating the best
overall rosters. Decomposing the problem into
several separate modules makes it more tractable
and often makes sense in terms of an organi-
sations business practices. For example, provided
the shifts remain fixed, task assignment could be
carried out at any time before a shift starts without
causing significant disruption to the staff. So it
may be sensible to generate the shifts ahead of time
but delay any task assignments until one or two
days before the actual day of operation, when the
set of jobs that need to be performed is better
known.
In most cases demand modelling can be treated
as a naturally separate module. For example, when
rostering to task based demand it is usually pos-
sible to pick sensible ways of aggregating tasks
without significantly reducing the flexibility of the
line of work creation. Furthermore, unless the
number of tasks is quite small, this aggregation is
essential in order to make the problem tractable.
When rostering to flexible demand, second
order effects may arise from the choice of rosters.
For example, it is usually not possible to exactly
match the staff on duty to a demand that varies on
an hourly basis when using shifts that are between
6 and 8 hours long. As a result, there may be times
when relatively fewer staff are on duty and this
could lead to longer customer queues, thus creat-
ing artificially higher demand in later time periods.
That is, the choice of rosters affects the pattern of
demand. These effects are usually small and deal-
ing with them by combining the demand and ro-
stering modules may lead to significant modelling
complications. In some cases, where there is an
unusually strong interaction, such effects may be
suitably reduced, as in [111], by a small number of
iterations between the rostering modules and the
(consequent) demand distribution.
In many applications the final module, staff
assignment, is performed manually. Staff may se-
lect from the lines of work based on seniority orthrough some consultative process. If this is not
the case, then it generally makes sense to consider
individual staff already during the line of work
construction rather than treating staff assignment
as a completely distinct module.
In summary, there are three main factors that
influence the differences between rostering prob-
lems and models:
1. The degree to which days off scheduling, line of
work construction and task assignment are inte-
grated. An appropriate decomposition strategy
can reduce the modelling complexity.
2. The modules required to construct a roster.
Some problems do not have tasks, others re-
quire non-trivial demand modelling, and some,
such as crew scheduling and rostering, do not
require task assignment.
3. The type of demand and the fundamental unit
from which lines of work are constructed. For
example, the modelling techniques used for air-
line crew rostering are very different from those
used for call centre rostering. The demand for
the former is based on fixed tasks and on flexi-
ble tasks for the latter.
2.3. Duty generation
Duty generation often occurs when dealing with
task based demand and involves the aggregation of
individual tasks into larger pieces of work. In later
rostering modules these pieces of work are treated
as indivisible units that are to be performed by the
same person. Crew pairing or crew scheduling is a
well-known example of duty generation.
Duty generation is often used to deal with lo-
cation dependencies by combining multiple tasks
into roundtrips or pairings that allow staff to re-
turn to their home base after performing multiple
tasks. The main aims in this module are to mini-
mise paxing (the movement of crew between
locations with no assigned duties during the
transfer), time away from home, quality of life,
cost of overnight stays, and so on.
Duty generation is often carried out in two
steps. The first step involves the generation of a
large number of feasible duties, shifts, pairings or
roundtrips, and the second step involves selecting
8 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27a good subset of these duties so as to cover all of
the demand.
Treating duty generation as a separate module
can provide a convenient way of removing some of
the complexity associated with detailed work rules
from an optimisation model. These rules may be
quite difficult to include in a full optimisation
model but often have only a limited effect on the
overall solution quality. For example, it makes
sense to deal with rules governing work breaks
while setting up pairings rather than including
them as a set of possibly complex side constraints
in an optimisation model.
2.4. Line of work construction
Constructing lines of work involves the deter-
mination of a sequence of duties spanning some
longer-term period of time, commonly fortnightly
or monthly, to be allocated to individual staff
members. The problem usually contains a number
of conflicting objectives and constraints.
There are a number of different line of work
models:
Cyclic/acyclic rosters. In a cyclic roster all em-
ployees of the same class perform exactly the same
line of work, but with different starting times for
the first shift or duty. This roster type is most
applicable for situations with repeating demand
patterns. For example, many train timetables re-
peat weekly and therefore it is not uncommon to
have cyclic rosters for train drivers. In acyclic
rosters, the lines of work for individual employees
are completely independent. This situation applies
in cases where demand fluctuates with time and
where shifts have different lengths and starting
times. Acyclic rosters are often employed in call
centres. Sometimes a complete cyclic roster, for all
staff, is not feasible, but it may be possible to have
cyclic rosters within subgroups of the workforce or
over subperiods of the rostering horizon.
Stint based. In some organisations only certain
shift sequences, called stints, are allowed. For ex-
ample, DDD may be used to refer to a stint with
three consecutive day shifts, DND to a stint
starting with a day shift followed by a night shift
and finishing with another day shift, and OOOOto a stint of four consecutive off days. A line of
work is constructed as a sequence of stints. In
constructing lines of work, rules indicating allowed
stint transitions must be followed. A stint transi-
tion matrix can be used to specify which stints can
follow a particular stint, and also to indicate pre-
ferred transitions. It is possible to construct either
cyclic or acyclic rosters using stints. A typical ap-
plication of stint based rostering is nurse schedul-
ing.
Line of work constraints. In most applications,
feasible rosters are significantly constrained by
rules governing which work patterns are allowed
for an individual. Such rules might impose re-
strictions on the number of sequential night shifts
to be worked, or specify some minimum time off
between successive shifts, or refer to more complex
preference constraints such as a requirement that
no more than two 12 hours shifts be worked per
fortnight.
Often there is a distinction between hard and
soft constraints. The former must be satisfied while
the latter may be violated, though it is generally
undesirable to do so. Modelling soft constraints
usually involves the inclusion of penalty terms in
the objective function.
These constraints, which must be applied inde-
pendently to each line of work, usually vary sig-
nificantly between different organisations and
these differences give rise to the great variety of
rostering problems and models.
An important aspect of rostering is to allow for
staff preferences. A number of approaches to this
problem are used in airline crew rostering. One
approach is to use bidding systems in which lines
of work are generated and then bid for by crew
members. Bids are normally taken in order of de-
creasing seniority, the most senior staff having the
widest range of work lines from which to select so
as to best satisfy their preferences. Successive crew
members bid for the remaining lines of work.
Another approach is to try and accommodate
preferences while constructing the lines of work. In
preferential bidding systems [96] crew members bid
for particular duties and these duties are then in-
corporated into their lines of work wherever pos-
sible. On a more general level, equitable systems
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 9attempt to distribute the workload fairly and
evenly within each crew class. Constructing cyclic
rosters is a typical strategy in equitable systems.
2.5. Assignment
Assignment can occur as a subproblem at var-
ious modules of the rostering process. The most
frequently used assignments are:
Task assignment. Task assignments are often
required when working shifts have been deter-
mined but tasks have not been allocated to indi-
viduals. Tasks are grouped and assigned to shifts,
or employees, based on their starting times and
durations. The assignment methods depend on
whether tasks times are fixed or movable, breaks
exist in shifts, overtime is allowed or specific skills
or qualifications are required to perform certain
tasks. Task assignment can also be carried out
when constructing lines of work.
Shift assignment. Shift assignments arise when
constructing lines of work. As discussed previ-
ously, in tour scheduling and crew rostering the
aim is to construct lines of work from shifts/duties/
pairings. In airline crew rostering, sequential as-
signment methods have been frequently employed
to generate rosters. Examples include assigning the
highest priority duties/pairings to highest priority
employees and assigning duties/pairings to em-
ployees on a day by day basis.
Roster assignment. Roster assignment involves
the allocation of lines of work to individual staff
members. This assignment can be done either after
generating all lines of work, as with the bidding
systems discussed above, or during construction of
the lines of work. If the assignment takes place as
the line of work is constructed, then it is common
to include individual staff preferences, availability
and qualifications as part of the process.3. Application areas
The origin of staff scheduling and rostering can
be traced back to Edies work on traffic delays at
toll booths [79]. Since then, staff scheduling and
rostering methods have been applied to transpor-tation systems such as airlines and railways, health
care systems, emergency services such as police,
ambulance and fire brigade, call centres, and many
other service organisations such as hotels, restau-
rants and retail stores. Extensive model and algo-
rithm development has been carried out in the
literature on crew scheduling and rostering in
transportation systems, nurse scheduling in health
care systems, and tour scheduling for various ser-
vice systems. A focussed review on applications of
both personnel and vehicle scheduling can be
found in [5] where scheduling objectives, con-
straints, and methodologies are surveyed for each
application area.
In this section we provide a brief description of
the key problems related to staff scheduling in
different application areas. We also point to key
papers in the research literature that attempt to
provide solutions.
3.1. Transportation systems
Staff scheduling and rostering is known as crew
scheduling and rostering in the transportation
market––airlines, railways, mass transit and buses.
The common features for all these applications are
1. Both temporal and spatial features are in-
volved, that is, each task is characterised by
its starting time and location and its finishing
time and location.
2. All tasks to be performed by employees are de-
termined from a given timetable (either flight,
train, subway or bus). Tasks are the smallest el-
ements (or building blocks) and are obtained
from decompositions of flight, train or bus jour-
neys. A task may be a flight leg in airlines, a trip
between two or more consecutive segments in a
train journey, or a trip between two or more
consecutive stops in a bus line.
Because of its economic scale and impact, air-
line crew scheduling and rostering is probably the
biggest application of staff scheduling and roster-
ing. More articles have been devoted to method-
ologies and applications in this area than to any
other rostering application area. An earlier survey
can be found in [17]. Many applications and
10 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27methodologies have been collected in proceedings
of the symposia of the Airline Group of the In-
ternational Federation of Operations Research
Societies (AGIFORS).
Crew scheduling and crew rostering vary be-
tween different airlines, notably between airlines in
North America and Europe. The major differ-
ences, in terms of crew categories, fleet types,
network structures, rules and regulations, regu-
larity of the flight timetables, and cost structures,
are highlighted in [15].
The most popular approach for solving airline
crew scheduling and rostering is the well-known
decomposition technique. In this decomposition
technique, the overall problem is solved in three
major stages: (a) crew pairing generation; (b) crew
pairing optimisation; (c) crew rostering. Crew
pairing generation is a process of constructing all
or a large number of feasible pairings/duties from
the given timetable. Some of the pairings gener-
ated in the first stage will be selected so that all
flight legs/trips are covered at a minimum cost. In
the last stage, the pairings selected in the second
stage are sequenced into rosters that will be
assigned to individual crew. Many articles deal
with airline crew pairing generation, crew pairing
optimisation and crew rostering including
[14,25,36,60,66,67,71,94,96,109,155,156,184]. Some
existing airline crew scheduling and rostering sys-
tems are reviewed in [15,17,94].
Most articles in the literature are concerned
with planning crew pairing and rostering. Opera-
tional crew pairing optimisation is studied in [170].
The operational problem consists of modifying, as
necessary, personalized planned monthly assign-
ments of airline crew members during day-to-day
operations to deal with sick leave and/or incident
interruptions. One operational problem is to con-
struct rosters for reserve pilots and flight atten-
dants who are on call to operate flights that
assigned crews cannot fly or flights to which no
crew has been assigned [73].
A deadhead problem is considered in [29].
Generation of pairings is done by attempting to
eliminate extended rest periods and to reduce the
cost and reposition crew for better utilization.
Some degree of under coverage and/or over cov-
erage may be beneficial globally. Extra undercoverage and over coverage can be eliminated by
adding penalties in the objective [100].
Downgrading is a concept used in [65] in order
to fill in positions required for lower ranked crew
by higher ranked crew.
A model is proposed in [115] to improve the
repetition or regularity of itineraries over a weekly
horizon since solutions with more regularities are
much easier to implement and manage. More im-
portantly, crew members prefer to repeat itiner-
aries. In order to satisfy passengers requirements,
many irregular flights that do not repeat daily may
be scheduled [171].
Some integrated models, that deal with both
crew scheduling and vehicle scheduling in one
pass, can be found in [36,92,104].
Crew scheduling and rostering has also received
considerable attention in public transport systems.
Progress can traced in a series of dedicated vol-
umes entitled Computer-Aided Scheduling of
Public Transport [61,62,68,153,186,189]. A com-
prehensive survey on vehicle and crew scheduling
can be found in [36]. Quite a few decision support
systems have been developed and used in public
transport systems. A number of software systems
for bus scheduling and rostering are described in
[28,52,54,62,69,81,89,154,191].
As with airline crew scheduling and rostering,
bus schedules and rosters are usually constructed
from given bus timetables. Unlike airlines, the time
scale may be much smaller since the concept of
roundtrips is normally replaced by the concept of
duties, and most duties can be performed by a
crew complement without long rests. Though the
spatial feature is still very important when gener-
ating duties in bus crew scheduling and rostering,
the concept of home depots does not generally
apply. In other words, the starting and finishing
locations of a duty need not necessarily be the
same.
Railways applications of crew scheduling and
rostering have appeared only recently in the public
transport sector literature. Most work reported in
the literature is about real applications to railway
crew rostering applications in different countries
[13,49,85,93,116,132,134–137,149]. Integration of
crew scheduling and rostering can be found in
[51,84].
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 11Crew scheduling and rostering has also been
used in other transport systems such as in a light
rail train in Hong Kong [57] and shipping lines [98]
and trucks [159].
3.2. Call centres
Unlike crew scheduling and rostering, person-
nel rostering in call centres does not involve a
geographical (or spatial) feature. In one sense this
makes scheduling and rostering a little easier.
However, unlike crew scheduling applications in
transport applications, the exact nature and the
number of tasks that need to be performed is not
known a priori. All that is known is that a work-
force requirements pattern exists for the entire
planning horizon. This feature complicates sched-
uling and rostering in call centres. It is important
to note that the workforce requirements in call
centre applications are necessarily variable from
day to day and from week to week. Shift start
times and shift lengths need to vary in order to
obtain good, low-cost rosters that cover the
workforce requirements adequately. More often
than not, the rosters may need to over cover de-
mand in certain time intervals and under staff in
other time intervals. A review of important call
centre problems that can be solved using opera-
tions research techniques is provided in [129]. A
more recent review is provided in [101].
A method for evaluating workforce require-
ments is provided in [42]. Queuing models [42] and
simulation models [38,106] may be used to obtain
the correct numbers of staff members in each time
interval. The work in [38] enabled AT&T to reduce
costs and also won the 1993 Edelman Prize. An-
other study for the Hong Kong telephone bill en-
quiries call centre is given in [148]. An approach to
determine how calls are answered (and in what
manner) is studied in [55]. The Erlang-C queuing
model is preferred in most call centre applications.
Queuing models are elegant and may give analyt-
ical results but in general many real world sim-
plifications need to be made. Simulation can take
many practical factors into account but these
may be very computationally expensive solutions.
Sometimes, queuing models and simulation are
combined to obtain ideal staff requirements.Once workforce requirements are known, we
still need to derive good shifts and rosters. Modern
call centre staff scheduling solutions need to take
into account the fact that not all calls will be of the
same type and that different staff will have different
call-handling skills. When generating rosters the
above skill issues must be considered in addition to
the usual constraints such as maximum shift du-
ration, earliest shift starting time, latest finishing
time and so on. Depending on these conditions,
the number of feasible shifts can range from a few
to a few billion. The rostering problem is to allo-
cate lines of work to individuals who have the
requisite attributes. A staffing requirements and
scheduling study in telephone companies was un-
dertaken in [58]. Mathematical programming and
heuristic approaches to shift scheduling in call
centres have been derived in [16,42,161,177]. The
work in [42] studied the three stages of forecasting,
staff requirements, and integrated scheduling to
derive call centre solutions. Shift scheduling ap-
proaches have been studied in [107,108]. Some
recent approaches at integrating demand estima-
tion, workforce requirements planning, staff
scheduling and rostering have been developed in
[106,177].
3.3. Health care systems
The major rostering focus in health systems has
been in nurse scheduling, usually in acute care
hospital wards. There are both clinical and cost
imperatives associated with providing appropriate
levels of staff in the different medical wards in a
hospital. The rosters must provide suitably quali-
fied nurses to cover the demand arising from the
numbers of patients in the wards while observing
work regulations, distinguishing between perma-
nent and casual staff, ensuring that night and
weekend shifts are distributed fairly, allowing for
leave and days off, and accommodating a range of
employee preferences. The resulting rostering
problems are, in most cases, over-constrained.
Approaches in the 1970s and 1980s addressed
a number of problem formulations and solution
techniques. A goal in many studies was to provide
support tools to reduce the need for manual
construction of nurse rosters. Some studies
12 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27[126,142,157,187,188] addressed the problem of
determining staff levels and skills based on the
numbers of patients and their medical needs.
Others adopted mathematical programming
[182,183], branch and bound techniques [180], or
goal programming [18,145,146], approaches in
which the objective contains weighted coverage
and shift satisfaction terms and the constraints
enforce hard rules such as the ratios of nurse
grades that must be observed on shifts. Others
[138,169], used iterative algorithms to generate
cyclic rosters in which fairness is achieved by
having each nurse work the same sequence of
shifts with individual shift sequences offset so as to
provide the required coverage and skill mix within
wards.
In the 1990s a number of papers [37,165,168],
provided classifications of nurse rostering systems
and reviews of methods for solving different classes
of problems. Further advances [113,131,178] were
made in applying linear and/or mixed integer
programming and network optimisation tech-
niques for developing nurse rosters. Constraint
programming (CP) methods [56,185] were also
used to model the complicated rules associated
with nurse rosters. The methods were applied to
problems involving cyclic and non-cyclic rosters.
Typically, the problems contained roster rules
applicable to a particular hospital. As such, these
approaches may require substantial reformulation
for use in a different hospital.
A number of approaches have included a mix of
heuristic and simulation techniques in an attempt
to deal with more complex nurse rostering and
clinical service problems. A simulation model
augmented by AI methods is used in [141] to in-
corporate nurse training into rosters. A decision
support system based on a shift pattern generating
heuristic is used in [151] to provide an interactive
system for developing weekly work schedules. A
simulated annealing (SA) algorithm for solving a
large set covering integer programming formula-
tion is used in [112] to develop rosters for a mix of
permanent and casual staff with demand specified
in half hourly intervals over a 10 day period. Day
to day nurse scheduling based on decisions arising
from stochastic models of patient acuity, assessed
via simulation modelling, is considered in [166].An attempt to develop a knowledge based system
for generating weekly nurse rosters and then ad-
justing the rosters so as to react to daily changes in
demand and staff availability is discussed in [124].
More recently, a mix of tabu search (TS) and
integer program subproblems is used in [77,76] to
generate weekly ward rosters while satisfying a
complex set of shift rules, cost restriction, nurse
grade, and employee preference constraints. A
hybrid TS algorithm is used in [44] to obtain so-
lutions within a reasonable timeframe for a com-
mercial nurse rostering system. The approach in
[44] has been refined in [43] using a set of memetic
(evolution by imitation) algorithms. The algo-
rithms incorporate various tabu and hybrid TS
procedures within a genetic algorithm (GA). These
algorithms are designed to overcome one of the
basic problems associated with using heuristics for
complex nurse rostering problems, namely that, as
indicated by the authors, ‘‘the quality of a solution
is not necessarily a sum or combination of the
partial solutions’’.
A number of other aspects of health system
rostering systems have been studied by different
researchers. Models for developing rosters for
nurses serving home care and regional clinics, in
which travel between different locations is an im-
portant factor, have been developed in [34,91]. A
queuing model is used in [6] to determine the
staffing levels needed to handle call arrivals for
inpatient, outpatient and other hospital generated
appointments. Simulation modelling is used in [9]
to consider operational management policies for
providing maintenance staff in a large hospital.
The use of a simple relational database system to
manage work schedules for radiologists is dis-
cussed in [130].
3.4. Protection and emergency services
An important aspect of staffing police, ambu-
lance, fire and security services is the need to meet
expected service standards. These standards may
be specified in terms of response times to attend
incidents, the ability to dispatch specified numbers
of properly trained officers to different types of
incidents, and so on. In addition, given the nature
of the duties, most emergency services have very
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 13tightly controlled regulations specifying acceptable
patterns of shift work.
The frequency of incidents requiring emergency
services officers will typically vary at different times
of a day, week or even season. For example, there
may be a higher demand for ambulances and po-
lice officers in certain areas on Friday and Satur-
day nights, or in resort areas during holiday
periods. Given a need to meet service standards,
changes in incidence frequency will result in
changes to the numbers of staff needed to provide
the required levels of coverage.
The study in [173] considers the problem of
assigning police officer shifts so that under cover is
minimised. Shifts can have different start times but
the allowed shift patterns are tightly specified (4
days/10 hours, 5 days/8 hours, with 3 consecutive
days off). New rosters are obtained by applying a
local search heuristic with tabu restrictions, start-
ing with the current roster as an initial solution.
Intermediate solutions may need manual adjust-
ment and further optimisation to provide good
feasible final solutions. Another study of police
rostering is given in [46], which considers the
problem of determining cyclical patterns of day,
afternoon and night shifts with pairs of rostered
days off. The objective is to minimise the deviation
from desired staffing levels given some specified
variability in demand.
Rostering ambulance officers to satisfy a de-
mand for officers of different classification to be on
duty for specified shifts is considered in [83].
Rosters over a period of one year are constructed
from allowed patterns of day, night and off shifts
together with annual leave periods. These shift
patterns are defined as stints and examples are
DDNN and OOO where D represents a 10 hours
day shift, N a 14 hours night shift and O an off
shift. A transition matrix is used to specify which
stints can follow any given stint and to give the
relative preferences for different stint successions.
The solution method uses a shortest path algo-
rithm to generate rosters which are ranked ac-
cording to how well they cover demand, how
evenly the workload is spread and so on.
The focus of [167] is the problem of developing
rosters for security guards. The problem is formu-
lated as a multi-objective integer program. Thedifferent objectives involve minimising under cover
of demand and satisfying workers preferences.
There is a mix of full time and part-time guards.
Constraints specify the allowed shift and leave
patterns for the guards. As the resulting problem is
large, the paper discusses a mix of a branch and
bound technique and a heuristic for solving the
problem.
3.5. Civic services and utilities
Governments at all levels (local, state and na-
tional) operate a large number of labour intensive
services. Optimised staff rostering for these public
services provides a significant opportunity to im-
prove the services provided by the government
while at the same time containing costs. However
these application areas also present unique chal-
lenges as government employment conditions tend
to have more generous employment conditions
and these can severely restrict the flexibility of the
rosters. The following give an indication of the
breadth of applications in this area.
A case study is given in [139] deals with the sorts
of claims processing that might occur in govern-
ment agencies dealing with claims for pensions and
other social security entitlements, or in private
companies dealing with insurance claims. A de-
mand modelling system is described that allowed
management to better deal with large fluctuations
in the workload.
Weekly schedules for a postal processing centre
are produced in [122]. A different application is in
the assignment of personnel in the military ser-
vices. Here the main problems related to assessing
how well a person fits a particular position [90] and
dealing with the very large number of staff (up to
500,000), skills and positions involved [118].
Two applications in the context of a university
are staffing of the reference and circulation desk at
a library [19], and the scheduling of proctors [20]
to oversee university examinations. Both of these
problems are complicated by availability restric-
tions, the first due to the study commitments by
student assistants and the second due to the
qualification and preferences of the proctors.
Toll collection is another area of personnel
scheduling that has been studied in the literature.
14 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27This problem was first introduced in 1954 [79] in-
spired by the New York Port Authority. The same
problem was revisited 40 years later [63] with an
emphasis on stochastic demand modelling based
service standards.
With privatisation trends in the utilities sector
(water, gas and electricity), efficient deployment of
resources in this sector is critical to improvements
to bottom-line performance. Rostering shift
workers and operators in public service utilities
and allied services is becoming an important area
of application. There are, however, not too many
papers in the literature dealing with workforce
scheduling studies of electric power supply/gener-
ation workers, personnel at gas installations, oil
and gas facilities and off-shore facilities. Some as-
pects of staff scheduling in the utilities area, par-
ticularly dealing with occupational health and
safety and fatigue, are discussed in [147]. A column
generation approach for generating employee
rosters for about 50 employees working in a 24/7
electric power generation operation is described
in [80].
3.6. Venue management
There are many different types of operations
that involve completing tasks with a variety of
skill requirements all at the same location. Ex-
amples of this include the ground operations at
an airport, cargo terminals, casinos and sporting
venues.
The largest number of published applications
in this category are on airport related staff
scheduling, including customs staff at Auckland
International Airport [128], aircraft refuelling
staff [11] and general ground staff including
baggage handlers [75]. All of these problems are
characterised by the fact that the demand for
services is relatively well known as it is driven by
the regular airline timetables. A somewhat dif-
ferent type of rostering problem arises in the
scheduling of aircraft maintenance personnel
where the main difficulty is to allocate a variety
of small tasks to shifts in the presence of skill
constraints [72,78].
Two sporting applications include the schedul-
ing of umpires in the American Baseball League[86] and for cricket games in England [193].
However, these problems are more closely related
to timetabling than other personnel scheduling
problems described here.
3.7. Financial services
Rostering is important for banks in the staffing
of tellers as well as some back office staff. This has
similar characteristics to other customer service
activities. The main difficulty is the variability of
demand over the day [125,133]. It is possible to
cope with this variability through the judicious use
of part-time staff and overtime.
Another quite different problem arises in the
scheduling of audit staff. Here the main complexity
arises through the non-homogeneous nature of
demand with a variety of audit jobs that have a
mix of skill requirements and different locations.
Various people have studied both the work loads
and the detailed scheduling requirements for audit
staff [74,158].
3.8. Hospitality and tourism
Staff scheduling forms a significant proportion
of overall costs in hotels, tourist resorts and fast
food restaurants. Staff costs (including training)
are often a hotels largest single expense. Payroll
and related expenses are sometimes over 30% of
the costs of operating a hotel. A reduction in this
by even 1% represents considerable cost savings
and differences to the organisations bottom line.
Hotels normally employ staff with many different
skills such as catering, housekeeping, reception,
accounting, billing, bookings and maintenance.
Staff need to be rostered round the clock in some
areas. Some staff may be multi-skilled and others
will have training needs written into the workplace
agreements. Demand for services is not generally
known with certainty before hand and manage-
ment often relies on a combination of intuition,
software systems and local knowledge (particu-
larly of marketing campaigns, events and attrac-
tions). Staff scheduling is a key element of
management planning in such circumstances.
Specific studies in the hospitality area have been
carried out in [120] and [150].
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 153.9. Retail
A mathematical programming approach is
proposed in [103] for constructing a weekly
schedule for staff members in the retail business.
The important criteria for generating quality
schedules include the total cost and the service
quality. This application can be dealt with in a
similar fashion to call centre operator scheduling
because shopping customers can be modelled as
callers and sales clerks as call takers.
A review is presented in [110] addressing sales
force deployment decisions relating to size, time
effort allocation and territory alignment. These
subproblems can be modelled separately. Recent
focuses are on the integration of these separate
models within one stage.
3.10. Manufacturing
In a dynamic production environment [1], de-
cisions must be made in order to establish pro-
duction levels for many different items in order to
meet demand over a given period while keeping
the inventories at acceptable levels. A critical
problem associated with the balance between de-
mand and supply is to decide the related man-
power requirements for each production period.
Manpower and material scheduling is consi-
dered in [87] for achieving strategic and tactical
objectives in an electronics firm. The objectives
are, among others, to minimise the costs associated
with labour, material, inventory, and penalties for
late shipments.
A PC-based decision support system for plan-
ning and scheduling part-time workers at a local
newspaper company is developed in [99]. The
duties of part-time workers include loading and
unloading materials, packing newspapers and
advertisements into bundles, and distributing
bundles. The system addresses two issues: Gener-
ating requirements for part-time workers for each
shift and scheduling them based on certain criteria.
In construction companies, labour costs ac-
count for a large proportion of total project costs.
An integration of project task scheduling and staff
scheduling is studied in [10,23]. The project task
starting times have time windows. The startingtimes of the tasks determine the daily staff re-
quirements. The objective is to determine the
number of staff needed on each day, based on
proper scheduling of tasks, such that the overall
cost is minimised.
The work reported in [21] is to schedule engi-
neers to carry out various jobs located at different
places. Each task can be characterised by a starting
and finishing time window, duration and location.
Tasks may also be constrained to be performed in
particular orders. The main objectives are to
maximize the amount of work done and to mini-
mise the amount of time that workers spend
travelling between locations.4. Solution methods
In this section, we review rostering methods and
techniques. We also comment on the applicability
of these techniques for solving the specific prob-
lems. It should be noted that the literature is
heavily skewed towards mathematical program-
ming and metaheuristic approaches for rostering
as opposed to CP and other techniques arising out
of artificial intelligence research.
4.1. Demand modelling
The complicated processes involved in devel-
oping rosters are often broken down into modules
as described in Section 2. The first step in this
process according to our classification is the
modelling of the requirements for labour. The type
of demand model used varies significantly across
different application and has a large effect of the
remaining rostering steps. Hence, even though
much of the rostering literature assumes that the
demand for staff is either given or can be obtained
without difficulty, we believe that it is important
not to ignore this step.
There are usually two main components in de-
mand modelling: we need a method for translating
incident data to a demand for staff, and a method
for forecasting incidents unless the incidents are
derived from a known timetable.
In some cases the demand may be generated
from incidents in a reasonably straightforward,
16 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27though possibly complicated, manner. For
example, in airline or rail crew scheduling in-
stances, the demand for crew is very straight-
forward because crew rosters are determined by
known timetables. However, for example in po-
licing, a serious crime may require the attendance
of some specified numbers of senior officers, fo-
rensic investigators and junior officers. The inci-
dent may also generate a demand for other staff
to carry out interviews and collect evidence over
the following days. In this case the incident could
be translated to a demand for staff via a lookup
table containing the immediate and follow up
staff requirements for the incident type, together
with some measure of the duration of the dif-
ferent jobs. Using such a scheme, the numbers
of appropriately qualified staff needed in differ-
ent time periods can be built up from a pre-
dicted time/place distribution of different incident
types.
Similarly, in a hospital the numbers of nurses of
different qualifications needed in, for example, in-
tensive care or obstetrics wards may be related to
the numbers of patients in the wards by a set of
regulations specifying patient/nurse ratios for dif-
ferent medical specialities.
In other cases the link between incident fre-
quency and staff demand may occur via a service
standard specified in measures such as customer
waiting times. In a call centre for example, the
service standard may be that 95% of calls are an-
swered within 3 minutes. Other possible service
standards include: average waiting time, average
number of customers waiting for a service and
utilization of staff. Similar types of measure may
also apply to customers waiting for service in
banks, social service departments, supermarket
checkout counters, hospital emergency depart-
ments, and so on.
An important aspect of these cases is that both
the incident frequency, or customer arrival rate,
and the service times associated with individual
customers are usually random, though it may be
possible to model them using Poisson, Erlang or
other more general distributions. Queuing theory
[42] and simulation modelling [39,106] are the two
approaches most commonly used to translate
customer arrivals during different time intervalsinto the staffing levels (demand) needed to main-
tain the required service standards.
The application of queuing theory to study staff
levels and service standards is a research area in its
own right and we will not explore it further here.
However, some queuing studies related to deter-
mining server (staff) levels to meet service stan-
dards are given in [114,175,177] and [111]. A
simple approach, assuming a stationary arrival
process and based on the Erlang-C model, often
provides the basis for ‘‘erlang calculators’’ which
are used to determine staffing levels in call centres.
Having decided on a suitable method for con-
verting incident data into staff demand curves, we
are still faced with the problem of forecasting the
likely distribution of incidents over the forthcom-
ing planning horizon. For example, the planning
horizon for a roster may be one month and we
may want to forecast the number of incidents that
are likely to occur in each daily, hourly, or other,
time interval over the next month. An important
limitation applies when determining the number of
time intervals to use in the planning horizon be-
cause traditional forecasting methods do not pro-
vide accurate forecasts if the number of forecasting
periods is large.
A number of approaches, including simple av-
eraging, exponential smoothing, and regression,
may be used for incident forecasting. An approach
using seasonal and non-seasonal moving averages
is given in [42], while [119] considers a regression
model for forecasting the number of calls in hourly
intervals to a customer hotline centre. The appli-
cation of heuristics to determine staffing levels by
assuming steady state arrivals in each time interval
and smoothing the demand curves by period
linking is considered in [105,106].
4.2. Artificial intelligence approaches
Apart from CP (see Section 4.3) several other
artificial intelligence techniques have been applied
to rostering. These include fuzzy set theory, search
and expert systems.
Fuzzy set theory has been used to solve air crew
rostering problems in [174]. The fuzzy set mem-
bership is used to guide a greedy search algorithm
in [174].
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 17Several decision support systems have been de-
veloped to assist rostering staff in their task. For
example [135] uses a neighbourhood search strat-
egy to improve solutions with a user-selectable
degree of automation that provides a range of
options from fully manual rostering to complete
automation. A similar philosophy underlies [12]
where an expert system is used to assist rosterers in
initial roster construction as well as in dealing with
disruptions.
The decision support approach to rostering is
particularly beneficial when there are a large num-
ber of human factors that cannot be codified in
software and need to be left to the discretion of the
person in charge of rostering. In some cases these
partial automation approaches also provide a use-
ful first step from a completely manual system in
organisations where the lack of trust into a ‘‘black
box’’ rostering engine is a significant issue. Note
that many of the metaheuristic approaches de-
scribed in Section 4.4 can also be modified to be
used in some form of partially automated decision
support.
4.3. Constraint programming
CP provides a powerful tool for finding feasible
solutions to rostering problems. This technique is
particularly useful when the problem is highly
constrained and/or when any feasible solution will
suffice even if it is not optimal. However this
technique is less likely to produce good solutions
for problems where the main challenge is to find an
optimal or near optimal solution out of a vast
number of feasible solutions.
While some authors, for example [162], use their
own constraint propagation and search algorithm
with hard coded constraints, most use the power
and flexibility of a constraint logic programming
language to express the rostering constraints. The
advantage of this approach is that complex con-
straints can be expressed relatively easily.
Pure CP approaches have been applied to nurse
rostering in [56,185]. CP performs well in this ap-
plication area as most nurse rosters tend to be
quite rigid and highly constrained.
However as optimisation with CP is generally
quite inefficient, several people have tried tocombine CP with traditional OR techniques. For
example [102] use CP as a preprocessing technique
to reduce the problem size before optimising with
an LP based branch and bound method. Another
alternative is to use CP to perform column gen-
eration for a set covering IP [50]. This hybrid
technique allows complex work rules to be repre-
sented easily in generating columns while using the
IP to ensure that a low cost solution is found. CP
can also be combined with heuristic search by
randomizing the labelling phase of the CP algo-
rithm [144]. Overall this area of hybrid techniques
is promising, though more research is required to
determine the best way to combine the flexibility of
constraint logic programming with some of the
optimisation techniques discussed in this section.
4.4. Metaheuristics
Metaheuristics form an important class of
methods that solve hard, and usually, combina-
torial/discrete optimisation problems. Typically,
these methods are used to solve problems that
cannot be solved by traditional heuristics such as
steepest descent or greedy local search. The prob-
lems are either difficult in their own right, or
practical real-world instances make them intracta-
ble for solution through exact solution approaches.
Metaheuristics are typically hybrids of heuristic
algorithms. The algorithms combine different base
methods under one framework. The different base
methods are drawn from areas as diverse as clas-
sical heuristics, artificial intelligence, biological
evolution, neural engineering and statistical me-
chanics. Examples of modern metaheuristics are
SA, TS, GAs, problem space search, greedy ran-
dom adaptive search procedure (GRASP), neural
networks, machine learning, reinforcement learn-
ing and ant colony optimisation. Refer to [143,152]
for recent reviews of metaheuristics.
Heuristics and metaheuristics have often been
used for solving staff scheduling problems. The
popularity of these types of methods for solving
rostering problems is due to a number of factors
including:
• They tend to be relatively robust. While they
cannot be guaranteed to produce an optimal
18 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27solution, they can usually produce a reasonably
good feasible solution for a wide range of input
data in a limited amount of running time. By
comparison many integer programming ap-
proaches run the risk of not returning any fea-
sible solutions for a long time.
• Most metaheuristics are relatively simple to im-
plement and allow problem specific information
to be incorporated and exploited.
• Heuristics make it easy to deal with complex
objectives, whether these are real staffing costs
or penalties for violating constraints that are
desirable but not mandatory.
Hence heuristics are generally the method of
choice for rostering software designed to deal with
messy real world objectives and constraints that do
not solve easily with a mathematical programming
formulation. However they generally dont work
very well if the rostering problem is highly con-
strained unless the constraints can be built directly
into the heuristic (say into the neighbourhood
move operator for local search heuristics). For
more highly constrained problems CP approaches
tend to work better.
An early review of heuristics is provided is
[179]. Swap and interchange based neighbourhood
search heuristics are commonly used for solving
airline crew rostering problems. See [17] and [94]
for reviews of this area. A method for deriving
weekly work schedules based on a shift pattern
generating heuristic is used in [151].
Generalized local search and adaptive/rando-
mised variations of this method have been used for
employee scheduling in [160,181]. Local search
methods have been used for bus driver scheduling
in [121].
TS has found more recent acceptance as a
metaheuristic method for obtaining solutions to
staff scheduling problems. Examples of TS appli-
cations include nurse rostering [44,76,77], air crew
scheduling [53], audit scheduling [74] and bus dri-
ver scheduling [163,164].
A hybrid TS algorithm is used in [44] to obtain
solutions for a nurse rostering problems. This ap-
proach is further refined in [43] using a set of
memetic (evolution by imitation) algorithms. Thisemploys a hybrid TS procedure within the frame-
work of a GA.
In general, SA is a popular metaheuristic
method for solving a variety of rostering problems.
Examples include [39–41,45,176]. Cyclic staff
scheduling problems have been solved using an SA
framework in [40,45]. An SA approach for airport
ground staff has been developed in [75] which at-
tempts to solve the whole rostering problem of
days off, shift scheduling and tour scheduling
within the SA framework. SA has been applied to
airline crew scheduling in [4,82,123] and to train
crew rostering in [85]. A SA algorithm for solving
a large set covering integer programming formu-
lation is used in [112] to develop rosters for a mix
of permanent and casual health sector staff.
GAs have also been used to find solutions for
personnel scheduling problems, subproblems and
their variants [8,48,132,172]. GAs have been used
in nurse rostering [7] and in bus driver scheduling
[59,192].
Combined SA and GA metaheuristic methods
have been successfully employed in [2,24] for
solving staff scheduling and manpower allocation
problems.
4.5. Mathematical programming approaches
In mathematical programming approaches,
scheduling and rostering problems are formulated
as linear programs or linear integer programs, or
general mathematical programs. The commonly
used model for both scheduling and rostering
problems is the famous Dantzig set covering for-
mulation [64] or its variations.
Algorithms based on a mathematical program-
ming approach generally achieve the lowest cost
solutions. However there are a number of diffi-
culties with these approaches that prevent them
from being universally applied:
• In many cases a column generation method is
applied which hides much of the complexity of
the problem in the definition of the columns.
Hence the pricing problem usually becomes
the real challenge and often this subproblem
has to be solved heuristically. In that case the
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 19advantage of using an exact method for the
master problem may be lost.
• Mathematical programming formulations are
more limiting in what constraints and objectives
can be expressed easily. Hence these approaches
are more commonly applied to simplified ver-
sions of the real world rostering problem or
where there are few complications in the origi-
nal problem.
• Implementing a good integer programming
method for a particular crew scheduling and ro-
stering problem, is relatively difficult and time
consuming. This is only justified when the extra
benefit through the reduced cost of solutions ob-
tained is significant and when the rostering rules
and regulations are relatively static over time.
The set covering/partitioning model is so gen-
eral that many problems in staff scheduling and
rostering can be described in this unified format.
Days-off, shift, tour scheduling [32], crew sched-
uling [17] and crew rostering [66,94] are such ex-
amples. A useful variation of the set covering
model is the elastic set partitioning model which
allows both under and over coverage. In order to
discourage unnecessary under and over coverage,
the associated terms are usually penalised in the
objective. Over coverage is particularly useful
when deadheading is unavoidable. Both the set
covering model and the elastic set partitioning
model allow over coverage, but the flexibility of
allowing under coverage in the latter may result in
very cost effective solutions.
In real life applications, a number of side con-
straints are added to the set covering model and its
variations in order to take different practical con-
siderations into account. These constraints may
include governmental and industrial regulations,
and personal preferences.
Large scale linear integer programs usually arise
from the set covering model and its variations.
Even with todays computational technology, it is
still a formidable, if not impossible task to effi-
ciently solve large linear integer programs with
millions or even billions variables to optimality.
Two different methods have been developed to try
and overcome the exponential explosion in size ofset covering formulations: generating a limited
number of columns and forming a reasonably
sized formulation [88,100], and partially generat-
ing all possible columns using column generation
approaches [70,117].
In the first method, a limited number of col-
umns can be generated either randomly or by us-
ing some intuitive criteria, or iteratively by solving
a sequence of set covering formulations. The idea
behind the second method is to generate good
columns to form restricted versions of the set
covering formulation. If the optimality condition
for the full version of the set covering formulation
is satisfied, then the problem is solved, otherwise,
subproblems are solved. Additional good columns
based on reduced cost or similar criteria are priced
out and added to the existing restricted version of
the set covering formulation. It is computationally
expensive to calculate reduced costs for all col-
umns since the number of columns is extremely
large. Instead, subproblems are formulated and
solved to find new columns. In typical crew
scheduling and rostering applications, this sub-
problem is a resource constrained shortest path
problem [70].
A set covering model needs to be solved in both
the column generation version of the set covering
formulation and its smaller sized variant. The set
covering model can be solved using either exact
or heuristic algorithms. The best known exact
algorithm for linear integer programs is the
branch-and-bound method. Upper bounds can be
calculated using any simple or advanced heuristic.
Lower bounds can be found by solving linear
programming relaxations [88,109] or Lagrangian
relaxations [184]. Branching on single variables
may not be efficient. Branching on constraints
have been proved to be more efficient. One such
example is the so-called ‘‘follow-on’’ branching
strategy [88], based on a determination of whether
or not one task must follow another in a duty/
shift/pairing.
If exploration of the branch-and-bound search
tree is too time consuming, then heuristic rules can
be used to terminate the search. These heuristic
rules include: termination after finding the first, or
a good, integer solution [66,95,156], and partially
20 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27exploring the search tree by fixing fractional vari-
ables [95]. The Lagrangian heuristic is a very
popular and efficient way for solving the set cov-
ering model arising from crew scheduling and crew
rostering [35,49,184]. Branch-and-cut [109], and
branch-and-price [30,94] approaches are emerging
as powerful techniques for solving large scale lin-
ear integer programs arising from crew scheduling
and crew rostering.
The set covering model and its variations rep-
resents a dominant approach employed in over
one hundred articles, to solving crew scheduling
problems. Nevertheless other mathematical mod-
elling techniques have also proved to be useful.
In nurse scheduling, a few approaches are re-
viewed in [168] for creating both cyclic and non-
cyclic rosters. Goal programming [146] is a viable
approach when multiple objectives are taken into
account. Stochastic programming [3] can be used
to model stochastic demand. A network model
based on the concept of the stint is considered in
[131].
Other methodologies employed in crew sched-
uling and rostering are the network model [26], the
multi-commodity network flow approach [36],
dynamic programming [31], and the matching
model [27]. Various methods have also been de-
veloped for general days-off, shift and tour
scheduling. For example, an alternative to the set
covering formulation is its equivalent but much
more compact implicit formulation [33].
Decomposition techniques for airline crew ro-
stering are reviewed in [94]. In these decomposition
techniques, the overall rostering problem is de-
composed into subproblems in various ways and
subproblems may be solved using different math-
ematical programming approaches. Rosters can be
constructed by assigning highest-priority activities
to highest-priority employees [97,127]. The model
presented in [140] is to generate rosters by solving
assignment problems for each day of the rostering
horizon. An extension of this model is to generate
subrosters for subperiods of the rostering horizon
[49,66]. Another model proposed in [47] is to
construct rosters sequentially. Any employees
roster, once constructed, remains unchanged
throughout the process, and the rosters for re-
maining employees are generated from pairings/duties that have not yet been assigned to any em-
ployee. The above decomposition techniques can
be combined to remove the drawbacks associated
with any individual approach.
Integrated models for both crew scheduling and
crew rostering are considered in [36,92]. It is
pointed out in [177] that the set covering model
suffers from ‘‘a single period paradigm’’ for labour
scheduling, in particular for shift scheduling and
tour scheduling. Basically, demand requirements
and workforce scheduling are dealt with indepen-
dently. As a result, the accurate calculation of
workforce requirements and optimal workforce
scheduling would not give an overall optimal or
near optimal solution. Therefore, two integrated
approaches have been proposed in [177] to con-
sider demand modelling and staff scheduling
simultaneously.
Improvements can be obtained if crew sched-
uling and crew rostering are combined into a single
global method. Some progress in this direction
is reported in [51,84].5. Future trends and conclusions
As can be seen from this review, a large amount
of work has already been done in the area of ro-
stering and personnel scheduling. Nevertheless
there is still significant room for improvements in
this area. We see improvements occurring not only
in the area of rostering algorithms, but also in the
wider applicability of rostering because of the
flexibility that more sophisticated rostering soft-
ware tools will be able to provide in the future.
Here we single out a few key areas that, in our
opinion, are likely to occupy people working in
this area over the near to medium term.
The first area of integration applies mainly to
applications where rostering is already well estab-
lished such as the transportation sector in general
and the aviation industry in particular. Here the
main challenge is to obtain greater efficiency gains
not by improving algorithms for solving any one
aspect of the problem but by integrating more of
the steps outlined in Section 2.1 into a single
problem. Furthermore it may be possible to con-
sider at least some aspects of the rostering problem
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 21in other scheduling problems. For example it is
likely that staffing costs for an airline could be
reduced if the rostering is considered (at least at
a fairly high level) during the timetabling and
scheduling of aircraft.
Another important area requiring further work
is generalisation of models and methods. Cur-
rently, models and algorithms often require sig-
nificant modification when they are to be
transferred to a different application area, or to
accommodate changes within an organisation. In a
continually changing environment it is not desir-
able to have an organisations internal structures,
processes and work policies hard-wired into
models, algorithms and software for personnel
scheduling. New models need to be formulated
that provide more flexibility to accommodate in-
dividual workplace practices. This can then lead to
the development of more general algorithms that
will be more robust to changes in the rostering
requirements.
Technology transfer in the area of roster prep-
aration is partly driven by the issues related to
algorithmic inflexibility. There are many applica-
tion areas where manual rostering practices per-
sist. This is partly due to a perception that existing
rostering software is not flexible enough to deal
with specific individual workplace practices. An-
other challenge is to integrate existing rostering
algorithms and software with industry standard
Enterprise Resource Planning and Human Re-
source systems to make them more accessible to
a larger number of users.
As the modern workplace becomes more com-
plex and as enterprise bargaining agreements be-
come more focussed on the individual, rather than
on a group or team, it is likely that roster solutions
will also need to cater to individual preferences. In
other words, roster algorithms and rostering ap-
plications will need to involve individual-centric
work constraints, preferences and business rules.
While this feature has the potential to increase
roster personalisation, and hence personal job
satisfaction in the workplace, this clearly impacts
on the complexity of the resulting rostering prob-
lems.
As a result of changing work environments and
conditions, it is likely that rostering algorithms willneed to be more general in the future. Given the
resulting flexibility that will be required of the al-
gorithms, it is likely that we will see a more inte-
grated approach to roster solution developments.
For example, it will be necessary to consider in-
tegrated solution frameworks that include CP,
heuristic search, integer programming and simu-
lation approaches to solve a multitude of sub-
problems within the context of solving the
complex rostering problems of the future.References
[1] K. Aardal, A. Ari, Decomposition principles applied to
the dynamic production and work-force scheduling prob-
lem, Engineering Costs and Production Economics 12 (1–
4) (1987) 39–49.
[2] N. Abboud, M. Inuiguchi, M. Sakawa, Y. Uemura,
Manpower allocation using genetic annealing, European
Journal of Operational Research 111 (1998) 405–420.
[3] W. Abernathy, N. Baloff, J. Hershey, S. Wandel, A three-
stage manpower planning and scheduling model: A service
sector example, Operations Research 22 (3) (1973) 693–
711.
[4] D. Abramson, H. Dang, M. Krishnamoorthy, A compar-
ison of two methods for solving 0–1 integer programs
using a general purpose simulated annealing algorithm,
Annals of Operations Research 63 (1996) 129–150.
[5] S. Aggarwal, A focused review of scheduling in services,
European Journal of Operational Research 9 (2) (1982)
114–121.
[6] S. Agnihothri, P. Taylor, Staffing a centralized appoint-
ment scheduling department in Lourdes Hospital, Inter-
faces 21 (5) (1991) 1–11.
[7] U. Aickelin, K. Dowsland, Exploiting problem structure
in a genetic algorithm approach to a nurse rostering
problem, Journal of scheduling 3 (2000) 139–153.
[8] H. Al-Tabtabai, A. Alex, Manpower scheduling optimi-
zation using genetic algorithm, in: Proceedings of the 1997
4th Congress on Computing in Civil Engineering, Phila-
delphia, 1997, pp. 702–709.
[9] H. Al-Zubaidi, A. Christer, Maintenance manpower
modelling for a hospital building complex, European
Journal of Operational Research 99 (1997) 603–618.
[10] H. Alfares, J. Bailey, Integrated project task and man-
power scheduling, IIE Transactions 29 (9) (1997) 711–717.
[11] R. Alvarez-Valdes, E. Crespo, J. Tamarit, Labour sched-
uling at an airport refuelling installation, Journal of the
Operational Research Society 50 (3) (1999) 211–218.
[12] C. Anantaram, P. Joshi, K. Deshpande, P. Trivedi, Crew
rostering system an expert system for scheduling crew for
Indian airlines, in: Proceedings of the 9th Conference on
Artificial Intelligence for Applications, 1993, pp. 63–70.
22 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27[13] F. Anbari, Train and engine crew management
system, in: T. Murthy, B. Mellitt, J. Korber (Eds.),
Computers in Railway Operations, WIT Press, 1987,
pp. 267–284.
[14] R. Anbil, E. Gelman, B. Patty, R. Tanga, Recent
advances in crew-pairing optimization at American air-
lines, Interfaces 21 (1) (1991) 62–74.
[15] E. Andersson, E. Housos, N. Kohl, D. Wedelin, Crew
pairing optimization, in: G. Yu (Ed.), OR in Airline
Industry, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1997,
pp. 1–31.
[16] B. Andrews, H. Parsons, Establishing telephone-agent
staffing levels through economic optimization, Interfaces
23 (2) (1993) 14–20.
[17] J. Arabeyre, J. Fearnley, F. Steiger, W. Teather, The
airline crew scheduling problem: A survey, Transportation
Science 3 (1969) 140–163.
[18] J. Arthur, A. Ravindran, A multiple objective nurse
scheduling model, AIIE Transactions 13 (1) (1981) 55–60.
[19] D. Ashley, A spreadsheet optimization system for library
staff scheduling, Computers and Operations Research 22
(6) (1995) 615–624.
[20] R. Awad, J. Chinneck, Proctor assignment at Carleton
University, Interfaces 28 (2) (1998) 58–71.
[21] N. Azarmi, W. Abdulhameed, Workforce scheduling with
constraint logic programming, BT Technology Journal 13
(1) (1995) 81–94.
[22] J. Bailey, Integrated days off and shift personnel sched-
uling, Computers and Industrial Engineering 9 (4) (1985)
395–404.
[23] J. Bailey, H. Alfares, W. Lin, Optimization and heuristic
models to integrate project task and manpower schedul-
ing, Computers and Industrial Engineering 29 (1995)
473–476.
[24] R. Bailey, K. Garner, M. Hobbs, Using simulated
annealing and genetic algorithms to solve staff scheduling
problems, Asia–Pacific Journal of Operational Research
14 (2) (1997) 27–43.
[25] E. Baker, L. Bodin, W. Finnegan, R. Ponder, Efficient
heuristic solutions to an airline crew scheduling problem,
IIE Transactions 11 (2) (1979) 79–85.
[26] A. Balakrishnan, R. Wong, A network model for the
rotating workforce scheduling problem, Networks 20
(1990) 25–42.
[27] M. Ball, L. Bodin, R. Dial, A matching based heuristic for
scheduling mass transit crews and vehicles, Transporta-
tion Science 17 (1) (1983) 4–31.
[28] M. Ball, A. Roberts, A graph partitioning approach to
airline crew scheduling, Transportation Science 19 (2)
(1985) 107–126.
[29] C. Barnhart, L. Hatay, E. Johnson, Deadhead selection
for the long-haul crew pairing problem, Operations
Research 43 (3) (1995) 491–499.
[30] C. Barnhart, E. Johnson, G. Nemhauser, M. Savelsbergh,
P. Vance, Branch-and-price: Column generation for solv-
ing huge integer programs, Operations Research 46 (1998)
316–329.[31] J. Beasley, B. Cao, A dynamic programming based
algorithm for the crew scheduling problem, Computers
and Operations Research 25 (7–8) (1998) 567–582.
[32] S. Bechtold, M. Brusco, M. Showalter, A comparative
evaluation of labor tour scheduling methods, Decision
Sciences 22 (1991) 683–699.
[33] S. Bechtold, L. Jacobs, The equivalence of general set-
covering and implicit integer programming formulations
for shift scheduling, Naval Research Logistics 43 (2)
(1996) 233–249.
[34] S. Begur, D. Miller, J. Weaver, An integrated spatial DSS
for scheduling and routing home-health-care nurses,
Interfaces 27 (4) (1997) 35–48.
[35] L. Bianco, M. Bielli, A. Mingozzi, S. Ricciardelli, M.
Spadoni, A heuristic procedure for the crew rostering
problem, European Journal of Operational Research 58
(2) (1992) 272–283.
[36] L. Bodin, B. Golden, A. Assad, M. Ball, Routing and
scheduling of vehicles and crews––the state of the art,
Computers and Operations Research 10 (2) (1983) 63–
211.
[37] D. Bradley, J. Martin, Continuous personnel scheduling
algorithms: A literature review, Journal of the Society for
Health Systems 2 (1991) 2–8.
[38] A. Brigandi, D. Dragon, M. Sheehan, T. Spencer III,
AT&Ts call processing simulator (CAPS) operation
design for inbound call centers, Interfaces 24 (1) (1994)
6–28.
[39] M. Brusco, L. Jacobs, A simulated annealing approach
to the cyclic staff-scheduling problem, Naval Research
Logistics 40 (1) (1993) 69–84.
[40] M. Brusco, L. Jacobs, A simulated annealing approach to
the solution of flexible labor scheduling problems, Journal
of the Operational Research Society 44 (12) (1993) 1191–
1200.
[41] M. Brusco, L. Jacobs, R. Bongiorno, D. Lyons, B. Tang,
Improving personnel scheduling at airline stations, Oper-
ations Research 43 (5) (1995) 741–751.
[42] E. Buffa, M. Cosgrove, B. Luce, An integrated work shift
scheduling system, Decision Sciences (1976) 620–630.
[43] E. Burke, P. Cowling, P. De Causmaecker, G.
Vanden Berghe, A memetic approach to the nurse
rostering problem, Applied Intelligence 15 (3) (2001)
199–214.
[44] E. Burke, P. De Causmaecker, G. Vanden Berghe, A
hybrid tabu search algorithm for the nurse rostering
problem, in: Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, vol.
1585, Springer, 1998, pp. 187–194.
[45] A. Burns, N. Hayes, M.F. Richardson, Generating
feasible cyclic schedules, Control Engineering Practice 3
(1995) 151–162.
[46] D. Butler, U. Maydell, Manpower scheduling in the
Edmonton police department, INFOR Journal 17 (4)
(1979) 366–372.
[47] J. Byrne, A preferential bidding system for technical
aircrew, in: 1988 AGIFORS Symposium Proceedings, vol.
28, 1988, pp. 87–99.
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 23[48] X. Cai, K. Li, A genetic algorithm for scheduling staff of
mixed skills under multi-criteria, European Journal of
Operational Research 125 (2000) 359–369.
[49] A. Caprara, M. Fischetti, P. Guida, P. Toth, D. Vigo,
Solution of large-scale railway crew planning problems:
The Italian experience, in: N. Wilson (Ed.), Computer-
Aided Transit Scheduling, Lecture Notes in Economics
and Mathematical Systems, Springer, Berlin, 1999, pp.
1–18.
[50] A. Caprara, F. Focacci, E. Lamma, P. Mello, M. Milano,
P. Toth, D. Vigo, Integrating constraint logic program-
ming and operations research techniques for the crew
rostering problem, Software Practice and Experience 28
(1) (1998) 49–76.
[51] A. Caprara, M. Monaci, P. Toth, A global method for
crew planning in railway applications, in: S. Voss, J.
Daduna (Eds.), Computer-Aided Scheduling of Public
Transport, Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathemat-
ical Systems, vol. 505, Springer Publishers, 2001, pp. 17–
36.
[52] P. Carraresi, M. Nonato, L. Girardi, Network models,
lagrangean relaxation and subgradient bundle approach
in crew scheduling problem, in: J. Daduna, I. Branco, J.
Paixao (Eds.), Computer-Aided Transit Scheduling, Lec-
ture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems, vol.
430, Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 188–212.
[53] L. Cavique, C. Rego, I. Themido, Subgraph ejection
chains and tabu search for the crew scheduling problem,
Journal of the Operational Research Society 50 (6) (1999)
608–616.
[54] M. Chamberlain, A. Wren, Developments and recent
experience with the Busman and Busman II systems, in:
M. Desrochers, J. Rousseau (Eds.), Computer-Aided
Transit Scheduling, Lecture Notes in Economics and
Mathematical Systems, Springer-Verlag, 1992, pp. 1–15.
[55] B. Chen, Staffing levels at the Auckland Police Commu-
nication Centre, Technical Report, Department of Engi-
neering Science, University of Auckland, 2000.
[56] B. Cheng, J. Lee, J. Wu, A nurse rostering system using
constraint programming and redundant modeling, IEEE
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine
1 (1) (1997) 44–54.
[57] S. Chu, E. Chan, Crew scheduling of light rail transit in
Hong Kong: From modeling to implementation, Com-
puters and Operations Research 25 (11) (1998) 887–894.
[58] J. Church, SURE STAF: A computerized staff scheduling
system for telephone business offices, Management Sci-
ence 20 (4) (1973) 708–720.
[59] R. Clement, A. Wren, Greedy genetic algorithms, opti-
mizing mutations and bus driver scheduling, in: J.
Daduna, I. Branco, J. Paixao (Eds.), Computer-Aided
Transit Scheduling, Lecture Notes in Economics and
Mathematical Systems, vol. 430, Springer-Verlag, 1995,
pp. 213–235.
[60] T. Crainic, J. Rousseau, The column generation principle
and the airline crew scheduling problem, INFOR 25 (2)
(1987) 136–151.[61] J. Daduna, S. Voss (Eds.), Computer-Aided Scheduling of
Public Transport, Lecture Notes in Economics and
Mathematical Systems 505, Springer Publishers, 2001.
[62] J. Daduna, A. Wren (Eds.), Computer-Aided Transit
Scheduling, Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathemat-
ical Systems, vol. 308, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[63] J. Danko, V. Gulewicz, Insight through innovation: A
dynamic approach to demand based toll plaza lane
staffing, in: J. Tew, S. Manivanna, D. Sadowski, A. Seila
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 1994 Winter Simulation Con-
ference, 1994, pp. 1116–1123.
[64] G. Dantzig, A comment on Edies traffic delay at toll
booths, Operations Research 2 (1954) 339–341.
[65] H. Dawid, J. Konig, C. Strauss, An enhanced rostering
model for airline crews, Computers and Operations
Research 28 (2001) 671–688.
[66] P. Day, D. Ryan, Flight attendant rostering for short-haul
airline operations, Operations Research 45 (5) (1997)
649–661.
[67] G. Desaulniers, J. Desrosiers, Y. Dumas, S. Marc, B.
Rioux, M. Solomon, F. Soumis, Crew pairing at Air
France, European Journal of the Operational Research
Society 97 (1997) 245–259.
[68] M.Desrochers, J. Rousseau (Eds.), Computer-Aided Tran-
sit Scheduling, Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathe-
matical Systems, vol. 386, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992.
[69] M. Desrochers, F. Soumis, CREW-OPT: Crew scheduling
by column generation, in: J. Daduna, I. Wren (Eds.),
Computer-Aided Transit Scheduling, Lecture Notes in
Economics and Mathematical Systems, vol. 308, Springer-
Verlag, 1988, pp. 83–90.
[70] J. Desrosiers, Y. Dumas, M. Solomon, F. Soumis, Time
constrained routing and scheduling, in: M. Ball, T.
Magnanti, C. Monma, G. Nemhauser (Eds.), Network
Routing: Handbooks in Operations Research and Man-
agement Science, vol. 8, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,
1995, pp. 35–139.
[71] A. Lasry, D. McInnis, F. Soumis, J. Desrosiers, M.
Solomon, Air Transat uses ALTITUDE to manage its
aircraft routing, crew pairing, and work assignment,
Interfaces 30 (2) (2000) 35–41.
[72] M. Dijkstra, L. Kroon, J. van Nunen, M. Salomon, A
DSS for capacity planning of aircraft maintenance
personnel, International Journal of Production Econom-
ics (1991) 69–78.
[73] J. Dillion, S. Kontogiorgis, US airways optimizes the
scheduling of reserve flight crews, Interfaces 29 (5) (1999)
123–131.
[74] B. Dodin, A. Elimam, E. Rolland, Tabu search in audit
scheduling, European Journal of Operational Research
106 (2–3) (1998) 373–392.
[75] D. Dowling, H. Mackenzie, M. Krishnamoorthy, D. Sier,
Staff rostering at a large international airport, Annals of
Operations Research 72 (1997) 125–147.
[76] K. Dowsland, Nurse scheduling with tabu search and
strategic oscillation, European Journal of Operational
Research 106 (2–3) (1998) 393–407.
24 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27[77] K. Dowsland, J. Thompson, Solving a nurse scheduling
problem with knapsacks, networks and tabu search,
Journal of the Operational Research Society 51 (2000)
825–833.
[78] S. Duffuaa, K. Al-Sultan, A stochastic programming
model for scheduling maintenance personnel, Applied
Mathematical Modeling 25 (5) (1999) 385–397.
[79] L. Edie, Traffic delays at toll booths, Journal Operations
Research Society of America 2 (2) (1954) 107–138.
[80] G. Eitzen, Rostering multi-skilled employees efficiently
and fairly: A column generation and constraint branching
approach, Technical Report, Working Paper, University
of South Australia, 1999.
[81] T. Emden-Weinert, H. Kotas, U. Speer, DISSY––a driver
scheduling system for public transport, in: Lecture Notes
in Economics and Mathematical Systems, Springer Pub-
lishers, 2001.
[82] T. Emden-Weinert, M. Proksch, Best practice simulated
annealing for the airline crew scheduling problem, Journal
of Heuristics 5 (1999) 419–436.
[83] A. Ernst, P. Hourigan, M. Krishnamoorthy, G. Mills, H.
Nott, D. Sier, Rostering ambulance officers, in: Proceed-
ings of the 15th National Conference of the Australian
Society for Operations Research, Gold Coast, 1999, pp.
470–481.
[84] A. Ernst, H. Jiang, M. Krishnamoorthy, H. Nott, D. Sier,
An integrated optimization model for train crew manage-
ment, Annals of Operations Research 108 (2001) 211–224.
[85] A. Ernst, M. Krishnamoorthy, D. Dowling, Train crew
rostering using simulated annealing, in: Proceedings of
ICOTA98, Perth, 1998.
[86] J. Evans, A microcomputer-based decision support system
for scheduling umpires in the American baseball league,
Interfaces 18 (6) (1988) 42–51.
[87] B. Faaland, T. Schmitt, Cost-based scheduling of workers
and equipment in a fabrication and assembly shop,
Operations Research 41 (2) (1993) 253–268.
[88] J. Falkner, D. Ryan, A bus crew scheduling system using a
set partitioning model, Asia–Pacific Journal of Opera-
tional Research 4 (1987) 39–56.
[89] J. Falkner, D. Ryan, EXPRESS: Set partitioning for bus
crew scheduling in Christchurch, in: M. Desrochers, J.
Rousseau (Eds.), Computer-Aided Transit Scheduling,
Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems,
vol. 386, Springer-Verlag, 1988, pp. 359–378.
[90] B. Feiring, A model generation approach to the personnel
assignment problem, Journal of the Operational Research
Society 44 (5) (1993) 503–512.
[91] L. Franz, H. Baker, G. Leong, T. Rakes, A mathematical
model for scheduling and staffing multiclinic health
regions, European Journal of Operational Research 41
(3) (1989) 277–289.
[92] R. Freling, D. Huisman, A. Wagelmans, Models and
algorithms for integration of vehicle and crew scheduling,
Journal of Scheduling 6 (1) (2003) 63–85.
[93] R. Freling, R. Lentink, M. Odijk, Scheduling train crews:
A case study for the Dutch railways, in: S. Voss, J. Daduna(Eds.), Computer-Aided Scheduling of Public Transport,
Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems,
vol. 505, Springer Publishers, 2001, pp. 153–166.
[94] M. Gamache, F. Soumis, A method for optimally solving
the rostering problem, in: G. Yu (Ed.), OR in Airline
Industry, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1998,
pp. 124–157.
[95] M. Gamache, F. Soumis, G. Marquis, J. Desrosiers, A
column generation approach for large scale aircrew
rostering problems, Operations Research 47 (2) (1999)
247–263.
[96] M. Gamache, F. Soumis, D. Villeneuve, J. Desrosiers, E.
Gelinas, The preferential bidding system at Air Canada,
Transportation Science 32 (3) (1998) 246–255.
[97] W. Glanert, A timetable approach to the assignment of
pilots to rotations, in: 1984 AGIFORS Symposium
Proceedings, 1984, vol. 24, pp. 369–391.
[98] J. Glen, A dynamic programming model for work
scheduling in a shipyard, Operational Research Quarterly
26 (4) (1975) 787–799.
[99] M. Gopalakrishnan, S. Gopalakrishnan, D. Miller, A
decision support system for scheduling personnel in a
newspaper publishing environment, Interfaces 23 (4)
(1993) 104–115.
[100] G. Graves, R. McBride, I. Gershkoff, D. Anderson, D.
Mahidhara, Flight crew scheduling, Management Science
39 (6) (1993) 736–745.
[101] T. Grossman, D. Samuelson, S. Oh, T. Rohleder, Call
centers, Technical Report, Haskayne School of Business,
University of Calgary, 1999.
[102] N. Guerinik, M. van Caneghem, Solving crew scheduling
problems by constraint programming, in: Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint
Programming, 1995, pp. 481–498.
[103] K. Haase, Advanced column generation techniques with
applications to marketing, retail and logistics manage-
ment, Ph.D. Thesis, Habilitation Thesis, University of
Kiel, 1999.
[104] K. Haase, C. Friberg, An exact algorithm for the vehicle
and crew scheduling problem, in: N. Wilson (Ed.),
Computer-Aided Transit Scheduling, Lecture Notes
in Economics and Mathematical Systems, vol. 471,
Springer, 1999, pp. 63–80.
[105] S. Henderson, Setting staffing levels in call centers with
random arrival rates, Technical Report, Department of
Engineering Science, The University of Auckland, 1999.
[106] S. Henderson, A. Mason, I. Ziedins, R. Thomson, A
heuristic for determining efficient staffing requirements for
call centres, Technical Report, Department of Engineering
Science, University of Auckland, 1999.
[107] W. Henderson, W. Berry, Heuristic methods for telephone
operator shift scheduling: An experimental analysis,
Management Science 22 (12) (1976) 1372–1380.
[108] W. Henderson, W. Berry, Determining optimal shift
schedules for telephone traffic exchange operators, Deci-
sion Sciences 8 (1977) 239–255.
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 25[109] K. Hoffman, M. Padberg, Solving airline crew scheduling
problems by branch-and-cut, Management Science 39 (6)
(1993) 657–682.
[110] R. Howick, M. Pidd, Sales force deployment models,
European Journal of Operational Research 48 (3) (1990)
295–310.
[111] A. Ingolfsson, M. Haque, A. Umnikov, Accounting for
time-varying queueing effects in workforce scheduling,
European Journal of Operational Research 139 (2002)
585–597.
[112] M. Isken, W. Hancock, A heuristic approach to nurse
scheduling in hospital units with non-stationary, urgent
demand, and a fixed staff size, Journal of the Society
for Health Systems (1991) 24–41.
[113] B. Jaumard, F. Semet, T. Vovor, A generalized linear
programming model for nurse scheduling, European
Journal of Operational Research 107 (1) (1998) 1–18.
[114] O. Jennings, A. Mandelbaum, W. Massey, W. Whitt,
Server staffing to meet time-varying demand, Manage-
ment Science 42 (1996) 1383–1394.
[115] D. Klabjan, E. Johnson, G. Nemhauser, Airline crew
scheduling with regularity, Transportation Science 35 (4)
(2002) 359–374.
[116] R. Larcher, M. Sinay, Scheduling of railway crew for
random arrivals, in: Research for Tomorrows Transport
Requirement, Proceedings of the World Conference on
Transport Research, British Columbia, Canada, 1982,
vol. 2, pp. 1156–1161.
[117] S. Lavoie, M. Minoux, E. Odier, A new approach for crew
pairing problems by column generation with an applica-
tion to air transportation, European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 35 (1) (1988) 45–58.
[118] T. Liang, B. Buclatin, Improving the utilization of
training resources through optimal assignment in the US
navy, European Journal of Operational Research 33
(1988) 183–190.
[119] C. Lin, K. Lai, S. Hung, Development of a workforce
management system for a customer hotline service,
Computers and Operations Research 27 (2000) 987–1004.
[120] J. Loucks, F. Jacobs, Tour scheduling and task assign-
ment of a heterogeneous work force: A heuristic ap-
proach, Decision Sciences 22 (4) (1991) 719–739.
[121] H. Lourenco, J. Paixao, R. Portugal, Multiobjective
metaheuristics for the bus–driver scheduling problem,
Transportation Science 35 (3) (2001) 331–341.
[122] L.P. Ritzman, L. Krajewski, M. Showalter, The disaggre-
gation of aggregate manpower plans, Management Sci-
ence 22 (11) (1976) 1204–1214.
[123] P. Lucic, D. Teodorovic, Simulated annealing for the
multi-objective aircrew rostering problem, Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice 33 (1) (1999) 19–45.
[124] D. Lukman, J. May, L. Shuman, H. Wolfe, Knowledge-
based schedule formulation and maintenance under
uncertainty, Journal of the Society for Health Systems 2
(1991) 42–64.
[125] V. Mabert, A case study of encoder shift scheduling under
uncertainty, Management Science 25 (7) (1979) 623–631.[126] C. Maier-Rothe, H. Wolfe, Cyclical scheduling and
allocation of nursing staff, Socio-Economic Planning
Sciences 7 (1973) 471–487.
[127] F. Marchettini, Automatic monthly cabin crew rostering
procedure, in: 1980 AGIFORS Symposium Proceedings,
1980, vol. 20, pp. 23–59.
[128] A. Mason, D. Ryan, D. Panton, Integrated simulation,
heuristic and optimisation approaches to staff scheduling,
Operations Research 46 (2) (1998) 161–175.
[129] V. Mehrotra, Ringing up big business, OR/MS Today
(1997).
[130] J. Meyer, R. Markowitz, A database program for the
management of staff scheduling a radiology department,
American Journal of Roentgenology 169 (6) (1997) 1489–
1492.
[131] H. Millar, M. Kiragu, Cyclic and non-cyclic scheduling
of 12 h shift nurses by network programming, European
Journal of Operational Research 104 (3) (1998) 582–
592.
[132] A. Monfroglio, Hybrid genetic algorithms for a rostering
problem, Software Practices Expert 26 (7) (1996) 851–862.
[133] S. Moondra, An L.P. model for work force scheduling for
banks, Journal of Bank Research 6 (Winter 1976) 299–
301.
[134] E. Morgado, J. Martins, Scheduling and managing crew
in the Portuguese railways, Expert Systems with Applica-
tions 5 (1992) 301–321.
[135] E. Morgado, J. Martins, An AI-based approach to crew
scheduling, in: Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on
Artificial Intelligence for Applications, IEEE Computer
Society Press, California, 1993, pp. 71–77.
[136] E. Morgado, J. Martins, Crews-NS: Scheduling train crew
in the Netherlands, in: Conference Proceedings of the 1997
9th Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial
Intelligence, 1997, Providence.
[137] E. Morgado, J. Martins, CREWS: A train scheduling tool,
in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Com-
puter Aided Design, Manufacture and Operation in the
Railway and Other Advanced Mass Transit Systems,
Lisbon, 1998.
[138] A. Morrish, A. OConner, Cyclical scheduling, Hospitals
14 (1970) 66–71.
[139] G. Mould, Case study of manpower planning for clerical
operations, Journal of the Operational Research Society
47 (3) (1996) 358–368.
[140] B. Nicoletti, Automatic crew rostering, Transportation
Science 9 (1) (1975) 33–42.
[141] M. Nooriafshar, A heuristic approach to improving the
design of nurse training schedules, European Journal of
Operational Research 81 (1) (1995) 50–61.
[142] R. Norby, L. Freund, B. Wagner, A nurse staffing system
based on assignment difficulty, Journal of Nursing
Administration 7 (9) (1977) 2–24.
[143] I. Osman, G. Laporte, Metaheuristics: A bibliography,
Annals of Operations Research 63 (1996) 513–623.
[144] B. Owens, Personnel scheduling using constraint logic
programming, Masters Thesis, Computer Science and
26 A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27Software Engineering, Monash University, Australia, July
2001.
[145] I. Ozkarahan, A disaggregation model of a flexible nurse
scheduling support system, Socio-economic Planning
Sciences 25 (1) (1991) 9–26.
[146] I. Ozkarahan, J. Bailey, Goal programming model sub-
system of a flexible nurse scheduling support system, IIE
Transactions 20 (3) (1988) 306–316.
[147] D. Panton, G. Eitzen, Dynamic rosters: Addressing
fatigue and recovery issues in the workforce, The Journal
of Occupational Health and Safety 13 (5) (1997) 487–492.
[148] C. Parkan, K. Lam, H. Chan, Workforce planning at a
bill inquiries centre, International Journal of Modelling
and Simulation 19 (2) (1999) 118–126.
[149] M. Parker, A. Wren, R. Kwan, Modelling the scheduling
of train drivers, in: J. Daduna, I. Branco, J. Paixao (Eds.),
Computer-Aided Transit Scheduling, Lecture Notes in
Economics and Mathematical Systems, vol. 430, Springer-
Verlag, 1995, pp. 359–370.
[150] M. Poliac, E. Lee, J. Slagle, M. Wick, A crew scheduling
problem, in: IEEE First International Conference on
Neural Networks, 1987, pp. 779–786.
[151] S. Randhawa, D. Sitompul, A heuristic-based computer-
ized nurse scheduling system, Computers and Operations
Research 20 (8) (1993) 837–844.
[152] V. Rayward-Smith, I. Osman, C. Reeves, G. Smith (Eds.),
Modern Heuristic Search Methods, Wiley, 1996.
[153] J. Rousseau, Computer Scheduling of Public Transport 2,
North Holland, 1985.
[154] J. Rousseau, J. Blais, HASTUS: An interactive system for
buses and crew scheduling, in: J. Rousseau (Ed.), Com-
puter Scheduling of Public Transport 2, North-Holland,
1985, pp. 45–60.
[155] R. Rushmeier, K. Hoffman, M. Padberg, Recent advances
in exact optimization of airline scheduling problems,
Technical Report, Department of Operations Research
and Operations Engineering, George Mason University,
1995.
[156] D. Ryan, The solution of massive generalized set parti-
tioning problems in aircrew rostering, Journal of the
Operational Research Society 43 (5) (1992) 459–467.
[157] T. Ryan, B. Barker, F. Marciante, A system for deter-
mining appropriate nurse staffing, Journal of Nurse
Administration 5 (5) (1975) 30–38.
[158] F. Salewski, L. Bottcher, L.A. Drex, Operational audit-
task assignment and staff scheduling, OR Spektrum 18 (1)
(1996) 29–41.
[159] S. Sarin, S. Aggarwal, Modeling and algorithmic devel-
opment of a staff scheduling problem, European Journal
of Operational Research 128 (2001) 558–569.
[160] A. Schaerf, A. Meisels, Solving employee timetabling
problems by generalized local search, in: The 6th Congress
of the Italian Association for Artificial Intelligence, AI*AI
99, Advances in Artifical Intelligence, Bologna, Italy,
LNAI 1792, 1999, pp. 380–390.
[161] M. Segal, The operator-scheduling problem: A network-
flow approach, Operations Research 22 (4) (1974) 808–823.[162] D. Seitman, In-house medical personnel scheduler––a
computerized on-call scheduling program, International
Journal CLIN MONIT COM 11 (1) (1994).
[163] Y. Shen, R. Kwan, Tabu search for time windowed public
transport driver scheduling, Technical Report 14, Univer-
sity of Leeds, 2000.
[164] Y. Shen, R. Kwan, Tabu search for driver scheduling,
in: S. Voss, J. Daduna (Eds.), Computer-Aided Schedul-
ing of Public Transport, Lecture Notes in Economics
and Mathematical Systems, vol. 505, Springer Publishers,
2001, pp. 121–136.
[165] S. Siferd, W. Benton, Workforce staffing and scheduling:
hospital nursing specific models, European Journal of
Operational Research 60 (3) (1992) 233–246.
[166] S. Siferd, W. Benton, A decision modes for shift sched-
uling of nurses, European Journal of Operational Re-
search 74 (3) (1994) 519–527.
[167] Z. Sinuany-Stern, Y. Teomi, Multi-objective scheduling
plans for security guards, Journal of the Operational
Research Society 37 (1) (1986) 67–77.
[168] D. Sitompul, S. Radhawa, Nurse scheduling: A state-
of-the-art review, Journal of the Society for Health Sys-
tems 2 (1990) 62–72.
[169] L. Smith, The application of an interactive algorithm to
develop cyclical rotational schedules for nursing person-
nel, INFOR Journal 14 (1) (1976) 53–70.
[170] M. Stojkovic, F. Soumis, J. Desrosiers, The operational
airline crew scheduling problem, Transportation Science
32 (3) (1998) 232–245.
[171] A. Tajima, S. Misono, Airline crew-scheduling problem
with many irregular flights, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 1350 (1997) 2–11.
[172] J. Tanomaru, Staff scheduling by a genetic algorithm with
heuristic operators, in: Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE
International Conference on Evolutionary Computation,
1995, pp. 456–461.
[173] P. Taylor, S. Huxley, A break from tradition for the San
Francisco police: Patrol officer scheduling using an
optimization-based decision support system, Interfaces
19 (1) (1989) 4–24.
[174] D. Teodorovic, A fuzzy set theory approach to the aircrew
rostering, Fuzzy Sets and Systems 95 (3) (1998) 261–271.
[175] G. Thompson, Accounting for the multi-period impact of
service when determining employee requirements for labor
scheduling, Journal of Operations Management 11 (3)
(1993) 269–287.
[176] G. Thompson, A simulated-annealing heuristic for shift
scheduling using non-continuously available employees,
Computers andOperationsResearch 23 (3) (1996) 275–288.
[177] G. Thompson, Labor staffing and scheduling models for
controlling service levels, Naval Research Logistics 44 (8)
(1997) 719–740.
[178] J. Thornton, A. Sattar, An integer programming-based
nurse rostering system, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science: Concurrency and Parallelism, Programming,
Networking, and Security, vol. 1179, Springer, 1996, pp.
357–358.
A.T. Ernst et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 153 (2004) 3–27 27[179] J. Tien, A. Kamiyama, On manpower scheduling algo-
rithms, SIAM Review 24 (3) (1982) 275–287.
[180] V. Trivedi, Optimum allocation of float nurses using head
nurses perspectives, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Michigan,
1974.
[181] E. Tsang, C. Voudouris, Fast local search and guided
local search and their application to British Telecoms
workforce scheduling problem, Operations Research Let-
ters 20 (3) (1997) 119–127.
[182] D. Warner, Scheduling nursing personnel according to
nursing preference: A mathematical programming ap-
proach, Operations Research 24 (5) (1976) 842–856.
[183] D. Warner, J. Prawda, A mathematical programming
model for scheduling nursing personnel in a hospital,
Management Science 19 (4) (1972) 411–422.
[184] D. Wedelin, An algorithm for 0–1 programming with an
application to airline crew scheduling, Annals Operational
Research 57 (1995) 283–301.
[185] G. Weil, K. Heus, P. Francois, M. Poujade, Constraint
programming for nurse scheduling, IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology 14 (4) (1995) 417–422.
[186] N. Wilson, Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathemat-
ical Systems: Computer-Aided Transit Scheduling, vol.
471, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.[187] H. Wolfe, J. Young, Staffing the nursing unit, Part I:
Controlled variable staffing, Nursing Research (1965)
237–243.
[188] H. Wolfe, J. Young, Staffing the nursing unit, Part II: The
multiple assignment technique, Nursing Research (1965)
299–303.
[189] A. Wren (Ed.), Computer scheduling of public transport,
Urban passenger vehicle and crew scheduling: Interna-
tional Workshop held at the University of Leeds, North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1981.
[190] A. Wren, A general review of the use of computers in
scheduling buses and their crews, in: A. Wren (Ed.),
Computer Scheduling of Public Transport, Urban Pas-
senger Vehicle and Crew Scheduling, North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1981, pp. 3–16.
[191] A. Wren, B. Smith, Experiences with a crew scheduling
system based on set covering, in: J. Daduna, A. Wren
(Eds.), Computer-Aided Transport Scheduling, Springer-
Verlag, 1988, pp. 104–118.
[192] A. Wren, D. Wren, A genetic algorithm for public
transport driver scheduling, Computers and Operations
Research 22 (1) (1995) 101–110.
[193] M. Wright, Scheduling English cricket umpires, Journal of
the Operational Research Society 42 (6) (1991) 447–452.

