Avai lable onl ine at www.sc iencedirect .com
journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/ locate / jva l
ISPOR TASK FORCE REPORT
Applying Dynamic Simulation Modeling Methods in Health
Care Delivery Research—The SIMULATE Checklist: Report of the
ISPOR SimulationModeling Emerging Good Practices Task Force
Deborah A. Marshall, PhD1,2,3,*, Lina Burgos-Liz, MSc, MPH, BSc Ind Eng1, Maarten J. IJzerman, PhD4,
Nathaniel D. Osgood, BS, MS, PhD5,6, William V. Padula, PhD, MS7, Mitchell K. Higashi, PhD8,
Peter K. Wong, PhD, MS, MBA, RPh9, Kalyan S. Pasupathy, PhD10, William Crown, PhD11
1Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 2Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, and the McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB,
Canada; 3Alberta Bone & Joint Health Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; 4Department of Health Technology &
Services Research, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands; 5Department of Computer Science, Health & Epidemiology and
Bioengineering Division, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 6Department of Community, Health & Epidemiology
and Bioengineering Division, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 7Section of Hospital Medicine, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 8GE Health care, Barrington, IL, USA; 9HSHS Illinois Divisions Medical Group, Hospital Sisters Health
System, Belleville, IL, USA; 10Health Care Systems Engineering Program, Mayo Clinic Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the
Science of Health Care Delivery, Rochester, MN, USA; 11Health Care Policy & Research, Health Care Systems Engineering Program,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
A B S T R A C T
Health care delivery systems are inherently complex, consisting of
multiple tiers of interdependent subsystems and processes that are
adaptive to changes in the environment and behave in a nonlinear
fashion. Traditional health technology assessment and modeling
methods often neglect the wider health system impacts that can be
critical for achieving desired health system goals and are often of
limited usefulness when applied to complex health systems.
Researchers and health care decision makers can either underesti-
mate or fail to consider the interactions among the people, processes,
technology, and facility designs. Health care delivery system inter-
ventions need to incorporate the dynamics and complexities of the
health care system context in which the intervention is delivered.
This report provides an overview of common dynamic simulation
modeling methods and examples of health care system interventions
in which such methods could be useful. Three dynamic simulation
modeling methods are presented to evaluate system interventions for
health care delivery: system dynamics, discrete event simulation, and
agent-based modeling. In contrast to conventional evaluations, a
dynamic systems approach incorporates the complexity of the system
and anticipates the upstream and downstream consequences of changes
in complex health care delivery systems. This report assists researchers
and decision makers in deciding whether these simulation methods are
appropriate to address specific health system problems through an eight-
point checklist referred to as the SIMULATE (System, Interactions, Multi-
level, Understanding, Loops, Agents, Time, Emergence) tool. It is a primer
for researchers and decision makers working in health care delivery and
implementation sciences who face complex challenges in delivering
effective and efficient care that can be addressed with system interven-
tions. On reviewing this report, the readers should be able to identify
whether these simulation modeling methods are appropriate to answer
the problem they are addressing and to recognize the differences of these
methods from other modeling approaches used typically in health
technology assessment applications.
Keywords: decision making, dynamic simulation modeling, health care
delivery, methods.
Copyright & 2015, International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and
Outcomes Research (ISPOR). Published by Elsevier Inc.
1098-3015$36.00 – see front matter Copyright & 2015, International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research (ISPOR).
Published by Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2014.12.001
E-mail: damarsha@ucalgary.ca.
* Address correspondence to: Deborah A. Marshall, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary, 3280 Hospital Drive NW, Room 3C56 Health Research Innovation Centre, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4Z6.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 6
Introduction
Health care delivery systems are inherently complex and frag-
mented social systems consisting of governments, payers, and
multiple providers responsible for delivering health care services
to patients in defined regions [1–3]. Social systems are different
from other systems in that people make decisions, interact
among themselves, and also interact with other parts of the
system in an interdependent nature. It is hard to plan health care
services in these types of complex systems because decisions and
choices by people are dynamic (i.e., can change over time and
interactions between parts of the system and with other systems
are adaptive). In the era of patient-centered care, customizing
care to the needs of individual patients further escalates the
complexity of health care delivery systems [4–9].
Complexity challenges decision makers to evaluate interven-
tions that can improve the effectiveness and efficiency of health
care delivery because of the emergent behavior of the system (i.e.,
the potential intended and unintended consequences). Although
modeling approaches such as decision trees and Markov models
have been standardized as methods to evaluate health care
interventions, these approaches are not sufficient for analyzing
complex health care delivery systems. Dynamic simulation mod-
eling offers advantages with recent advances in accessible com-
puting power and data analytics that make it possible to simulate
the impact of system interventions on health care delivery
systems without costly and time-consuming direct experimenta-
tion. The results of such simulation models can anticipate the
comparative effectiveness of a novel system intervention as well
as its cost-effectiveness.
This task force report presents dynamic simulation modeling
methods to evaluate system interventions for health care deliv-
ery. It is a primer for researchers and decision makers who face
complex challenges to deliver effective and efficient care. Based
on experience from the fields of industrial engineering and
operations research, three dynamic simulation modeling meth-
ods are well suited for and commonly applied to these types of
problems: system dynamics (SD), discrete event simulation (DES),
and agent-based modeling (ABM) [9–13].
This report provides an overview of these dynamic simulation
modeling methods and examples of health care system inter-
ventions in which such methods could be useful. It is intended to
assist researchers and decision makers in deciding whether these
simulation methods are appropriate to address specific health
system problems. An eight-point checklist referred to as the
SIMULATE (System, Interactions, Multilevel, Understanding,
Loops, Agents, Time, Emergence) tool is included to assist in
determining whether these dynamic simulation modeling meth-
ods are suitable to address the problem of interest. The report
also directs readers to other resources for further education on
the topic of modeling system interventions in the emerging field
of health care delivery science and implementation. On review-
ing this report, readers should be able to identify whether these
dynamic simulation modeling methods are appropriate to
answer the problem they are addressing and to recognize the
differences of these methods from other modeling approaches.
Background to the Task Force
In October 2013, the ISPOR Health Science Policy Council
recommended to the ISPOR Board of Directors that an
ISPOR Emerging Good Practices for Outcomes Research Task
Force be established to focus on dynamic simulation modeling
methods that can be applied in health care delivery research
and recommendations on how these simulation techniques
can assist health care decision makers to evaluate interventions
to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of health care
delivery. The Board of Directors approved the ISPOR Simulation
Modeling Emerging Good Practices Task Force in November
2013.
The task force leadership group is composed of experts in
modeling, epidemiology, research, systems and industrial en-
gineering, economics, and health technology assessment. Task
force members were selected to represent a diverse range of
perspectives. They work in hospital health systems, research
organizations, academia, and the pharmaceutical industry. In
addition, the task force had international representation with
members from Canada, The Netherlands, Colombia, and the
United States.
The task force met approximately every five weeks by
teleconference to develop an outline and discuss issues to be
included in the report. In addition, task force members met in
person at ISPOR International meetings and European con-
gresses. All task force members reviewed many drafts of the
report and provided frequent feedback in both oral and written
comments.
Preliminary findings and recommendations were presented
in forum and workshop presentations at the 2014 ISPOR Annual
International Meeting in Montreal and ISPOR Annual European
Congress in Amsterdam. In addition, written feedback was
received from the first and final draft reports’ circulation to the
190-member ISPOR Modeling Review Group.
Comments were discussed by the task force on a series of
teleconferences and during a 1.5-day task force face-to-face
consensus meeting. All comments were considered, and most
were substantive and constructive. Comments were addressed
as appropriate in subsequent versions of the report. All written
comments are published at the ISPOR Web site on the task
force’s Webpage: http://www.ispor.org/TaskForces/Simulation-
ModelingApps-HCDelivery.asp. The task force report and Web-
page may also be accessed from the ISPOR homepage (www.
ispor.org) via the purple Research Tools menu, ISPOR Good
Practices for Outcomes Research, heading: Modeling Methods
In the course of task force deliberations, in response to
specific comments and suggestions from reviewers, and a
growing concern about length, it became apparent that two
task force reports would be needed to be thorough, covering the
essential points, yet keep the report readable and digestible.
With Value in Health’s permission, the material has been split
into two articles.
This first article is a primer on how dynamic simulation
modeling methods can be applied to health system problems. It
provides the fundamentals and definitions, and discusses why
dynamic simulation modeling methods are different from
typical models used in economic evaluation and relevant to
health care delivery research. It includes a basic description of
each method (system dynamics, discrete event simulation,
agent-based modeling), and provides guidance on how to
ascertain whether these simulation methods are appropriate
for a specific problem via the SIMULATE checklist developed by
the task force.
The second report will provide more depth, delving into the
technical specifications related to the three dynamic simulation
modeling methods. It will systematically compare each method
across a number of features and provide a guide for good
research practices for the conduct of dynamic simulation
modeling. This report will appear in the March/April 2015 issue
of Value in Health.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 66
Definitions of Concepts and Terminology
Behaviors and interactions of systems are governed by their level
of complexity. Likewise, complexity is considered a property of a
system, not of an intervention [14]. Complex systems consist of
tasks that are relationally dependent events with unpredictable
outcomes [15]. A complex system is one that is adaptive to
changes in its local environment, is composed of other complex
systems (e.g., the human body), and behaves in a nonlinear
fashion (i.e., change in outcome is not proportional to change
in input) [16]. Moreover, the behavior of the system as a whole is
different from that of its parts or components. Understanding
this emergent behavior is part of understanding a complex
system. In contrast to these complex systems, simple systems
consist of tasks that can be answered as “yes” or “no,” whereas
complicated systems consist of tasks that are based on “if-then”
algorithms.
Health care consists of multiple complex systems. For
instance, complex systems in health care delivery include
primary care, specialists, outpatient facilities, hospitals, and
long-term chronic care facilities. This framework of complex-
ity can be useful for delineating simulation modeling appli-
cations to systems depending on the level of complexity
(Table 1).
Overview of dynamic simulation modeling methods
Dynamic simulation modeling methods are used to design and
develop mathematical representations (i.e., formal models) of the
operation of processes and systems to experiment with and test
interventions and scenarios and their consequences over time to
advance the understanding of the system or process, communicate
findings, and inform management and policy design [18–20]. The
three dynamic modeling methods highlighted in this report—SD,
DES, and ABM—are well suited for health care delivery problems.
System dynamics. SD is a simulation modeling method used for
representing the structure of complex systems and understand-
ing their behavior over time. It was developed in the 1950s by Jay
Forrester at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with the
goal of using science and engineering to identify the core issues
that determine the success and failure of corporations. His
involvement with General Electric (New York, NY) and the
managerial problems faced by the company influenced his work
greatly. From manual simulations of the stock-flow-feedback
structure of the production plants, including the existing corpo-
rate decision-making structure for hiring and layoffs, Forrester
[21] showed that the employment instability was due to the
internal structure of the firm, not an external force such as the
business cycle. Forrester and his team at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology developed the first computer SD simu-
lator, DYNAMO. In 1961, Forrester [22] published the first book in
the field, Industrial Dynamics.
The core elements of SD are feedback, accumulations (stocks),
rates (flows), and time delays. Stocks are accumulations or
aggregations of something (e.g., people, beds, and oxygen). Flows
are rates; these feed in and out of stocks and have the same units
of stocks per time unit (e.g., people per hour, beds per year, and
oxygen per minute). An important concept in SD is nonlinearity.
This concept is tied to the existence of feedback processes. It
means that an effect is seldom proportional to the cause.
One of the core assumptions in SD is that the behavior of the
system is due to its structure and not due to external forces or
factors. Although SD models can be formulated at many different
levels of detail, such models in health care are most traditionally
aggregate, in the sense that they characterize the population in
terms of sizes of subpopulations rather than at an individual level.
Thus, rather than tracking specific persons on a longitudinal basis,
such models provide a cross-sectional view of a system by counting
over time the number of people exhibiting particular combinations
of characteristics or in specific transitional health states.
In general terms, SD can produce patterns and trends, as well
as mean values as outputs from the model. The patterns and
trends resulting from simulation experimentation with different
policies or strategies (“what-if” questions) can be analyzed by
modelers and stakeholders to inform decision making.
Discrete event simulation. DES is a simulation method used to
characterize and analyze queuing processes and networks of
queues in which there is an emphasis on the use of resources [23]
developed in the late 1950s by Tocher et al. for United Steel
Companies (United Kingdom) for constructing a simulation
model of one of the steel plants [24]. Most problems or questions
that DES can help analyze are those regarding resource utiliza-
tion and queues (i.e., wait times).
The core concepts in DES are events, entities, attributes, and
resources. An event is something that happens at a certain time
point in the environment that can affect resources and/or
entities. Entities are objects that have attributes and consume
resources while experiencing events, but consumption is not
affected by individual-level behavior. Attributes are features or
characteristics unique to an entity. They can change over time or
not. Resources are objects that provide a service to an entity.
Queues are another important concept in DES and occur when
several entities compete for a specific resource for which there is
a constraint. At a more technical level, time is discrete, and
change happens when an “event” occurs.
In health care specifically, DES can be useful to analyze effects
on health outcomes. DES is also useful for problems in which it is
particularly relevant to be able to capture the changing attributes
of entities (e.g., patients), and in which the processes to be
characterized can be described by events [25].
The outputs of DES are generally mean values and distribu-
tions of values. Individual entities are followed through simu-
lated processes, enabling event traceability. This methodology
Table 1 – Concepts and terminology definitions.
Term Definition
Complex system A system that is adaptive to changes in its
local environment, is composed of other
complex systems, behaves in a
nonlinear fashion, and exhibits
emergent behavior [14,15].
Emergent
behavior
Also known as emergence, refers to the
novel and coherent structures, patterns,
and properties that arise from the
interaction of the parts of a complex
system and take place at the system
scale rather than at the component’s
scale [17].
Health care
delivery
systems
Health care delivery systems represent a
continuum of providers in primary,
secondary, and tertiary care as well as
payers that grant patients access to
affordable, quality care in defined
regions; they are inherently complex
entities, consisting of multiple tiers of
interdependent subsystems and
processes, as well as varying degrees of
private and public elements throughout
different regions [15].
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 6 7
generates high-level insight about the problem and system under
study at logistic/operational levels. Outputs of DES can be
interpreted or used for system performance indicators such as
resource utilization, wait times, number of entities in queues,
and throughput of services or products. Also, scenarios with
different strategies and policies (“what-if” questions) can be
tested. The mean values or distributions can be thought of as
accurate; however, these are not necessarily optimal.
Agent-based modeling. ABM is a simulation method for model-
ing dynamic, adaptive, and autonomous systems [26]. It is used to
discover systems by using “deductive” and “inductive” reasoning.
At the core of an ABM model, there are “autonomous” and
“interacting” objects called agents. Agents are social and interact
with others and they live in an environment and their next
actions are based on the current state of the environment. In
addition, an agent senses its environment and behaves accord-
ingly on the basis of defined decision rules. Agents may have
explicit goals to maximize or minimize and may learn and adapt
themselves on the basis of experience (i.e., agency).
In 1971, Schelling [27] used ABM to propose a theory to explain
the persistence of racial segregation even though the legal and
cultural environment was one of growing tolerance. Using a basic
ABM model with if-then statements (e.g., individuals will tolerate
racial diversity, but will not tolerate being in a minority in their
locality), Schelling [27] showed via colored squares on a matrix
that segregation will still be the equilibrium situation.
The three core concepts that form the basis for ABM are
agency, dynamics, and structure [28]. Dynamics means that both
the agents and their environment can change, develop, or evolve
over time. Structure is emergent from agent interaction. For
example, how human populations will tend to aggregate in
certain locations on the basis of predefined behaviors that have
been coded into the agents. All the above factors can be modeled.
The widest use of ABM related to population health has been to
model large-scale anthropogenic or natural disasters, such as a
chemical spill, infectious disease outbreaks, forest fires, hurricanes,
or flooding. The response of the affected population is driven by
available information about the event, behaviors (e.g., evacuation),
and containment strategies (e.g., vaccination or quarantine) [29].
ABM is a rapidly maturing health modeling technique well
suited to addressing public health planning and policy needs, as
well as health care infrastructure investment decisions. The
attainment of specific population health goals can be simulated
at the population level, and the specifics of investments needed
to achieve these goals can be investigated in a more detailed
fashion. Primary goals can be defined by disease outcomes,
efficiency measures, return on investment, or costs [30,31].
The strength of interpretation of ABM results lies in the
conduct of sensitivity analyses. ABMs can be a powerful tool to
test assumptions, assist planning, and anticipate the effects of
different health system scenarios on population health by vary-
ing the interventions applied to the health care system (e.g.,
introducing a new diabetes prevention program vs. lowering the
co-pay for diabetes medications).
As applied to health care systems, ABM model outputs can
include health outcomes (e.g., quality-adjusted life-years [QALYs]
and mortality), disease patterns and trends (e.g., viral transmission
and diabetes), costs, resource utilization, and labor productivity (e.
g., patients treated per day and bed occupancy). ABM is well suited
to generate insights into the health of large populations over time.
Why Is Dynamic Simulation Modeling Relevant to Health Care
Delivery Research in Complex Systems? (See Box)
Health care delivery systems are inherently complex, character-
ized by nonlinearities, feedback loops, and a large number of
variables that evolve dynamically over time. Simulation models
can help identify the critical functional and relational aspects of a
system. Thus, dynamic simulation modeling allows us to under-
stand why a system behaves the way it does as a function of its
organization and relationships among components of the
system.
More recently, with the focus on patient-centered care, the
complexity has increased in these systems. The Institute of
Medicine’s seminal report, “Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New
Health System for the 21st Century,” highlights patient-centered
care as a necessary component of good practice, emphasizing the
importance of continuous health relationships, knowledge shar-
ing, and free information flow across segments of the health care
system [5]. According to Berwick et al. [32], health care system
improvement requires the simultaneous pursuit of three aims in
iterative cycles: improving both the experience of care and the
health of populations, and reducing per capita costs of
health care.
A dynamic simulation model can help address these conflict-
ing goals and complements the increased focus on patient
centeredness as a research priority [33]. Providers are now
challenged with implementing evidence-based practices, such
as checklists, but lack guidance on incorporating patient prefer-
ences [34,35]. Dynamic simulation models of complex systems
can capture patient preferences to simulate patient and provider
behavior as well as anticipate the outcomes of behavioral
interactions.
In the context of health care delivery, a patient-centered
approach requires an understanding of the multiple and diverse
determinants of health outcomes and patient experience. Model-
ing these relationships and interdependencies at the system level
can provide a comprehensive view of the drivers that improve
the quality of the patient visit experience, such as shortened
waiting times, quality of information, and access to care. Care
pathways can be designed to better reflect patient preferences for
certain subgroups, such as risk tolerance for therapies [36], the
avoidance of adverse effects [37], potential adherence to ther-
apeutic regimens, or demographic characteristics and medical
history [38]. In the complex interactions between doctors and
patients, simulation modeling may also yield insights into
revealed versus stated preferences.
Health care delivery systems are continually evolving as they
strive to balance quality care against resource constraints. Classic
What is Dynamic Simulation Modeling Used for?
Health Care Delivery Research in Complex Systems
 Model building process and simulation are learning
processes themselves
 Identify critical functional and relational aspects in com-
plex systems.
 Understand why a system behaves the way it does as a
function of its organization (structure).
 Shift paradigms and mental models
Design and Evaluation of Health Care Delivery System Interventions
 Evaluate intended and unintended consequences of an
intervention using “what if…?” scenarios
 Tool for designers (e.g. policy design, system design and re-
design) that is more prescriptive in nature by informing
decision making.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 68
health economic models, however, do not account for the multiple
constraints facing health care systems. Constraints are imposed on
the health care system in many ways: provider budgets, patient out-
of-pocket spending, physical space and facility designs, staff num-
bers, delivery processes, workflow productivity, access to technol-
ogy, and time. Designing health care systems that deliver value will
require these types of new methods [39].
What/How Can Dynamic Simulation Modeling Contribute to
the Design and Evaluation of Health Care Delivery System
Interventions? (See Box)
In the Medical Research Council’s framework for the evaluation of
interventions, an intervention is “built up from a number of
components, which may act both independently and inter-
dependently.” Consequently, it can be challenging to determine
what aspect(s) of the intervention effect change in the system [14].
When evaluating interventions, the report emphasizes that it
is necessary to consider the wider ramifications of intervening
and to be aware of the interaction that occurs between compo-
nents of the intervention, as well as between the intervention
and the context in which it is implemented. This includes the
operations, structures, and relationships that exist in each set-
ting and the implications that contextual effects have for design-
ing and evaluating interventions.
Dynamic simulation modeling methods are useful in the
design and evaluation of health care systems and the interven-
tions needed to resolve their inherent problems. Many of the
advances in disease diagnosis, treatment, and care are imple-
mented without considering the unintended or unanticipated
consequences of these interventions at the system level. In fact,
interventions that are implemented to address difficult chal-
lenges in health care sometimes fail to solve persistent problems
or create new problems. This phenomenon is known as policy
resistance: the tendency for interventions to be defeated by the
system’s response to the intervention itself [40]. Dynamic simu-
lation models enable evaluators and policymakers to account for
and identify policy resistance in a system and design and test
interventions that can overcome this phenomenon.
It is widely accepted in health care that generating reliable
scientific evidence requires conducting experiments, comparing
and differentiating hypotheses, and obtaining results that are
replicable [40,41]. Generating reliable scientific evidence, however,
becomes more difficult as complexity increases and is not always
feasible because of ethical, physical, or technical reasons. Dynamic
simulation models are virtual worlds that offer decision makers
the capability of conducting experiments and evaluating system
interventions [42]. Simulation models provide low- risk and low-
cost laboratories to learn and gain understanding about health
care systems and the effects that interventions may have on them.
Dynamic simulation modeling methods test “what-if” scenar-
ios that can then be used to estimate the upstream and down-
stream outcomes associated with systems of care that are too
complex to anticipate on the basis of piecemeal analyses of the
system components. In the virtual world of the simulation model,
decision makers can push the system to extreme conditions,
extend the time of observation, and strengthen and relax assump-
tions, which is often impossible or infeasible in the real world [42].
Simulation models provide immediate feedback to decision mak-
ers, allowing them to gain years of simulated experience and
knowledge about the system and interventions by revealing
dynamics and mechanisms that are otherwise not obvious [40,42].
Traditional approaches and statistics provide descriptive ways
of measuring and testing individual relationships. As massive
amounts of data are collected and warehoused, the descriptive
analyses are used by predictive models, which strive to forecast
future scenarios. Dynamic simulation modeling takes it further
to anticipate the consequences of unforeseen interactions in the
system (emergence) and become prescriptive in nature, such that
the models prescribe what actions/interventions to take, on the
basis of scenarios tested through experiments [43,44]. Through
simulation modeling, decision makers can observe effects that
interventions can have on different parts of the system con-
currently; it engages decision makers into systems thinking and
to focus on interdependencies, thus broadening their perspec-
tive on the problem and enhancing their understanding of
interventions in the context of the overall system [3,45]. Hence,
decision makers are forced to develop intuition about the
system and how it really works, thereby informing the design
of the system and interventions realistically and more accu-
rately [44–48].
System redesign is an essential step to achieving sustainable
implementation of evidence-based practice interventions across
the care continuum, and dynamic simulation modeling can
inform the adoption of evidence-based patient care practices.
Suppose, for example, that policymakers are considering a new
centralized system for the intake of patients with joint pain and
disability because of long waiting times to access appropriate
arthritis care. Redesigning the referral process can be informed by
dynamic simulation modeling. Arthritis, most commonly osteo-
arthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis, is a frequent cause of
joint pain and disability, and is associated with a significant
societal burden, in terms of both morbidity and costs. Early
recognition and intervention prevents or minimizes permanent,
irreparable joint damage, which results in functional impairment.
Ensuring timely access to appropriate and effective care is the
first step in preventing the deleterious, progressive effects of
these diseases. A centralized intake referral system involves
pooling of patients on waiting lists to create a single first-come,
first-serve, but severity prioritized queue, from which patients
are directed to an appropriate service provider [49]. In theory,
pooling patient referrals for assessment and triage should help
decrease the variability in the system and improve access to
arthritis care [50]. But, a central intake system can be structured
in various ways, and the impact of different structures on patient
outcomes and costs is not obvious. Dynamic simulation modeling
allows policymakers to evaluate these different structures and
alternative scenarios [51]. This ability to evaluate system design
and the intended and unintended consequences of implementing
alternative interventions is a critical, but largely missing, tool in
health services delivery research.
Nonetheless, there are challenges to using and implementing
dynamic simulation models. Some of the challenges are the need
of specialized skills in simulation modeling, for example, oper-
ations research, engineering, and computer science; data require-
ments for the models can be difficult to fulfill because of lack of
access to certain data, costs associated with data acquisition, and
data availability. Nevertheless, these models provide an advant-
age because their structure will not be limited by the available
data and they can be used to do exploratory analyses until the
additional data can be incorporated. It may be difficult at times to
communicate how these models are built and the details of their
mathematical structure. This can sometimes be interpreted by
users (i.e., policymakers) as lack of transparency. These struc-
tures and sophisticated calculations, however, are necessary to
adequately represent the problem and to obtain accurate results.
What Are the Differences between Health Economic Models in
Health Technology Assessment and Dynamic Simulation
Models in Health Care Delivery Systems?
Health technology assessment (HTA) is defined as “the system-
atic evaluation of the properties and effects of a health technol-
ogy, addressing the direct and intended effects of this technology,
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 6 9
as well as its indirect and unintended consequences, and aimed
mainly at informing decision making regarding health technolo-
gies” [52]. Traditionally, health economic models used in HTA are
based on clinical evidence and perform analyses of economic
consequences of that specific technology as an intervention
compared with usual care. The standard approach used in HTA
is cost-effectiveness analysis, in which the ratio of the incremen-
tal cost to the incremental benefit (often measured in terms of
utility as QALYs) of a single or multiple interventions is most
important.
Most HTA reports have a limited scope with regard to the
consequences to the health care delivery system. For planning,
design, and evaluation of health care delivery system interven-
tions, dynamic simulation models can capture the feedback loops
that reflect interactions among the operations, structures, and
relationships in the health care system and evolve dynamically
over time. Conventional evaluation of interventions in health care
is often limited because it neglects these wider health system
impacts that could be critical for achieving desired health goals.
For instance, a health economic model comparing tissue
engineered and biodegradable gels for repair of small cartilage
defects in patients with arthritis might evaluate the clinical
effectiveness in terms of cost per QALY and economic conse-
quences (budget impact) compared with physiotherapy, surgery,
or watchful waiting. For health care planning and delivery,
however, other questions may arise, such as the required health
care facilities to deliver this minimally invasive therapy, and the
change in hospital service due, for instance, to a delay in whole
joint replacement in case of severe OA. In addition, the health
system is likely to adopt minimally invasive interventions, but
the diffusion may differ widely between regional health facilities,
depending on interaction between health care payers, providers,
and physicians. The impacts of such interactions are not typically
accounted for in HTA.
A systems approach anticipates the upstream and down-
stream consequences of changes in health care delivery. This
enables health service planners to identify upstream and down-
stream points of leverage through experimentation with various
“what-if” scenarios without actually having to implement the
policy first. Dynamic simulation modeling is used to model
interventions before the cost-intensive design and development
and implementation phases. Thus, effects on patient care, the
health care system, as well as health economics aspects can be
estimated and anticipated [53].
Characteristics of dynamic simulation modeling methods
relevant to health care delivery system problems
Now we describe applications in which dynamic simulation
modeling is appropriate beyond traditional HTA evaluation of a
specific health technology.
Dynamic simulation modeling can be applied to a range of
health care delivery system problems:
a. Simulation modeling can estimate the consequences of health care
delivery system interventions: Many interventions in health care
have impacts on the health care delivery system that are not
typically considered in health economic models. Simulation
modeling can better estimate the downstream and upstream
consequences once a health policy or delivery intervention is
implemented, accounting for feedback loops and interdepen-
dencies to characterize the adaptive nature of the health care
delivery system. These models can also be used to dynam-
ically estimate the consequences of demographic change, or,
for instance, aging of the population [54].
b. Simulation modeling allows the incorporation of behavioral aspects
and personalized health care decisions: One of the advantages of
dynamic simulation models is that they are flexible in the
definition of either “health states” or “events” [55,56]. This
enables a more realistic representation of the unique path-
ways of individual patients through the health care system as
well as the health states they currently experience. Patients
make decisions about when they will see a doctor, whether
they will comply with their medication regimen, or whether
they are willing to co-pay for expensive treatment. Dynamic
simulation models in general, and ABM in particular, allow
flexibility to incorporate the dynamics of people making
decisions affecting population health outcomes, and thus
efficient planning of health care interventions. Pombo-
Romero et al. [57] developed an ABM to show social inter-
action to explain the use and diffusion of new drugs in a
regional health care system. Such ABMs account for behav-
ioral interactions between patients, physicians, and pharma-
cists regarding prescriptions.
c. Simulation models are flexible to consider consequences of comorbid-
ities and health care utilization: Most health economic models
assume an underlying disease for which a treatment is
evaluated. Many people with chronic diseases, however,
suffer from multiple morbidities and experience multiple
episodes of interactions with the health care system. Dynamic
simulation models may also incorporate subroutines to model
physiological interactions in the body that affect treatment
outcomes and health care demand. For instance, Sabounchi
et al. [58] created a system dynamics model specific to weight
gain and obesity in women undergoing fertility treatment.
The model includes several physiological subsystems that
may affect body weight.
The potential advantage is that networks of related diseases
can be defined similar to networks of underlying genetic
mutations and networks of social activities [59]. If such
underlying physiological responses networks can be identified
and modeled, the consequences of health care delivery
interventions on the health system can be evaluated more
precisely, taking into account time dependency.
d. Simulation models can consider the spatial consequences of a health
care delivery intervention: Many health care interventions also
have a spatial component, such as infectious disease policies
[60] or remote health services such as telemonitoring. If
health services are delivered at home, or if general hospitals
specialize into health care centers, this has a large impact on
the number of patients traveling to health care facilities. At
the least, it will impact the case-mix of patients in the
hospital, and dynamic simulation modeling can be applied
to estimate the consequences on hospital admissions and
support further capacity planning [61]. One specific applica-
tion is queuing and waiting list management in hospitals.
Troy and Rosenberg [62] used a dynamic simulation model to
determine the need for intensive care unit (ICU) beds for
surgery patients. The background for the study was an
increase in the number of patients admitted to the hospital
for emergency care as the hospital developed into a tertiary
care facility. The increase in acute patient admissions led to
an increase in the need for ICU beds. Dynamic simulation
modeling was used to estimate the required number of ICU
beds on the basis of available surgeons and the expected
number of patients admitted to the hospital.
e. Simulation modeling addresses system problems that are too com-
plex to enable an analytic solution: Health care consists of
multiple complex systems. The inherent feedback loops that
reflect interactions and interdependencies among the oper-
ations, structures, and relationships in the health care system
evolve dynamically over time and cannot always be captured
in an analytic solution. But simulation methods can be used to
model such relationships.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 610
Dynamic simulation methods for problems at different system
levels (strategic, operational, and tactical)
The feasibility and relevance of dynamic simulation modeling
methods to inform health system planning and decision making
for improving system efficiency have been demonstrated [63].
The specific selection of the appropriate simulation modeling
method depends on a number of factors, such as whether the
problem is specific to individuals or groups, the level of the
problem (strategic, tactical, or operational), and whether stochas-
tic or deterministic solutions are sought [26] (Table 2). This will be
the subject of a subsequent task force report.
The literature on the applications of dynamic simulation
modeling in health care is large and growing rapidly, although
most applications continue to be in the traditional operations
research areas of scheduling, transportation, queuing theory, and
allocation of resources [63,64]. The following examples illustrate
how these dynamic simulation modeling methods have been
applied to health care delivery problems and interventions:
 The Mayo Clinic’s Center for the Science of Health Care
Delivery has applied health care delivery systems thinking
to redesign its practices, particularly in the domains of cardiac
surgery [65] and outpatient practice [66]. The center used DES
to predict the minimum number of beds needed to meet Mayo
Clinic quality standards of care. The model incorporated
assumptions about surgery growth and new patient recovery
protocols, as well as smoothing surgery schedules and
transferring long-stay patients from the ICU. The model
predicted 30% lower bed supply requirements than did the
traditional bed planning approach. System dynamics model-
ing was used for high-level planning of primary care staffing
that incorporated new care delivery modes. The model
allowed for “what-if” scenarios to be evaluated, showing
projected access performance for measures such as time to
appointment and corresponding staffing requirements.
 Another example is the ReThink Health model. This system
dynamics model simulates the behavior of a health system,
tracking changes in health status, utilization, and costs. It has
been used to analyze various health policy strategies (e.g.,
expanding health insurance coverage, delivering better pre-
ventive and chronic care, and improving environmental con-
ditions) to reduce deaths and improve the cost-effectiveness
of interventions [9,67]. For example, Milstein et al. [67] report
on the use of the model to evaluate five different health
reform policy proposals. The results demonstrated that
expanding health insurance and improving the quality of
health care delivery would improve health status but would
do so at higher cost and health care inequality. In contrast,
policies focused on strengthening primary care would
improve health status, reduce inequalities, and lower costs.
Such divergent outcomes would be extremely difficult to
anticipate (not to mention quantify) without the aid of a
simulation model [9].
 In Ontario, the median waiting time for total hip and knee
joint replacements was more than 6 months, longer than
clinically appropriate. To inform decisions to reduce waiting
times and improve waiting list management, the team devel-
oped a DES model of the Ontario total joint replacement
system to evaluate the effects of four management strategies
on waiting times: 1) reductions in surgical demand, 2) formal
clinical prioritization, 3) waiting time guarantees, and
4) common waiting list management. Using the DES model,
they concluded that if the number of surgeries provided
(supply) increased by less than 10% per year, demand would
need to be reduced by at least 15% to reduce waiting times to
clinically acceptable levels within 10 years. Clinical prioritiza-
tion was found to improve the number of patients receiving
surgery in severity-specific wait periods. Implementing gen-
eral wait time guarantees, however, would only shuffle wait
times among patients [68].
 GE Healthcare has applied ABM, combining demographic,
economics, and epidemiological data, to support resource
allocation decisions about the optimal delivery of care [30].
For example, in India, two government censuses and a socio-
economic survey were integrated and used to simulate the
expansion of India’s health care infrastructure.
Initially, the simulations had been limited to cardiovascular
disease diagnosis and treatment within the state of Andhra
Pradesh. Cardiovascular disease is an increasing health issue
in India and a priority for the Indian Ministry of Health, with
2.58 million Indians predicted to die from the disease each
year by 2020. Data visualization methods were used to detail
the highest concentration of disease, which could then be
overlapped over the existing or potential future health care
infrastructure. Such visualizations allow health care scenar-
ios over time to be compared, allowing for better future
planning. In the future, the model will be expanded to cover
other disease areas and adapted for use in other markets
outside India.
 The Alberta Health Services Bone and Joint Strategic Clinical
Network was seeking a sustainable solution to balancing
access, effectiveness, and efficiency in delivering health serv-
ices to patients with OA across the continuum of care.
A system dynamics model was used to inform systemwide
Table 2 – Examples of problems addressed with
dynamic simulation modeling methods to evaluate
complex health care delivery interventions.
System
level
Types of
problems
Problem example
Strategic
level
Policy Informing regional or national
policy regarding the
implementation of a
centralized intake system for
referral to an appropriate
provider for assessment and
specialist consultation, if
needed, for patients with
musculoskeletal pain
Tactical
level
Management Wait time management for
referral for a specific service,
e.g., consultation with
orthopedic surgeon or
rheumatologist
Operational
level
Logistics Scheduling surgical dates for
joint replacement in the
operating room
Evaluating the introduction of
a new service using tissue
engineered and
biodegradable gels for repair
of small cartilage defects
with respect to the change in
required health care facilities
and hospital services
Evaluating the change in
hospital services due to a
delay in total joint
replacement in cases of
severe osteoarthritis
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 6 11
planning for OA of the hip and knee [69,70]. This model
contained a complex set of interactions among system com-
ponents including initial OA diagnosis and care, specialist
assessment, medical management, surgical management,
and postsurgery rehabilitation characterized by various feed-
back loops. Other important variables included funding levels
and the supply of orthopedic surgeons.
Comparison and Contrast of Key Simulation Modeling
Methods (SD, DES, ABM) with Other Modeling Methods
(e.g., Optimization and Markov Models)—Differences and
Complementarities
There are a large variety of simulation models, some of which
share similar capabilities. The International Society of Pharma-
coeconomics and Outcomes Research and the Society for Medical
Decision Making published seven ISPOR-Society for Medical
Decision Making Modeling Good Research Practices Task Force
reports providing guidance on state-transition models, such as
Markov models [71–77]. Methods focused on in this report (SD,
DES, and ABM) were selected on the basis of their suitability to
address problems in health care delivery systems and ability to
simulate dynamically the interactions between operations, struc-
tures, and relationships in the health care system (Table 3).
Simulation models in the sense that we are discussing here
(dynamic simulation) are distinguished by their explicit represen-
tation of system states and the mechanisms of their evolution
over time. Such states might, for example, include the health
status and risk behaviors of population members, cumulative
societal cost, and QALYs. In contrast to the situation for analytic
models—in which the trajectories associated with system evolu-
tion are specified as an explicit function of time—for simulation
models, this evolution is implicitly characterized by specification
of the rules governing that system evolution. Such rules aspire to
characterize the posited “physics” of the system, describing causal
drivers hypothesized to characterize “how the system works.”
The resulting simulation models—like the systems that they
characterize—are often nonlinear in character, a feature with
several implications. First, the nonlinearity of the models and
systems characterized implies that understanding the behavior
of the system to a portfolio of interventions requires simulating
those interventions together, so as to capture situations in which
such interventions work synergistically and compete with one
another. In contrast to Markov models, which are commonly
used to characterize the evolution of isolated cohorts, nonlinear-
ity in simulation models generally implies that individuals or
cohorts cannot be simulated as solitudes, but must instead be
simulated in a population context.
Second, the nonlinearity leads such models to exhibit emer-
gence, in which the behavior of the whole can be very distinct
from—and cannot be reduced to—that of its parts. Such emergent
behavior is often surprising and counterintuitive and often differs
strikingly across temporal and spatial scales. Third, although
Markov models and linear systems models can be solved to
provide a “closed-form” (analytic) description of the system’s
evolution a priori, to understand simulation models, analytic
solutions are in general not possible, and to derive dynamics of
the system requires executing the rules governing the system
over time in a mechanistic fashion accounting for the dynamics
in the system.
Individual-based simulation modeling—modeling formu-
lated at the level of individual agents or actors—is associated
with two major traditions: 1) microsimulation, originating in
economics and emphasizing evolution based on empirically
grounded, statistical relationships, and 2) ABM, originating in
computer science and traditionally depending on algorithmic
and rule-based formulations in richer, dynamic, environments.
Although their origins, emphases, and preferred patterns of
practice differ, these methods overlap in content and underlying
concepts, and we consider them here together. In accordance
with growing practice, we refer to both below as “agent-based
models.”
There are many other types of related simulation modeling
methods. Reflecting the important role networks have come to
play in many ABMs, we further consider aspects of dynamic
social network analysis as specializations of ABMs. Similarly, we
consider diverse compartmental modeling techniques such as
those prevalent in mathematical epidemiology since its inception
in the 1920s under the rubric of system dynamics. Furthermore,
simulation models can be used to evaluate and optimize a health
care intervention given constrained resources. For example,
optimization models can consider the demand for imaging in
the context of the limited availability of imaging capacity and
scanning time to optimize the use of imaging services. Likewise,
these modeling studies can be applied to improve scheduling and
hence, to minimize waiting time for patients [78].
The SIMULATE Checklist
The SIMULATE checklist developed by this task force guides
researchers in determining whether dynamic simulation model-
ing is appropriate to address the problem. The checklist identifies
eight elements that characterize simulation modeling methods
and differentiate them from other modeling approaches such as
Markov models and decision trees.
Table 3 – Comparison between dynamic simulation models and other types of models.
Criteria Dynamic simulation models Markov models Analytic models
Mode of
description
Implicitly (via rules or state
equations)
Implicitly (via transition
matrices)
Closed-form expressions
Indexing Time and space Time Varies
Linearity Generally nonlinear Linear Generally derivable only for linear
systems
Solution
procedure
Simulation Closed-form solution or
simulation
Direct evaluation
Population
character
Generally open population Cohorts Varies
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 612
SIMULATE Does your problem require:
System Modeling multiple events, relationships,
and stakeholders representing health
care delivery processes?
Interactions Including nonlinear or spatial
relationships among stakeholders
and their context that influence
behaviors and make outcomes in the
system difficult to anticipate?
Multilevel Modeling a health care delivery
problem from strategic, tactical, or
operational perspectives?
Understanding Modeling a complex problem to improve
patient-centered care that cannot be
solved analytically?
Loops Modeling feedback loops that change the
behavior of future interactions and the
consequences for the delivery system?
Agents Modeling multiple stakeholders with
behavioral properties that interact and
change the performance of the
system?
Time Time-dependent and dynamic transitions
in a health care delivery system,
either between or within health care
system levels or in health status
change?
Emergence Considering the intended and unintended
consequences of health system
interventions to address policy
resistance and achieve target
outcomes?
Applied Example of the SIMULATE Checklist
Now we provide an example of a problem with key characteristics
that warrant the use of dynamic simulation modeling methods to
illustrate the use of the SIMULATE checklist. We continue with the
example of OA care delivery that was introduced earlier: seeking a
sustainable solution to delivering health care services to patients
with OA while balancing access (i.e., delivering care at the right
time to address the problem of long waiting times to see care
providers), effectiveness (i.e., delivering the right care to address
the problem of inappropriate services), as well as efficiency and
cost-effective care (i.e., address the problem of increasing costs
and constrained health care resources). This problem can be
studied using dynamic simulation modeling methods. The more
elements of the SIMULATE checklist that are indicated, the more
likely that dynamic simulation modeling is required or will be a
more efficient approach to inform the problem.
System
The decision problem in the checklist includes the entire health
care delivery system. This includes different health care entities
and patients moving through the system. For example, in OA care
delivery, events and relationships to be modeled include elements
throughout the care continuum: primary care visits for joint pain
and disability, referral from primary care to specialist care, and in
cases of end-stage disease, joint replacement performed by an
orthopedic surgeon followed by subacute care (i.e., postsurgical
care such as homecare). Stakeholders involved include patients,
family doctors, orthopedic surgeons, and allied health providers.
Interactions
Patient characteristics and behaviors, such as obesity, socio-
economic status, and comorbidities combined with medication
adherence and diet and exercise behaviors, may have a nonlinear
relationship with their OA progression and their associated
health care expenditures. As a result, the aggregate implications
of patient characteristics and health behaviors for the health care
system are difficult to anticipate. Similarly, the patient’s geo-
graphic location (i.e., spatial relationships) may have strong
influences on access to services for the patient with OA (e.g.,
orthopedic surgeon visit).
Multilevel
The management and treatment of OA is important at several
levels of the health care system. At an operational level, patients’
behaviors have an impact on their disease progression, as does
their interaction with the health care system itself (their family
doctor, allied health providers, local emergency room, etc.).
Accumulating the experience of many patients can help to
inform the development of decision rules to maximize the
effectiveness and efficiency of care provided subject to the
characteristics of a particular patient’s case, spatial proximity to
different types of health care providers, and so forth. This is the
tactical level. Finally, at a strategic level, attempts to maximize
the cost-effectiveness of OA care must account for patient
characteristics, nonlinearity of health care expenditures, and
interactions with health care providers. The data must be
accumulated over the entire population with OA served by the
health care system now and in the future to evaluate policies and
plan for health services that are effective, efficient, and sustain-
able over the long term.
Understanding
The complexity of systems characterized by nonlinearities, inter-
actions among system components, and behaviors and charac-
teristics of agents (e.g., patients and doctors) makes it very
difficult to anticipate outcomes associated with particular
changes to the system such as the changes in OA incidence
due to changes in obesity in the population, or the demographic
and epidemiological shift of OA from the younger population to
an older one. Traditional modeling approaches such as Markov
models, decision trees, and multivariate methods can be helpful
in understanding pieces of a system but are not generally
adequate to understand outcomes at a system level because they
cannot be solved analytically.
Loops
Systems of OA care have integrated loops that may feed forward
or feed backward. For instance, presurgical care and modification
of certain behaviors (i.e., exercise and diet) in patients who have
been deemed surgical could lead to improvement in function-
ality, mobility, and reduced pain, which may, in turn, delay the
need for surgery and associated heath care utilization such as
rehospitalizations.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 6 13
The system may also integrate feedback loops, which actually
implies that the system learns or adapts from experiences or
from new policy interventions. For instance, physicians may
change their referral patterns as new care paths are designed
and tested within the system. Or, as waiting lists grow or lessen,
the criteria for selecting patients as appropriate candidates for
surgery may tighten or relax in response to a fixed surgical
operating room capacity in the system.
Agents
Patients, doctors, and informal care providers are all examples
of agents who interact with one another and other components
of the health care system. Patients’ behavior at any time is
influenced by the consequences of their experiences in pre-
vious periods, their expectations for the future, and their
interactions with their physician, the rehabilitation therapist,
and the informal care provider who helps them maintain their
independence when they return home. Similarly, the treat-
ment choices of physicians are influenced by the outcomes of
their previous patients, availability of alternative treatment
options, expansion of evidence in the literature, and many
other factors. Each of these behavioral responses is, in itself,
complex, but their interaction makes it virtually impossible to
anticipate outcomes without the use of dynamic simulation
methods.
Time
Time is an inherent component of any health care system.
A model of care for OA with specific waiting time benchmark
performance targets can be implemented and temporarily
decrease waiting times for joint replacement. Population charac-
teristics and behaviors, however, change over time and as a
consequence, the new model of care may no longer achieve the
performance targets. Considering these dynamic changes is
relevant to the management and design of a model of care for
OA that allows for adaptation to new conditions in the popula-
tion and the care delivery system and responds accordingly.
Emergence
Nonlinearities and interactions among agents over time and
space can lead to such complexity that it is possible to under-
stand the performance of the system only through dynamic
simulation. Emergent behaviors can range from valuable inno-
vations to unfortunate events. Policy resistance is related to
emergence. Because of the complexity of the system, a particular
policy intervention may fail because policymakers do not fully
understand its mechanisms and cannot anticipate certain con-
sequences or effects that may emerge. For instance, in an effort
to encourage physical activity in the younger generations to
reduce the risk of OA, sport-related injuries may increase, leading
to an increase in the incidence of OA in a younger population as
they age over time.
Summary and Conclusions
The translation of evidence into policy and clinical care through
implementation in the health care system are core issues facing
health care delivery system transformation around the world.
Evidence-based practices can be implemented through simula-
tion modeling to redesign health care delivery systems and
improve patient outcomes and health system performance [6].
Traditional HTA and modeling methods are often of limited
usefulness when applied to health systems. The hierarchical
relationship between the health system, providers, and the
patients manifests a level of complexity that can be captured
using dynamic simulation modeling methods.
Although dynamic simulation modeling methods are widely
used in industrial and business operations to study processes and
improve effectiveness and efficiency, they are still relatively new
in health applications [42]. Recently, there has been a notable
growth in studies applying simulation modeling methods in
health sciences research and health systems management [64].
The feasibility and relevance of these methods to inform health
care delivery system planning and decision making for improving
system efficiency have been demonstrated [63].
In this report, we provided an overview of dynamic simulation
modeling methods and examples of health care system problems
for which such methods could be useful. We differentiate
dynamic simulation modeling methods from other types of
modeling approaches used typically in HTA applications. The
SIMULATE checklist can be used to assist in determining whether
dynamic simulation modeling methods are an appropriate mod-
eling approach to address the specific health care delivery
problems of interest. Key characteristics that necessitate simu-
lation modeling or that take a more efficient approach to under-
stand the system and inform decision making include a complex
problem with nonlinear and/or spatial relationships among
stakeholders in the context of a system characterized by emer-
gent behavior.
In a subsequent report, we will describe each of the three
dynamic simulation modeling methods (SD, DES, and ABMs) and
present good research practice guidelines to support the appli-
cation of dynamic simulation modeling methods in health care
delivery.
Acknowledgments
We thank the following reviewers for valuable written feedback
on earlier drafts of this report: Brian Denton, Beth Devine, Chris
Jones, Jonathan Karnon, Nishkarsh Likhar, Andriy Moshyk, David
C. Norris, Martin O’Leary, Luke Rudmik, and Amir Viyanchi. We
also very much appreciate the comments, expertise, and insight
of those who provided oral comments during presentations of
our work to date. ISPOR member comments contribute to the
high-quality consensus nature that characterizes ISPOR Good
Practices for Outcomes Research reports. Finally, the steady and
capable support of our ISPOR staff liaison, Elizabeth Molsen, is
genuinely appreciated.
Source of financial support: The authors have no other
financial relationships to disclose.
R E F E R E N C E S
[1] Glouberman S, Zimmerman B. Complicated and Complex Systems:
What Would Successful Reform of Medicare Look Like. Discussion
paper number 8. Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada,
2002.
[2] Zimmerman B, Lindberg C, Plsek PE. A complexity science primer. In:
Zimmerman B, Lindberg C, Plsek PE, eds. Edgeware, Insights from
Complexity Science for Health Care Leaders. Irving: VHA, Inc, 2001.
[3] Ackoff RL. OR: After the post mortem. System Dyn Rev 2001;17:
341–6.
[4] Padula WV, Breteler MJM. Sharing perspectives on HTA from both sides
of the pond— lessons learned by graduate students at ISPOR’s 15th
Annual European Congress. ISPOR CONNECTIONS 2013;19:15.
[5] Berwick DM. A user’s manual for the IOM’s ‘Quality Chasm’ report.
Health Aff (Millwood) 2002;21:80–90.
[6] Berwick DM. What ‘patient-centered’ should mean: confessions of an
extremist. Health Aff (Millwood) 2009;28:w555–65.
[7] Kravitz RL, Duan N, Braslow J. Evidence-based medicine, heterogeneity
of treatment effects, and the trouble with averages. Milbank Q
2004;82:661–87.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 614
[8] Berwick DM. The science of improvement. JAMA 2008;299:1182–4.
[9] Milstein B, Homer J, Hirsch G. Analyzing national health reform
strategies with a dynamic simulation model. Am J Public Health
2010;100:811–9.
[10] Homer JB, Hirsch GB. System dynamics modeling for public health:
background and opportunities. Am J Public Health 2006;96:452–8.
[11] Seila AF, Brailsford S. Opportunities and challenges in health care
simulation. In: Alexopoulos C, Goldsman D, Wilson JR, eds. Advancing
the Frontiers of Simulation. New York, NY: Springer, 2009.
[12] Liu P, Wu S. An agent-based simulation model to study accountable care
organizations. Health Care Manag Sci 2014 Apr 9. [Epub ahead of print].
[13] Crane GJ, Kymes SM, Hiller JE, et al. Accounting for costs, QALYs, and
capacity constraints: using discrete-event simulation to evaluate
alternative service delivery and organizational scenarios for hospital-
based glaucoma services. Med Decis Making 2013;33:986–97.
[14] Medical Research Council. A Framework for the Development and
Evaluation of RCTs for Complex Interventions to Improve Health.
London: Medical Research Council, 2000.
[15] Padula WV, Duffy MP, Yilmaz T, Mishra MK. Integrating systems
engineering practice with health-care delivery. Health Systems
2014;3:159–64.
[16] Plsek PE, Greenhalgh T. The challenge of complexity in health care. BMJ
2001;323:625–8.
[17] Goldstein J. Emergence as a construct: history and issues. Emergence
1999;11:49–72.
[18] Harrison JR, Lin Z, Carroll GR, Carley KM. Simulation modeling in
organizational and management research. Acad Manag Rev
2007;32:1229–45.
[19] Banks J. Handbook of Simulation. Wiley Online Library, 1998.
[20] Sokolowski JA, Banks CM. Principles of Modeling and Simulation:
A Multidisciplinary Approach. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[21] Forrester J. System dynamics—a personal view of the first fifty years.
Syst Dyn Rev 2007;23:345–58.
[22] Forrester J. Industrial Dynamics. Cambridge, MA: The M.I.T. Press, 1961.
[23] Siebers PO, Macal CM, Garnett J, et al. Discrete-event simulation is
dead, long live agent-based simulation! J Simul 2010;4:204–10.
[24] Hollocks B. Forty years of discrete-event simulation—a personal
reflection. J Oper Res Soc 2006;57:1383–99.
[25] Karnon J, Stahl J, Brennan A, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force. Modeling using discrete event
simulation: a report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research
Practices Task Force-4. Value Health 2012;15:701–11.
[26] Gunal MM. A guide for building hospital simulation models. Health
Systems 2012;1:17–25.
[27] Schelling TC. Dynamic models of segregation. J Math Sociol
1971;1:143–86.
[28] Borshchev A, Filippov A. From system dynamics and discrete event to
practical agent-based modeling: reasons, techniques, tools. Presented
at: 22nd International Conference of the System Dynamics Society.
Oxford, England, 2004.
[29] IPLER. Information Products Lab for Emergency Response (IPLER). 2008.
Available from: http://ipler.cis.rit.edu/node/1?_sm_au_=iVV0HQk2ZV57
r4kR. [Accessed January 10, 2014].
[30] Kruzikas DT, Higashi MK, Edgar M et al. Using agent-based modeling to
inform regional health care system investment and planning. In:
International Conference on Computational Science and
Computational Intelligence (CSCI) (Volume 2). March 10-13, 2014,
Las Vegas, NV.
[31] Sobolev B, Harel D, Vasilakis C, Levy A. Using the Statecharts paradigm
for simulation of patient flow in surgical care. Health Care Manag Sci
2008;11:79–86.
[32] Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, health, and
cost. Health Aff (Millwood) 2008;27:759–69.
[33] Selby JV, Beal AC, Frank L. The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research
Institute (PCORI) national priorities for research and initial research
agenda. JAMA 2012;307:1583–4.
[34] Gawande A. The Checklist Manifesto—How to Get Things Right. New
York: Metropolitan Books, 2009.
[35] Pronovost PJ, Vohr E. Safe Patients, Smart Hospitals: How One Doctor’s
Checklist Can Help Us Change Health Care from the Inside Out. New
York: Penguin, 2010.
[36] Bewtra M, Kilambi V, Fairchild AO, et al. Patient preferences for surgical
versus medical therapy for ulcerative colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis
2014;20:103–14.
[37] Mohamed AF, Zhang J, Johnson FR, et al. Avoidance of weight gain is
important for oral type 2 diabetes treatments in Sweden and Germany:
patient preferences. Diabetes Metab 2013;39:397–403.
[38] Schneider A, Kanagarajan N, Anjelly D, et al. Importance of gender,
socioeconomic status, and history of abuse on patient preference for
endoscopist. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:340–8.
[39] Garber S, Gates SM, Keeler EB, et al. Redirecting Innovation in U.S.
Health Care: Options to Decrease Spending and Increase Value. RAND
Corporation, 2014.
[40] Sterman JD. Learning from evidence in a complex world. Am J Public
Health 2006;96:505–14.
[41] Brownson RC, Fielding JE, Maylahn CM. Evidence-based public health:
a fundamental concept for public health practice. Ann Rev Pub Health
2009;30:175–201.
[42] Sterman JD. Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a
Complex World. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.
[43] Pasupathy KS. Transforming healthcare: Leveraging the
complementarities of health informatics and systems engineering. Int J
Healthc Delivery Reform Initiatives 2010;2:35–55.
[44] Brown GD, Patrick TB, Pasupathy KS. Health Informatics: A Systems
Perspective. Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press, 2013.
[45] Richmond B. Systems thinking: critical thinking skills for the 1990s and
beyond. Syst Dyn Rev 1993;9:113–33.
[46] Scholtes P, Joiner B, Streibel B. The Team Handbook. (3rd ed.). Madison,
WI: Oriel, Inc, 2013.
[47] Vennix JAM. Group model-building: tackling messy problems. Syst Dyn
Rev 1999;15:379–401.
[48] Axelrod R. Advancing the art of simulation in the social sciences. In:
Conte R, Hegselmann R, Terna P, eds. Simulating Social Phenomena.
Berlin: Springer, 1997.
[49] Bungard TJ, Smigorowsky MJ, Lalonde LD, et al. Cardiac EASE (Ensuring
Access and Speedy Evaluation)—the impact of a single-point-of-entry
multidisciplinary outpatient cardiology consultation program on wait
times in Canada. Can J Cardiol 2012;25:697–702.
[50] Cattani K, Schmidt GM. The pooling principle. INFORMS Trans Educ
2005;5:17–24.
[51] Vasilakis C, Sobolev BG, Kuramoto L, Levy LR. A simulation study of
scheduling clinic appointments in surgical care: individual surgeon
versus pooled lists. J Oper Res Soc 2006;58:202–11.
[52] The International Network of Agencies for Health Technology
Assessment. What is health technology assessment (HTA)? 2014.
Available from: http://www.inahta.org/. [Accessed November 27,
2014].
[53] Gantner-Bär M, Djanatliev A, Prokosch HU, Sedlmayr M. Conceptual
modeling for prospective health technology assessment. Stud Health
Technol Inform 2012;180:33–7.
[54] Ansah JP, Eberlein RL, Love SR, et al. Implications of long-term care
capacity response policies for an aging population: a simulation
analysis. Health Policy 2014;116:105–13.
[55] Stahl JE. Modelling methods for pharmacoeconomics and health
technology assessment: an overview and guide. Pharmacoeconomics
2008;26:131–48.
[56] Caro J. Pharmacoeconomic analyses using discrete event simulation.
Pharmacoeconomics 2005;23:323–32.
[57] Pombo-Romero J, Varela LM, Ricoy CJ. Diffusion of innovations in social
interaction systems: an agent-based model for the introduction of new
drugs in markets. Eur J Health Econ 2013;14:443–55.
[58] Sabounchi NS, Hovmand PS, Osgood ND, et al. A novel system
dynamics model of female obesity and fertility. Am J Public Health
2014;104:1240–6.
[59] Barabasi AL. Network medicine—from obesity to the “diseasome”.
N Engl J Med 2007;357:404–7.
[60] Davis GS, Sevdalis N, Drumright LN. Spatial and temporal analyses to
investigate infectious disease transmission within healthcare settings.
J Hosp Infect 2014;86:227–43.
[61] Hulshof PJ, Boucherie RJ, Hans EW, Hurink JL. Tactical resource
allocation and elective patient admission planning in care processes.
Health Care Manag Sci 2013;16:152–66.
[62] Troy PM, Rosenberg L. Using simulation to determine the need for ICU
beds for surgery patients. Surgery 2009;146:608–17.
[63] Brailsford SC, Harper PR, Patel B, Pitt M. An analysis of the academic
literature on simulation and modelling in health care. J Simul
2009;3:130–40.
[64] Katsaliaki K, Mustafee N. Applications of simulation within the
healthcare context. J Oper Res Soc 2011;62:1431–51.
[65] Marmor YN, Rohleder TR, Cook DJ, et al. Recovery bed planning in
cardiovascular surgery: a simulation case study. Health Care Manag Sci
2013;16:314–27.
[66] Kuchera D, Rohleder TR. Optimizing the patient transport function at
Mayo Clinic. Qual Manag Health Care 2011;20:334–42.
[67] Milstein B, Homer J, Briss P, et al. Why behavioral and environmental
interventions are needed to improve health at lower cost. Health Aff
(Millwood) 2011;30:823–32.
[68] Cipriano LE, Chesworth BM, Anderson CK, Zaric GS. An evaluation of
strategies to reduce waiting times for total joint replacement in
Ontario. Med Care 2008;46:1177–83.
[69] Marshall DA, Rogers P, Rohleder T, Vanderby S. System dynamics
modeling: A decision support tool to improve care for hip and knee
osteoarthritis. Inst Health Econ 2010;1–44.
[70] Vanderby S, 2 more authors, et al. Modeling the complete continuum of
care using system dynamics: the case of osteoarthritis in Alberta.
J Simul 2014. In press.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 6 15
[71] Caro JJ, Briggs AH, Siebert U, Kuntz KM. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling
Good Research Practices Task Force. Modeling good research
practices—overview: a report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force-1. Med Decis Making 2012;32:
667–77.
[72] Pitman R, Fisman D, Zaric GS, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force. Dynamic transmission modeling: a
report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research Practices Task
Force Working Group-5. Med Decis Making 2012;32:712–21.
[73] Siebert U, Alagoz O, Bayoumi AM, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force. State-transition modeling: a report of
the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research Practices Task Force-3.
Value Health 2012;15:812–20.
[74] Karnon J, Stahl J, Brennan A, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force. Modeling using discrete event
simulation: a report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research
Practices Task Force-4. Value Health 2012;15:821–7.
[75] Briggs AH, Weinstein MC, Fenwick EA, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling
Good Research Practices Task Force. Model parameter estimation and
uncertainty analysis: a report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force Working Group-6. Med Decis Making
2012;32:722–32.
[76] Eddy DM, Hollingworth W, Caro JJ, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling
Good Research Practices Task Force. Model transparency and
validation: a report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force-7. Med Decis Making 2012;32:
733–43.
[77] Roberts M, Russell LB, Paltiel AD, et al. ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good
Research Practices Task Force. Conceptualizing a model: a report of the
ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research Practices Task Force-2. Med
Decis Making 2012;32:678–89.
[78] Vanberkel PT, Boucherie RJ, Hans EW, et al. Accounting for inpatient
wards when developing master surgical schedules. Anesth Analg
2011;112:1472–9.
V A L U E I N H E A L T H 1 8 ( 2 0 1 5 ) 5 – 1 616

