Six emerging trends in  
media and communications
Occasional paper
NOVEMBER 2014
 
 
 
Canberra 
Red Building  
Benjamin Offices 
Chan Street  
Belconnen ACT 
 
PO Box 78 
Belconnen ACT 2616 
 
 
T  +61 2 6219 5555 
F  +61 2 6219 5353 
Melbourne 
Level 32  
Melbourne Central Tower 
360 Elizabeth Street 
Melbourne VIC 
 
PO Box 13112 
Law Courts  
Melbourne VIC 8010 
 
T  +61 3 9963 6800 
F  +61 3 9963 6899 
Sydney 
Level 5  
The Bay Centre 
65 Pirrama Road  
Pyrmont NSW 
 
PO Box Q500 
Queen Victoria Building  
NSW 1230 
 
T  +61 2 9334 7700  
    1800 226 667 
F  +61 2 9334 7799 
  
 
Copyright notice 
 
 
 
 
 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/au/ 
 
With the exception of coats of arms, logos, emblems, images, other third-party material or devices protected by a trademark, this 
content is licensed under the Creative Commons Australia Attribution 3.0 Licence.  
 
We request attribution as: © Commonwealth of Australia (Australian Communications and Media Authority) 2014. 
 
All other rights are reserved.   
 
The Australian Communications and Media Authority has undertaken reasonable enquiries to identify material owned by third parties and secure permission 
for its reproduction. Permission may need to be obtained from third parties to re-use their material.  
 
Written enquiries may be sent to: 
Manager, Editorial and Design 
PO Box 13112 
Law Courts 
Melbourne VIC 8010 
Tel: 03 9963 6968 
Email: candinfo@acma.gov.au 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
  
     |   iii 
 
Introduction 1 
Communication goes OTT 6 
Consumers build their own communications links 10 
Wearable devices—personalised data arrives 15 
‘Flexible’ TV—online expands viewer options 19 
Multi-screening is mainstream 25 
TV is still the main news source, even as platforms shift 30 
 
 
 
 
  
      |   1 
 
Introduction  
The ACMA monitors industry and consumer data to identify changes in the media and 
communications environment and their impact on regulatory settings. Previous ACMA 
research, such as Broken concepts1 and the Emerging issues2 series of papers, has 
identified areas of regulatory strain resulting from changes in this environment. The 
ACMA’s 2014 data collection program highlighted six further trends that are of 
particular interest as they indicate challenges to the regulatory frameworks within 
which the ACMA works. These trends illustrate how developments in communications 
device technologies and over-the-top (OTT) services and content offer both: 
 new opportunities for businesses and individuals as consumers and citizens 
 potential challenges to confident and optimal use of these new services.  
The evolving media and communications environment offers new ways to understand 
and achieve policy objectives, and may expose alternatives to ’black-letter’ regulation.  
 
However, changes in media and communications can also strain the effectiveness and 
efficiency of existing regulatory settings designed in an environment where content 
and communication services have been delivered by network owners over dedicated 
networks and devices. The selected trends highlight that consumers are increasingly 
using personalised access pathways to communications and content services that cut 
across different networks, devices and services. This paper looks at the implications of 
these six trends for existing regulatory settings.  
 
Trends overview 
A short overview of each of the six trends is provided below: 
 
Communications goes over-the-top (OTT) 
Trend data in this paper confirms that consumers are increasingly using OTT services. 
Globally, the volume of OTT mobile messages sent has overtaken SMS traffic, while 
the number of Australian home VoIP users has grown to nearly half the number of 
fixed-line phone services. Historically, telecommunications regulation has covered 
voice communications delivered over the copper network, but this now represents a 
declining set of communications services. These developments in OTT voice services 
suggest that it is timely to look again at how existing regulation might align with 
emerging OTT consumer behaviour. While incremental regulatory changes can often 
address individual problems, it also increases the risk of creating a fragmented rather 
than a coherent regulatory framework. 
 
Consumers build their own communications links 
Another feature of the expanding take-up of OTT services is consumers using the 
communications ‘building blocks’ at network, service and device levels to construct 
their own communication access pathways. Consumers can often choose a different 
option if one service is not working, effectively building additional redundancy and 
robustness through self-management of their communications network and service 
access. These decentralised modes of connection mean regulation may need to 
address public interest outcomes such as end-to-end connectivity and universal 
service in new ways.  
                                                     
1 ACMA, Broken concepts—a 2013 update on the Australian communications legislative landscape, 
October 2013. 
2 ACMA, Emerging issues in media and communications, May–June 2013. 
 
 
  
2   |      
 
For example, the traditional universal service obligation could be met by means other 
than a regulated service of last resort, in cases where the individual consumer has 
multiple pathways to achieve a network and service connection. 
 
Wearable devices—personalised data arrives 
There is a rapidly growing number of internet-accessible wearable devices that allow 
individuals to track their activities. Real-time continuous information on a range of 
personal indicators can offer numerous benefits, including improved health monitoring 
and increased productivity. Wearable devices may provide new avenues to deliver 
important consumer and market outcomes. For example, there is the potential for 
devices to automatically contact emergency services and instantaneously transmit 
detailed health and situational information. There is a concurrent growing interest in 
privacy and security management as increasing amounts of personal data are 
generated by these devices. 
 
‘Flexible’ TV—online expands viewer options 
Flexible TV refers to the expanding range of service options for viewers to access 
content from free-to-air television, subscription television, catch-up television or online 
video. While broadcast television viewing retains its hold on Australian audiences, 
OTT video content is now a commonly used complementary platform, with 50 per cent 
of online Australians having watched some form of internet television within a six-
month period. This trend data further confirms the observations first contained in the 
ACMA’s 2010 Broken concepts paper—that the same content, delivered by the same 
content producer, is regulated differently depending on the distribution platform used. 
This inconsistency is expected to become even more pronounced as the availability 
and take-up of online video services increases in Australia. 
 
Multi-screening is mainstream 
The television screen remains key to the Australian household entertainment 
experience. Increasingly, viewers are using second (and even third) screens when 
they watch television. Two opposing effects are apparent from Australians changing 
screen behavior. For some audiences, there is a deeper connection with the television 
content; for other audiences, attention is split. The emergence of second-screen 
behaviour has potential implications for the regulatory concept of influence and for 
content-related industry obligations. For example, as second-screen content becomes 
mainstream, and audiences view it as a core part of their entertainment experience, 
they may transfer the expectations they have of broadcast television to the second 
screen. Conversely, the experience of second- and third-screen viewing may affect 
expectations about the content experience on the television screen. These 
developments were not envisaged within the current regulatory framework and there 
may be a variety of pressures to recognise changing and diverse community 
expectations of content protections within existing regulation. 
 
TV is still the main news source, even as platforms shift 
Broadcast television remains the main source of news, including for Australians 
accessing news online. Nonetheless, as part of the regulation of media diversity, 
citizens’ consumption of a more interactive and dispersed set of news sources is 
important to the way that regulators measure and assess the influence of news and 
the diversity of media voices. How the changing environment for the production, 
supply and consumption of news may be affecting media diversity is highly 
contestable. Nevertheless, the accurate measurement of online news, and content 
consumption more generally, is undergoing considerable innovation and is the subject 
of discussion between industry and regulators internationally. 
 
 
 
  
      |   3 
 
Some observations on existing regulation 
This paper primarily focuses on consumer behaviour data to identify trends in the 
media and communications environment. In turn, these trends may have some 
implications for changing industry structures and business models that also raise 
regulatory issues (although such structures and models are not the primary focus 
here). This paper provides some observations on the implications of these consumer 
and audience trends for existing regulation. However, it is not intended to be 
comprehensive. 
 
By way of background, in the current communications and media environment, there 
are two broad service constructs in use. The first is service-specific networks and 
devices that have delivered voice, data and audiovisual communications and content. 
At their most straightforward, dedicated service networks connect end users to specific 
devices used to deliver different forms of communications and content (see Figure 1).   
 
The second construct is internet protocol (IP) network architecture that underpins the 
provision of OTT services and content.3 IP network architecture can be understood in 
terms of defined network and service layers broadly comprising infrastructure, 
digital/IP transport, applications/services and content layers. While the network-
layered architecture provides a useful conceptual model, in practice these layers are 
blurring through software-defined networks and infrastructure-like content and 
services. The increasingly virtualised nature of these layers means that there may not 
be a physical or, for regulatory purposes, a conceptual delineation that can be made 
between each layer.4 Infrastructure functions can be software-defined and the content 
layer can provide connections of services that are ‘infrastructure-like’.    
 
This paper looks at Australians’ changing communications and content use across 
these two broad service constructs. 
 
                                                     
3 There are other network models identifying different numbers of layers. For example, the OSI Reference 
Model defines seven network layers. See What is OSI Model and the Overall Explanation of ISO 7 Layers, 
27 March 2013. 
4 Refer to ACMA, Broken concepts, October 2013, pp. 1–4 for a more detailed discussion of this subject. 
 
 
  
4   |      
 
Figure 1 Convergence in networks and services layers 
 
Source: ACMA, Broken concepts, October 2013, p. 2. 
 
The ACMA has also drawn on its Broken concepts analysis of regulatory concepts to 
inform the following discussion about some of the regulatory implications arising from 
consumer and audience involvement in the changing communications and media 
environment. This earlier analysis offers a useful basis for assessing the utility of 
existing regulation in the context of communications and media developments; in 
particular, whether any of these developments contribute to: 
1. A misalignment of policy and legislative constructs with market, behavioural and 
technological realities.  
2. Gaps in the existing framework’s coverage of new forms of content and 
applications.  
3. Misplaced emphasis in the legislative framework or underlying policy that skews 
the burden of regulatory activity and attention towards traditional media or 
communications activity.  
4. Blurring of boundaries between historically distinct devices, services and industry 
sectors leading to inconsistent treatment of like content, devices or services.  
5. Mainstreaming of innovations with associated changes in community expectations.  
6. Piecemeal responses to new issues. Communications and media legislation has 
been incrementally amended and supplemented to address the rapid change 
occurring in the communications sector over the past two decades. The 
cumulative impact of these changes can reduce the overall coherence of the 
regulatory scheme.  
7. Institutional ambiguity as a consequence of sectoral convergence such that 
several regulators—or no regulators—have a clear mandate to address pressing 
market or consumer concerns.  
The relevance of identified trends in this paper is discussed in terms of these seven 
regulatory consequences. In many cases, trend data further confirms areas of 
regulatory pressure identified in the Broken concepts papers.  
 
 
  
      |   5 
 
Each of these consequences is represented in at least one of the trends. In practice, 
each development has multiple consequences for existing regulatory settings. For 
example, while almost all the issues examined in this paper illustrate gaps where new 
activities are not recognised in existing regulatory concepts, simply filling those gaps 
would not necessarily be appropriate or efficient, or may not solve the specific 
regulatory problem posed. The complex and interconnected regulatory consequences 
suggest that often a multi-faceted approach is required that takes into account the 
changing environment and the changing balance of industry and consumer risks and 
harms.  
 
Purpose 
The ACMA has statutory obligations to report and advise the Minister for 
Communications, and to inform industry and the public about telecommunications, 
broadcasting and internet services.  
 
The ACMA has developed a research program to provide an evidence-informed 
approach to meeting these obligations and its decision-making. Research informs the 
development of graduated regulatory response strategies, and reviews of regulation, 
including where there are opportunities to reduce direct regulation, adopt industry  
co- and self-regulatory solutions, or remove redundant regulation, consistent with a 
better-practice regulatory focus. There is a continued focus on measuring and 
assessing the benefits of regulation, and adapting regulatory and non-regulatory 
responses to address OTT and internet-based communications and content issues. 
 
Each sector of media and communications is approaching its own tipping point, and 
each issue reflects a different balance of convergence pressures, prospects for red-
tape reduction and opportunities for broader regulatory reform. Research helps in 
identifying the scope and case for change, and the design of effective regulatory and 
non-regulatory responses.   
 
This program, researchacma, has five broad areas of interest:  
 market developments  
 media content and culture  
 social and economic participation 
 citizen and consumer safeguards  
 regulatory best practice and development.  
This occasional paper contributes to each theme of the researchacma program. 
 
 
 
  
6   |      
 
Communication 
goes OTT 
Background 
Consumers are increasingly using communications services delivered over the top 
(OTT) of the communications network. For example, OTT mobile messaging 
applications such as WhatsApp and KakaoTalk have global user bases of over 
100 million each, while VoIP services are routinely offered as a fixed home phone 
alternative.5  
 
Fixed-line network revenues decline 
In the Australian context, OTT communication services are affecting traditional fixed-
line voice revenue streams alongside fixed-mobile substitution trends. The decline in 
Australian wired telecommunications network revenue from $18.296 billion in 2008 to 
$12.045 billion in 2013 represents a 34 per cent reduction over this five-year period. In 
contrast, wireless telecommunications carriers’ revenue increased from $15.967 billion 
to $20.014 billion over the same period.6 
 
Figure 2 Declining wired telecommunications revenues in Australia 
 
IBISWorld, Wired Telecommunications Network Operation in Australia, April 2014, p. 35. 
 
This reduction in Australian wired telecommunications revenue reflects fixed-mobile 
substitution, as well as consumers moving to other means of communication, including 
VoIP, messaging applications and other services. For example, a variety of services 
enable users to avoid standard international voice call rates, such as prepaid SIM 
cards and Wi-Fi call applications. OTT VoIP and mobile messaging are two major 
examples of the move to OTT communications. 
 
                                                     
5 WhatsApp had 600 million users at August 2014. See Christian Bautista, ‘WhatsApp now has 600 million 
active users, according to its founder’, 26 August 2014. KakaoTalk reported that it had 140 million users in 
2013. See Willis Wee, ‘KakaoTalk reveals it has 140 million users, made $203 million in revenue last year’, 
19 April 2014. 
6 IBISWorld, Wireless Telecommunications Carriers in Australia, February 2014, p. 32. 
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
$
A
 m
ill
io
n
s
Trend  
1 
 
 
  
      |   7 
 
VoIP subscribers increase  
One analyst firm forecasts that by 2018, 39 per cent of total consumer OTT VoIP 
minutes in Australia will comprise minutes substituted from Australian 
telecommunications operator minutes.7 Total Australian home VoIP users increased 
from 2.1 million in June 2009 to 4.6 million in June 2013, just under half of the number 
of fixed-line home phone services in Australia. 
 
Figure 3 Take-up of VoIP by household consumers and fixed-line home phone services in 
Australia, 2009–13 
 
Source: ACMA, Communications report 2012–13. 
 
Mobile messaging overtakes SMS 
OTT mobile messaging has experienced strong growth in recent years. One analyst 
group found that, globally, OTT messages overtook the number of SMS in 2012.8 The 
monthly active users of WhatsApp grew from 400 million worldwide in December 2013 
to 600 million in August 2014, illustrating the strong growth in OTT messaging 
services.9 
 
                                                     
7 Emeka Obiodu, Ovum, Consumer OTT VoIP Forecast: 2013–18, November 2013. Note: Ovum defines 
‘consumer OTT VoIP’ as a call that originates from an OTT platform (either an application or computer-
based software). 
8 Informa, ‘OTT messaging traffic will be twice volume of P2P SMS traffic this year’, 30 April 2013. 
9 Christian Bautista, ‘WhatsApp now has 600 million active users, according to its founder’, 26 August 2014. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
M
ill
io
n
s
Fixed-line home phone VoIP users
 
 
  
8   |      
 
Figure 4 OTT messaging services overtake SMS messages (global) 
 
Source: Informa, VoIP and IP messaging: Operator strategies to combat the threat from OTT players (revised and updated), 2013 and 
BBC, ‘Chat app messaging overtakes SMS texts, Informa says’, 29 April 2013. 
 
Unlike carriage services, OTT messaging apps are not tied to a national location and 
are generally part of a global service. The major OTT messaging services include 
iMessage (Apple), Viber, Kakao Talk, WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger and Snapchat. 
None of these services is Australian-based or owned by an Australian 
telecommunications service provider.  
 
Some observations on existing regulation  
The move to OTT communications services represents a significant shift in consumer 
behaviour. The number of VoIP users is now nearly half the number of total fixed-line 
services in Australia and, on a global scale, OTT mobile messaging volumes have 
overtaken SMS. The number of Australian mobile phone users without a home fixed-
line phone (3.68 million at June 201310) continues to grow and increasingly consumers 
are using alternative communications—including substitutes to voice telephony—as 
their main source of contact. This trend is eroding the utility of technology-specific 
safeguards, as noted in the ACMA’s earlier Broken concepts analysis. 
 
In response to these developments in the market and changes in consumer use of 
services, new communications services are, where possible, being facilitated using 
existing regulatory mechanisms. One example is the 2011 variations to the Numbering 
Plan. Among other changes, this allowed VoIP providers to use geographic and 
location-independent communication services for carriage services only offering 
outgoing calls.11 While specific changes can facilitate particular services and resolve 
individual problems, incremental changes risk creating fragmented, rather than 
coherent, regulatory schemes.  
 
                                                     
10 ACMA, Communications report 2012–13, November 2013, p. 8. 
11 The Telecommunications Numbering Plan Variation 2011 (No. 1) allowed VoIP providers to use 
geographic and location-independent communication services numbers for carriage services that are only 
capable of making outgoing calls. It also provided a framework for geographic numbers to be used for 
carriage services outside their normal area. Refer to the Explanatory Memorandum for more information.  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2012 2013 2014
B
ill
io
n
s
 o
f 
m
e
s
s
a
g
e
s
 s
e
n
t 
p
e
r 
d
a
y
OTT messages sent per day
Person to person SMS messages sent per day
 
 
  
      |   9 
 
Another consequence of these developments is that the historical focus of 
telecommunications regulation—voice services delivered over the copper network—
now represents a declining set of communications services, resulting in gaps in 
regulatory coverage for OTT service users. For example, many underpinning 
telecommunications regulatory concepts such as the Standard Telephone Service 
(STS) do not readily incorporate alternative forms of communications, such as VoIP or 
messaging applications on social networking services. The Telecommunications 
(Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act 1999 defines the STS as a carriage 
service for the purpose of voice telephony that passes the connectivity test, and it is 
service- and technology-specific.12 The STS underpins a range of consumer 
safeguards, including the universal services regime and access to untimed local calls.  
 
As consumers expand their communications service options, there is a risk of both 
misalignment between regulatory settings and market realities, and of misplaced 
regulatory emphasis on services that make up a declining percentage of total 
communications activity. These OTT developments suggest it is timely to look again at 
how existing communications protections might align with emerging OTT consumer 
behaviour. Possible regulatory responses to this environment include: 
 reducing regulation or identifying alternative means of achieving policy objectives 
 removing regulation that is no longer relevant or effective 
 updating regulation to reflect environmental realities. 
                                                     
12 Refer to ACMA, Broken concepts, October 2013, pp. 61–3 for more discussion of this subject. 
 
 
  
10   |      
 
Consumers build their 
own communications 
links 
Background 
Broad take-up of OTT services gives consumers access to a variety of functions using 
multiple combinations of networks, technologies, devices and services. While 
previously consumers may have had a home phone, a broadband connection via a 
digital subscriber line (DSL) connection and a mobile phone, they can now have 
several: 
 network access options, such as fixed, mobile, Wi-Fi hotspots 
 devices for communications, such as mobiles, tablets, laptops, wearable devices 
 communication options, such as messaging apps, OTT VoIP, social networks such 
as Facebook. 
Figure 5 Diverse communications options 
 
 
 
Source: ACMA 
 
Trend  
2 
 
 
  
      |   11 
 
Another feature of this expanding take-up of OTT services is that individuals are now 
able to use these network, service and device ‘building blocks’ to construct their own 
communications links. For example, a person may use a range of methods to contact 
a friend depending on location and other environmental context. At a cafe, he or she 
may access public Wi-Fi using their mobile device and use an OTT messaging app to 
send a message to a friend. At home, that same person may access their mobile 
network using a tablet to use a social networking application for the same purpose. Or 
they may use a fixed-line telephone.  
 
Communications services themselves may detect the appropriate network based on 
the context of a situation. For example, Apple’s iMessage is a messenger service that 
will select how to send a message depending on the device used by the message 
recipient. The iMessage service automatically sends messages as an SMS to contacts 
with a non-Apple device, and sends the same message as an iMessage over the data 
network to contacts with an Apple device. Consequently, the same message sent at 
the same time to two contacts may be sent as both an SMS using the mobile network 
and an OTT message. 
 
Figure 6 Consumers have the building blocks for communications 
 
Source: ACMA 
 
 
 
  
12   |      
 
Each service, device or network access can have different: 
 consumer expectations attached to them, depending on the context of their use 
 relationships with the service provider 
 expected length of use (one-off to long-term) 
 regulatory treatment.  
Australians are using multiple devices  
Australians are using an increasing number of devices to communicate. A recent 
survey found that the number of respondents owning a tablet, laptop and smartphone 
had increased from 28 per cent in 2013 to 53 per cent in 2014.13  
 
Consumers use multiple communications services 
Individuals are also using a diverse set of communications services. More than 50 per 
cent of respondents to an ACMA survey used social networking, a fixed-home phone, 
texting, email and a mobile phone.  
 
Figure 7 Communications services used in the last six months  
 
Base: People with a fixed-line telephone and/or a mobile telephone. 
Note: Multiple responses allowed. 
Source: ACMA-commissioned surveys, published in ACMA, Communications report 2012–13, p. 20. 
 
In particular, the 18–24 age group is likely to use multiple communications services, 
with 63 per cent using six or more services. 
 
                                                     
13 Deloitte, Media Consumer Survey 2014 Australian media and digital preferences, 3rd edition, July 
2014, p. 1. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Public payphone
Instant messaging
Internet telephony (e.g. VoIP, Skype)
Social networking (e.g. Facebook, blogging)
Fixed-line telephone at home
Texting from a mobile phone
Email
Mobile phone calls
% of people aged 18 years and over
May-13 May-12
 
 
  
      |   13 
 
Figure 8 Number of communications services used in the six months to May 2013 
 
Source: ACMA-commissioned surveys cited in ACMA, Communications report 2012–13, p. 21. 
 
Consumers may also have different contractual and usage arrangements across these 
services. Not all of these networks will:  
 be permanent or even long term 
 provide any-to-any connectivity14 
 offer an adequate quality of service all of the time. 
Alternative communications services are becoming increasingly important to 
consumers—nine per cent of respondents to an ACMA consumer survey cited social 
networks as their most used form of communication. Of the 18–24 age group, 26 per 
cent cited social networks as their most used form of communication in the last six 
months, making it the second most-used form of communication for this age group 
after texting.15 Social networks typically: 
 restrict connections to other members of the service 
 do not guarantee quality-of-service standards 
 are not necessarily used long term, particularly when new services are constantly 
appearing. Recent examples include Vine (video-sharing site launched in 2013), 
Kik (messaging app launched in 2010), Pheed (launched in 2012) and the creation 
of a separate Facebook Messenger app in 2014.16  
                                                     
14 By any-to-any connectivity, this paper means that the service allow users to connect to other users of the 
service regardless of the network they are using. For example, users of some messaging apps can only 
send communications to members of the same messaging service. 
15 ACMA-commissioned research, May 2013. 
16 Facebook Messenger was previously only available through the Facebook app. 
Total
18–24 
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65+
% of people with a home fixed-line telephone or mobile phone
1 2 3 4 5 6 or more
 
 
  
14   |      
 
Some observations on existing regulation 
A positive consequence of the range of communications services now in use is that a 
consumer may have multiple pathways to establish a network connection to a service 
or device. The ready availability of an alternative connection offers additional 
robustness and redundancy. If one service is not working, a consumer may be able to 
choose a different connection option. For example, if the mobile network is temporarily 
unavailable, a consumer may be able to use their fixed broadband connection to make 
an OTT VoIP call.  
 
Concepts such as a service provider of last resort underpin the traditional regulatory 
obligations of telecommunications universal service. For example, the universal 
service obligation requires the universal service provider to make a standard 
telephone service and/or payphone reasonably accessible to all Australians. This 
obligation is designed to achieve the social and economic good of all Australians being 
able to connect to each other and to emergency services, public services and general 
information services. There is potential in this emerging OTT service environment—
where alternative network and service pathways can be established by an individual 
consumer—for this obligation to be achieved in ways other than a regulated service. 
 
Much of the telecommunications regulation that the ACMA administers, including 
industry codes such as the Telecommunications Consumer Protections (TCP) Code, 
provides protections for consumers who have a contractual relationship with a carriage 
service provider. Since these regulatory processes and structures were put in place, 
consumer communications behaviour has evolved to incorporate a more sophisticated 
web of communications links comprising a range of networks, devices and services.  
 
New communications services are appearing constantly, allowing consumers to 
choose (sometimes temporarily) new ways to contact others. This structure of 
communications—often transitory, of variable quality and restricted in its base of 
users—may well challenge the relevance, efficiency and effectiveness of established 
communications regulation built on regulatory concepts like carriage service provider 
and standard telephone service.  
 
This environment of innovation can also have implications for industry certainty and 
consumer confidence. Some communications services offer a range of functions, 
including financial purchases, which can blur the boundaries between financial and 
telecommunication services, and bring telecommunications services used for financial 
transactions into the ambit of financial regulation. Such a shift would raise questions 
for consumers about what safeguards to expect and where to go for regulatory 
assistance. Similarly, it might have an impact on industry certainty about applicable 
regulatory settings. 
 
 
 
  
      |   15 
 
Wearable devices—
personalised data arrives 
Background 
Wearable devices are monitoring or communications technologies that can be worn on 
the body; for example, in clothing or accessories.17 Currently available types of 
wearable devices include: 
 Smart watches—these devices transmit information to and from the smartphone to 
the smart watch on the user’s wrist. Capabilities include texting, biometric functions 
and location-based services. 
 Health and fitness devices—these can include health scanners and fitness 
monitors. Capabilities can include sleep- and movement-tracking. 
 Google Glass—users wear glasses that are able to perform a variety of functions 
including navigation, music, communications, movement-tracking, and information 
and search services. 
Cisco forecasts that wearable devices will increase from 22 million globally in 2013 to 
177 million in 2018.  
 
Figure 9 Growth in global-connected wearable devices 
 
Source: Cisco, Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2013–2018, February 2014. 
 
The increasing market for wearable devices is reflected in Google’s recent release of 
Android Wear, a mobile operating system designed specifically for wearable devices.18 
Apple has announced the availability of its Apple Watch from early 2015. A US-based 
study found that there had been considerable growth in wearable device purchases in 
the last six months—60 per cent of respondents had purchased a wearable device in 
the last six months, compared to 11 per cent within the last 12 to 18 months.19   
                                                     
17 Wearabledevices.com, ‘Introduction to wearable technology, 26 March 2014. 
18 Nick Dillon, Ovum, Google releases Android Wear OS for wearable devices, 19 March 2014. 
19 Endeavour Partners quoted in Teena Hammond, ‘Fewer people stashing wearable devices in sock 
drawer’, TechRepublic, 30 June 2014. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
m
ill
io
n
s
Trend  
3 
 
 
  
16   |      
 
The forecast number of wearable devices is expected to remain small compared to the 
number of personal or handheld mobile devices in 2018, although 177 million still 
represents strong growth in wearable devices and substantial global use. The 
forecasts include Australian adopters (see Table 1).  
 
Table 1 Mobile and wearable devices 
Device 2013 2018 
Mobile devices  
(Personal/hand-held) 
7 billion 
(6.7 billion) 
10.2 billion 
(8.2 billion) 
Wearable 22 million 177 million 
 
Source: Cisco, Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2013–2018, February 2014. 
 
Wearable devices offer individual and economy-wide benefits 
Wearable devices collect a broad range of observed data, including biometric, location 
and communications information. Data such as physical activity is collected by 
wearable devices on an ongoing, continuous basis. Some wearable devices may also 
able to collect particularly sensitive information, such as health data. For example, one 
wearable device tracks ECG, heart rate, heart rate variability and other biometric 
indicators.20 The emergence of wearable devices and their ability to produce, collate, 
analyse and distribute information in real time will likely further encourage growth in 
data-driven business models.  
 
Availability and collection of such data can have both individual and economy-wide 
benefits. Individuals may benefit from the collection of information, real-time access to 
their own health and fitness information, potential health prevention benefits, tailored 
advertisements and product offerings, and the receipt of personalised services at a 
manageable cost. Individuals are choosing to wear wearable devices that monitor 
health and fitness indicators, such as sleep and active minutes tracker, with the 
expectation of positive effects on health and wellbeing. There is also the opportunity 
for increased business productivity; for example, through real-time access to 
information and improved customer service.21  
 
Wearable devices can also be one way to contact, or be found by, emergency 
services. The FiLIP wearable smart locator designed for children can make and 
receive calls to parents and provides the child’s location. There is also an emergency 
button that begins ambient recording and connects the child to emergency services.   
 
One consequence of the growth in wearable devices is the increase in the amount and 
value of data exchanged via device use. Individuals are already volunteering personal 
information through blogs, interactive sites, social networking services, applications 
and other online activities.22  
 
Increases in the take-up of wearable devices suggests that the amount and sensitivity 
of data available online will expand significantly, given the diverse range of personal 
information such devices can collect on a constant basis. One analyst firm has 
forecast the amount of available data to be growing at around 45 per cent year-on-
year, with available data reaching around seven zettabytes by the end of 2015. This 
equates to more than 1,000 gigabytes of data for each person on earth.23 
                                                     
20 Best Fitness Tracker Reviews website. 
21 Rene Millman, ‘Wearable technology could boost workplace productivity’, 2 May 2014.   
22 ACMA, Privacy and personal data—Emerging issues in media and communications, Occasional paper 4, 
June 2013, p. 7. 
23 Boston Consulting Group, The Value of our Digital Identity, November 2012, p. 10. 
 
 
  
      |   17 
 
Some observations on existing regulation 
The collection of real-time data by wearable technologies presents a range of 
opportunities for telecommunications regulation to be more efficient and effective—
such as the capability to collate and synthesise real-time contextual information that 
could be applied to critical services.   
 
One example is the potential for the use of wearable devices to contact emergency 
services.24 The Department of Communications, in its discussion paper Review of the 
National Triple Zero (000) Operator (July 2014), is already anticipating the potential for 
automatic devices to be used in contacting emergency services.25 The paper notes the 
advantages for automatic contact when the user is incapacitated, and the potential 
ability to send stored medical information and data on the emergency incident. But it 
also notes the potential of an increased rate of non-genuine contact with the 
emergency call service and that a two-way conversation may not be possible. Existing 
regulation for emergency services is structured to support voice calls. But harnessing 
the potential wider set of information collected via wearable devices to support 
emergency service contact would require a more detailed consideration about how 
such devices and real-time information could be integrated into existing emergency 
service arrangements. 
 
While there are many potential benefits and applications from the real-time information 
collected via wearable devices, there are also some barriers to wider adoption. ACMA 
research has found that many consumers want better information about the collection 
and use of their personal data to allow them to manage privacy issues in this 
environment.26  
 
Protecting the personal information of consumers becomes more complex in an 
environment of multiple avenues to display, communicate and record personal data. 
For example, developments in data-driven marketing can mean that an individual’s 
online presence is the target of commercial messages rather than the traditional 
methods of telephone or email contact. In the Australian regulatory context, this poses 
challenges for the ongoing effectiveness of measures to reduce nuisance 
communications, based on the concept of ‘unsolicited commercial electronic 
messages’ as set out in the Spam Act 2003.27 
 
Around the world, responses are being developed to manage and mitigate risks. The 
European Union introduced a Privacy and Data Protection Impact Assessment (PIA) 
Framework for Radiofrequency Identification (RFID) Applications. RFID applications 
are similar to wearable devices as they can automatically collect personal data for a 
variety of purposes including assets-tracking and automatic payments. Information 
stored on the tag may include identification, location and product information. The PIA 
Framework provides a methodology to assess and mitigate privacy risks associated 
with RFID tags and is the result of an agreement between industry, standards bodies, 
consumer organisations, trade unions and civil society groups to respect the EU 
Commission recommendation to set out principles for privacy and data protection in 
the use of RFID tags.28 The definition of personal information for the purposes of the 
                                                     
24 The ACMA regulates and monitors the provision of emergency call services and is interested in 
innovations that may affect these services. 
25 Department of Communications, Review of the National Triple Zero (000) Operator Discussion Paper, July 
2014, p. 13. 
26 ACMA, Privacy and personal data—Emerging issues in media and communications, Occasional paper 4, 
June 2013, p. 27. 
27 For further discussion of this issue, see the case study on unsolicited commercial electronic messages in 
ACMA, Broken concepts, June 2013, pp. 84–5. 
28 European Commission, ‘Digital Agenda: new guidelines to address privacy concerns over use of smart 
tags’, press release, 6 April 2011.  
 
 
  
18   |      
 
RFID PIA framework is restricted to a few types of data used for a set type of purpose. 
Sensitive data includes health, genetic and biometric information, and information on 
children.  
 
In the United States, information and education are the preferred strategies for data 
risk management. The US Federal Trade Commission’s report on data brokers, Data 
Brokers—A Call for Transparency and Accountability, recommended that consumers 
are given more information on what data is collected on them and are able to access 
the information data brokers hold on them.29  
 
                                                     
29 FTC, Data Brokers—A Call for Transparency and Accountability, May 2014, p. 49.  
 
 
  
      |   19 
 
‘Flexible’ TV— 
online expands 
viewer options 
Background 
Flexible TV refers to the variety of service options for viewers to access content 
including from: 
 free-to-air television 
 subscription television 
 catch-up television 
 online video. 
Broadcast television remains an important part of Australians’ entertainment habits. 
Recent ACMA research found that 97 per cent of respondents had watched free-to-air 
(FTA) or subscription television in a typical week.30 Time spent watching television has 
declined only slightly over the past decade, with total television viewing time reducing 
from 190 minutes per day in 2001 to 172 minutes per day in 2013. At the same time, 
Australians are using a growing number of viewing entertainment platforms in addition 
to traditional television viewing. 
 
Figure 10 TV watching habits in Australia, 2001–13 
 
Source: OzTAM 2001–13. 2008–13 data includes free-to-air multichannels. 2010–13 is consolidated (includes time-shifted viewing;  
live-only viewing was measured prior to 2010). Annual averages are for five metro cities, 6 am–midnight, Sunday–Saturday. 
Time spent viewing data is averaged across all television households. 
 
                                                     
30 ACMA, Community research informing the Contemporary community safeguards inquiry—qualitative and 
quantitative findings, March 2014, p. 10.  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2001 2005 2009 2013
M
in
u
te
s
Total TV (incl. Sub TV) FTA TV
Trend  
4 
 
 
  
20   |      
 
Online content is mainstream 
Online video content has expanded available entertainment options beyond scheduled 
broadcast television. Consumers are building their own content delivery paths at a 
device, network and service level. For example, an individual may view an ABC 
television program through a scheduled television broadcast, the ABC television  
catch-up website or a different online content delivery service via computer, tablet or 
phone.   
 
Figure 11 Consumers view content in a range of ways 
 
Source: ACMA 
 
Fifty per cent of online Australians31 watched some form of internet TV within a six-
month period, including:  
 professionally produced content (such as broadcasters’ catch-up TV websites) 
 pirated content 
 videos streamed from sites like YouTube.  
The use of internet TV is particularly prevalent among young people. In 2013, online 
Australians aged between 16 and 24 spent more time watching internet TV than 
broadcast television at the scheduled program time32, representing a generational shift 
in the delivery and consumption of content. ACMA research has found that 78 per cent 
of people aged 14–15 and 80 per cent of people aged 16–17 used the internet to 
search for or watch videos, movies and television.33   
 
                                                     
31 ACMA research found that 91 per cent of Australians had accessed the internet in the six months to May 
2013. 
32 The Nielsen Company 
33 ACMA, Like, post, share—young Australians’ experience of social media, 2013, p. 28. 
 
 
  
      |   21 
 
Gaining access to films, packaged seasons of television series and other similar 
content via online rather than physical means is increasingly common. One survey 
found that 26 per cent of Australians surveyed stated they will most likely watch films 
and packaged television content via online digital sources in the next 12 months. An 
additional 32 per cent stated they would use a mix of physical and digital sources to 
gain access to films and packaged television content.34 
 
In Australia, on-demand or catch-up TV services of the broadcast networks, such as 
ABC’s iView, is the most popular way in which Australians access professionally 
produced online content. A May 2013 ACMA survey found that of the 7.86 million 
Australians aged 18 years and over that had accessed professionally produced online 
video content services, 6.69 million (85 per cent) accessed a catch-up television 
service. This compared to 1.94 million (25 per cent) who accessed a video-on-demand 
service and 1.38 million (18 per cent) who accessed a commercial online television 
service.35  
 
The increasing number of online video services available in Australia may further 
increase online content consumption. Recent developments include:  
 Stan—announced by StreamCo (co-owned by Fairfax Media and Nine 
Entertainment) in November 2014. The service will be ready for trial shortly36 
 Foxtel’s Presto online movie service—launched March 2014 
 Netflix—in talks about an Australian launch of its service, reported to be in 2015.37  
Hbb TV introduced in Australia 
The Hbb TV standard represents another step in the evolution of online television 
delivery and a further blurring of distinctions between broadcast and internet television 
content. Like IPTV, internet video and broadcaster catch-up sites, this standard 
enables consumers to view broadband-delivered content via their television sets. 
 
Freeview Plus, using the Hbb TV standard, is a service launched jointly by Australian 
FTA channels in September 2014 that may encourage further take-up of online 
delivery of television.38 Take-up will be limited by the number of Hbb TV-ready devices 
available and sold in Australia. The Freeview Plus service allows users to view catch-
up and live television through the same screen. Consumers can already view catch-up 
television via their internet-ready television sets, but this service will further blur the 
distinction between internet and broadcast network-delivered content, as both are 
available via the same electronic program guide (EPG).39 Other than for live-to-air or 
near-live content, the viewer is expected to see little difference between old content 
broadcast in the previous seven days and delivered over the internet, and live content. 
Foxtel offers a similar service, where internet-connected Foxtel iQ boxes allow 
customers to view content screened in the past seven days via their internet 
connection. 
                                                     
34 Deloitte, Media Consumer Survey 2014 Australian media and digital preferences, 3rd edition, August 
2014, p. 8. 
35 ACMA, Communications report 2012–13, p. 11. 
36 Stan website 
37 Josh Taylor, ‘Netflix Australia will not be the Netflix you are looking for’, ZDNet, 30 June 2014. 
38 Nic Christensen, ‘Can hybrid television redefine Australian TV? – The consumer experience’, Mumbrella, 
1 September 2014.  
39 Freeview website, ‘Introducing FreeviewPlus’. 
 
 
  
22   |      
 
Video is an increasing proportion of network traffic 
Turning to other markets, OTT content consumption is driving other changes in market 
structure and demand for communications infrastructure to support peak viewing. 
Internet traffic forecasts reflect the view that the internet is both a content distribution 
and consumption platform. While there are differences in forecast traffic estimates, 
embedded video streaming in applications and services is expected to drive global 
fixed and mobile broadband traffic in the future.40 Cisco estimates are outlined in 
Table 2.41  
 
Table 2 Video as a percentage of network traffic forecast 
Network type Percentage of network traffic that is video 
2013 2018 
Total 60 76 
Mobile  53 69 
 
Source: Cisco, VNI Global IP Traffic Forecast, 2013–2018, June 2014. 
 
Consumer take-up of OTT television services is further advanced in markets outside 
Australia. One survey found that 47 per cent of US households subscribe to one or 
more of the OTT TV services Netflix, Hulu Plus or Amazon Prime.42 Netflix offers 
streaming television and film content online in the US, as well as other countries in 
North and South America, the Caribbean and Europe. In the US, Netflix accounts for 
some 34 per cent of US fixed access downstream traffic during peak period traffic.43  
 
Some observations on existing regulation  
While broadcast television remains the primary audiovisual content source for 
Australians44, OTT delivery of content has a wide mainstream user base. One aspect 
of this trend is increased video traffic on fixed and wireless broadband networks. The 
forecast increase in mobile video traffic may place additional pressure on spectrum 
availability in the future. As reflected in the Five-year spectrum outlook 2014–18, 
ensuring appropriate spectrum arrangements are in place for mobile broadband 
services is an ACMA priority.45 
 
Monitoring the delivery and consumption of audiovisual entertainment allows an 
assessment of how these developments affect the ongoing efficiency and 
effectiveness of broadcast regulation, as outlined in the Broadcasting Services Act 
1992 (BSA).  
 
                                                     
40 P. Loskot, M.A.M. Hassanien, F. Farjady, M Ruffini and D. Payne, ‘Long-term drivers of broadband traffic 
in next-generation networks’, Ann. Telecommun., February 2014. 
41 Multiple analysts provide forecasts. Cisco forecasts are used here as they are regarded as an industry 
standard and cited by government agencies, international bodies such as the ITU and infrastructure 
vendors.  
42 Leichtman Research Group cited in Janko Roettgers, ‘Close to half of all U.S. households subscribe to 
Netflix, Amazon Prime or Hulu Plus’, GiagaOM, 6 June 2014. 
43 Sandvine, Global Internet Phenomena Report 1H 2014. 
44 ACMA research found that 97 per cent of respondents had watched FTA or subscription television in a 
typical week. See ACMA, Community research informing the Contemporary community safeguards 
inquiry—qualitative and quantitative findings, March 2014, p. 10. 
45 ACMA, Five-year spectrum outlook 2014–18, September 2014. 
 
 
  
      |   23 
 
Much online audiovisual content is provided by broadcasters in the form of catch-up 
television, which has been designed to fit within the broadcast television regulatory 
envelope. For example, the Nine Network has stated that the same standards are 
applied to news content broadcast through the television channel and displayed on the 
ninemsn website.46 ACMA consumer research found that viewers consistently 
distinguish between user-generated and professionally produced content on the 
internet. Participants expected professionally produced content to broadly reflect 
community standards whatever the delivery channel.47  
 
The trend data for content delivery and consumption further confirms the observation 
first outlined in the ACMA’s 2010 Broken concepts paper that the same content, 
delivered by the same entity, is often regulated differently depending on whether the 
content is viewed via a broadband connection or broadcast spectrum. The BSA 
applies different levels of regulation according to whether the content is delivered by a 
broadcasting service, a datacasting service or an internet content service.  
Differences in regulation between these three delivery mechanisms include:  
 Advertising. There is no restriction on the placement of advertising in broadband 
content. There are restrictions for advertising in Children’s and Preschool programs 
broadcast under the BSA. There are other advertising restrictions, including time 
limits, covered by relevant broadcasting codes of practice. 
 Treatment of complaints. Citizens can refer complaints to the ACMA about 
broadcast content if they are not satisfied by the response from the broadcaster. 
Different complaint processes govern content delivered over the internet. For 
example, citizens contact the ACMA in the first instance if they wish to make a 
complaint about prohibited online content.48  
 Content regulation. Broadcast content is regulated in a variety of ways, including 
classification and captioning, that do not apply to broadband-delivered content. 
The relationship between regulatory treatment and delivery platform has challenged 
the application of content regulation over the last decade or more. The differing 
treatment of content dependent on delivery mechanism is likely to become even more 
pronounced as the amount of television-like online content distributed by non-
broadcasters increases in Australia. 
 
In the US, the wide availability and take-up of online video services, such as Amazon 
and Netflix, has made the different treatment of content depending on its mode of 
delivery a pressing regulatory issue. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
chair has recently asked the FCC to include linear online video providers within the 
definition of ‘multichannel video programming distributor’ (MVPD), which is currently 
limited to cable, satellite and IPTV video providers. This expansion of MVPD means 
that linear online video providers will have: 
 the same ability to negotiate to carry broadcast television stations as cable, satellite 
and IPTV providers 
 the same access to programming owned by cable operators as satellite and IPTV 
providers.49 
                                                     
46 The Hon. R. Finkelstein QC, Report of the Independent Inquiry into the Media and Media Regulation, 
28 February 2012, p. 165. 
47 ACMA, Digital Australians—expectations about media content in a converging media environment, 
October 2011, p. 52. 
48 Online content is deemed to be prohibited if its classification category is RC, X18+, or a category 1 or 2 
restricted publication. Other classification categories, or if material is not classified, may result in an 
assessment of ‘potential prohibited’. See the ACMA website for more information. 
49 Tom Wheeler, FCC Chairman, ‘Tech Transitions, Video and the Future,’ 28 October 2014. 
 
 
  
24   |      
 
There is a further dimension to this debate occurring in the US, where the wide  
take-up of streaming video services has also sparked increased media attention on the 
issue of net neutrality—the principle that all internet traffic is to be treated equally. In 
May 2014, the FCC issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking recommending that ISPs 
be prohibited from blocking legal content, but that charges to guarantee faster access, 
or ‘paid prioritisation,’ would be allowed. US President Barack Obama explicitly voiced 
his support of net neutrality in November 2014, calling for the FCC to reclassify wired 
and wireless consumer broadband services as a ‘telecommunications service’ under 
Title II of the Telecommunications Act.50 This would allow the FCC to disallow paid 
prioritisation on consumer broadband networks. The FCC Chairman has stated that it 
is still exploring possible options.51 
 
                                                     
50 Colin Mann, ‘Obama reiterates opposition to paid prioritisation,’ Advanced-television.com, 10 November 
2014. 
51 FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler’s Statement on President Barack Obama’s Statement Regarding Open 
Internet, FCC website, 20 November 2014. 
 
 
  
      |   25 
 
Multi-screening 
is mainstream 
Background 
Television—and the television screen—is key to the household entertainment 
experience, but there are now a variety of video-capable devices and content services 
that enable Australians to view multiple screens at the same time.   
 
The second screen catches on 
Many Australians are watching television with one eye on their phone or computer. In 
2013, 74 per cent of online Australians regularly watched television and used the 
internet at the same time, an increase of 25 percentage points since 2009. The 
incidence of second-screening for those aged 25–34 was 89 per cent in 2013. 
 
Figure 12 Online Australians watching TV and using the internet simultaneously 
 
Source: Nielsen, Australian Connected Consumers, 2014. 
 
Triple-screening, where the viewer watches television and uses both the internet and a 
mobile device, has also emerged as a significant trend—26 per cent of online 
Australians have triple-screened.52 
 
Content available over range of devices 
The same content can be viewed via a range of devices, including mobile phones, 
laptops, tablets and televisions.  
 
                                                     
52 Nielsen, Australian Connected Consumers, 2014, p. 128. 
49
74
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
P
e
rc
e
n
ta
g
e
 o
f 
o
n
lin
e
 A
u
s
tr
a
lia
n
s
Trend  
5 
 
 
  
26   |      
 
Table 3 Viewing content by device—preferred device when viewing different types of content 
 Mobile phone Tablet Computer Television 
User-generated content 41% 17% 71% 10% 
Video clips 23% 11% 53% 24% 
TV shows/full-length movies 5% 4% 29% 71% 
 
Source: Accenture, All the Right Connections, 2014, p. 6. 
 
While the television screen remains the primary preferred viewing device for long-form 
television shows and films (as shown in Table 3), other devices are also being used at 
different times. Nielsen has recently announced a partnership with Facebook designed 
to track what content viewers are watching on devices other than the television.53 
 
Enhanced services are also available 
Individuals are also able to view multiple screens on their television screens. Internet-
enabled television allows the delivery of enhanced services through the television 
screen, which may include interactive and product-purchasing capabilities. Some 
‘smart TVs’ have the ability to provide online and television content at the same time 
through a split screen.  
 
Changing engagement with content 
The second (online) screen can be used to discuss or comment on the broadcast 
content or to engage with content unrelated to the television program. Second (and 
third) screening means that the audience: 
 May not be paying as much attention to the television screen. An individual may be 
reading articles or social networking posts that are unrelated to the television 
content. For example, someone may be watching a television evening news 
program while catching up on Facebook. 
 May be engaging more deeply with the broadcast content. While watching the 
television program, an individual may also be commenting on it, through 
applications or services such as Twitter. One Australian survey found that 21 per 
cent of second-screening activity related to the television program being watched.54 
Australian examples include Q&A, in which viewers’ tweets are displayed on the 
bottom of the screen while the program is broadcast55, and The Voice, in which 
viewers can vote to ‘save’ participants.56 Viewers may engage online with the 
television program through unrelated services and applications, such as Twitter, or 
interact within a program ecosystem that provides space and opportunity for 
audiences to connect with each other and the program. An example of the latter is 
Channel Seven’s Fango service, which allows viewers to discuss selected Channel 
Seven television programs, vote in real time on polls trivia and other issues, and 
win prizes.57  
                                                     
53 Melissa Hellmann, ‘Nielsen Partners Up with Facebook to Track Television-Viewing Habits’, Time, 16 July 
2014. 
54 Deloitte, Media Consumer Survey 2014 Australian media and digital preferences, 3rd edition, July 
2014, p. 3. 
55 Q&A’s moderated twitter feed, ABC, 2014. 
56 The Voice Australia: How it works, news.com.au, 16 April 2012. 
57 Fango, Yahoo!7 website. 
 
 
  
      |   27 
 
One example of audiences using online tools to engage with televisual content is the 
first presidential campaign debate between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney in 2012, 
which generated over 10 million tweets by the time the debate had finished.58 Pew 
research found that, in general, the audience used social media to interact with the 
televised debate. For example, fact-checking the debate was the second most popular 
reason to engage with social media (Table 4). 
 
Table 4 Intended reason to use social media during 2012 US presidential debate 
Stated reason Percentage of respondents 
Monitor broadcast media responses and reactions 46 
Fact-check 41 
Follow the reaction of political reporters 39 
Monitor social media 32 
 
Source: Verizon research cited in Pew Research Center, The State of the News Media 2013, accessed 16 August 2013. 
 
Additional complementary content 
The second screen can also display additional content that can become an integral 
part of the viewing experience. An early example of this trend is the Network Ten 
television series Secrets and Lies, which explicitly encouraged its audience to interact 
on the second screen through the ‘Focus Room’ that allowed viewers to discuss the 
show and a social TV application that gave viewers additional clues while the program 
was broadcasting. Additional Secrets and Lies content was created for Zeebox (a 
social TV application that has now been relaunched as Beamly), Twitter, Facebook, 
the Channel Ten website, mobile app Tenplay and YouTube.59 
 
Understanding audience attention in this environment is complicated 
The increased interactive capabilities of internet TV, through split-screen and 
interactive services as a television program is viewed, and the multiple devices (and 
consequently environments) in which content can be viewed, is also complicating 
understanding of the audience’s attention and involvement. 
 
Understanding the attention paid to, and influence of, the first screen in this 
environment is consequently a more complicated proposition. The media sector is 
exploring alternative measurements to complement ratings data. For example, Nielsen 
Twitter weekly top 10 identifies the most popular television shows by audience number 
and then provides the following additional information: 
 number of tweets related to a television episode 
 number of unique Twitter accounts that have sent at least one tweet related to the 
television episode 
 number of times such a tweet was seen 
 total number of Twitter accounts that are accruing at least one of the tweets about 
that television episode. 
As yet, there is no agreed standard method globally to measure audience attention in 
this environment. 
 
                                                     
58 Matthew Ingram, ‘The Twitter spin room: What happens when politics goes real-time’, GigaOM, 4 October 
2012. 
59Laura Sinclair, ‘Ten’s second-screen strategy to hook viewers with Secrets and Lies’, The Australian, 
24 February 2014. 
 
 
  
28   |      
 
Some observations on existing regulation 
Multi-screening raises two issues relevant to regulatory settings:  
 whether users are paying as much attention to the first screen 
 whether the community has the same attitudes to content shown on second 
screens, which informs discussion of community safeguards.  
Whether the audience is paying the same level of attention 
Broadcasting regulation bases much of its regulatory treatment of media platforms on 
the perceived influence of different broadcasting services, such as radio and 
television. The concept of influence has flow-on effects to the regulation of broadcast 
licensing, standards, diversity, and internet and datacasting services.60  
 
The multi-screen environment did not exist when broadcasting regulation was framed 
in the early 1990s. Audiences’ split attention may have some impact on the 
broadcasting media’s ability to influence, and this is the subject of ongoing debate 
internationally. For example, if audiences are routinely checking social network 
updates while watching television news on the first screen, the content of that program 
may be less influential. It is equally possible that online interaction with programs such 
as the ABC’s Q&A allows multiple points of views to be explored by the audience, 
making the content of Q&A itself less influential. 
 
Conversely, the number of online conversations about program content (to continue 
this example) may extend its audience and influence. At present, there is no 
consensus globally about the best tools or metrics to measure media influence. 
Consequently, there is no clear answer to questions about the effect of multi-screening 
on the influence of particular content.  
 
Consumer attitudes when using second-screen content  
If audiences are interacting with content and other services on the second screen 
through properties owned by the content producers, this offers: 
 a more interactive experience for the audience 
 a potentially more engaged audience for the content producer and advertisers 
 additional avenues to build audience loyalty. 
When the second screen is used to create additional content as part of the television 
program viewing experience—as with Secrets and Lies—the boundaries between a 
television program and the supporting online content is blurred. In the future, both the 
content producer and audience may increasingly consider the content produced and 
delivered online for the second screen to be an integral part of the television program. 
The potential merging of broadcast television programs and supporting online content 
challenges the continuing appropriateness of the regulatory definition of a ‘television 
program’. 
 
As second-screen content becomes mainstream and audiences see it as an essential 
part of the television viewing experience, viewers may transfer the expectations they 
have of broadcast television to the second, or even third, screen. One example could 
be the provision of captioning for the deaf and hearing-impaired. Broadcasters are 
required to comply with rules and standards for captioning of television programs. 
Secondary content supplied via broadband as complementary second-screen material 
is not subject to the same requirements.  
 
                                                     
60 The concept of influence is discussed further in Chapter 6. 
 
 
  
      |   29 
 
Conversely, the experience of second- and third-screen viewing may also affect 
expectations about the content experience on the primary television screen. For 
example, expectations about audience loyalty and interactivity may transfer from the 
second screen to primary-screen environment. There may be a variety of pressures to 
recognise these changing viewing experiences and diverse community expectations of 
content within the existing regulatory framework. 
 
 
  
30   |      
 
TV is still the main news 
source, even as 
platforms shift 
Background 
New developments in media, encouraged by the ubiquitous deployment of IP 
networks, have altered news media supply chains and content consumption 
behaviours. While print newspaper circulations are declining globally, individuals are 
increasingly consuming online news, opinion and current affairs in a variety of forms. 
Nonetheless, broadcast television remains the main source of news, including for 
Australians accessing news online.  
 
Print newspaper circulation decline 
The decline in print newspaper revenues and circulation, both in Australia and 
internationally, is well documented. Combined Monday to Saturday Australian national 
newspaper sales declined 8.3 per cent between 2012 and 2013. Monday to Sunday 
metropolitan titles declined 11.5 per cent over the same period.61 Total newspaper 
revenues in Australia declined 18 per cent between 2009 and 2013.  
 
Figure 13 Newspaper revenues in Australia, 2009–13 
  
Source: PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Australian Entertainment and Media Outlook 2014–2018, 2014. 
 
Smaller decline in overall television news audiences 
The consolidated audiences of FTA television evening news programs in Australia 
shows an overall decline of 10 per cent between 2009 and 2013, albeit with some 
growth in audiences in 2012 and 2013.  
 
                                                     
61 Audited Media Association of Australia (AMAA) data cited in PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Australian 
Entertainment and Media Outlook 2014–2018, July 2014, p. 134. 
4,513 
4,713 
4,448 
4,006 
3,686 
 -
 500
 1,000
 1,500
 2,000
 2,500
 3,000
 3,500
 4,000
 4,500
 5,000
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
T
o
ta
l 
re
v
e
n
u
e
s
 (
A
$
 m
ill
io
n
s
)
Trend  
6 
 
 
  
      |   31 
 
Figure 14 Total audiences for FTA television evening news bulletins in Australia 
  
Source: OzTAM data sourced from Department of Communications, Media control and ownership, Policy Background Paper No. 3, 
June 2014, p. 25.  
Note: The total average night audience for individual news programs is calculated by adding the average nightly audience for the 
following FTA television evening news bulletins: ABC News, Seven News, Nine News, Ten News and World News Australia. All evening 
news bulletins, with the exception of Nine News, experienced a decline in average weeknight audience between 2009 and 2013. 
 
Recent ACMA research into regional local news broadcasts echoes this finding. While 
average audiences for different news services fluctuated from year to year at individual 
sub-market levels, there was an overall declining trend in audiences for early evening 
news broadcasts on the main FTA television channels across the combined 19 
regional sub-markets between 2003 and 2013.62 
 
TV still the main source of news 
Television remains the most cited platform for sources of news, despite the overall 
decline in audience levels. 2014 ACMA research found that 92 per cent of FTA or 
subscription television viewers watched a news or current affairs programs on 
television63, while earlier ACMA research found that television was the respondents’ 
main source of news.64 This is confirmed by 2013 Nielsen research, which found that 
more online Australians (36 per cent) cited television as their main source of news 
than any other source. 
 
                                                     
62 ACMA, Attachment D—Regional Australian television news: Audiences across regional evening news 
services, 2003–2013, November 2013, p. 1. 
63 ACMA, Community research informing the Contemporary community safeguards inquiry—qualitative and 
quantitative findings, March 2014, p. 12. 
64 ACMA, Digital Australians—expectations about media content in a converging media environment, 
October 2011, p. 39. 
3,700,000
3,800,000
3,900,000
4,000,000
4,100,000
4,200,000
4,300,000
4,400,000
4,500,000
4,600,000
4,700,000
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
T
o
ta
l 
a
v
e
ra
g
e
 n
ig
h
tl
y
 a
u
d
ie
n
c
e
 f
o
r 
in
d
iv
id
u
a
l 
n
e
w
s
 p
ro
g
ra
m
s
Total (consolidated)
 
 
  
32   |      
 
Figure 15 My main source of news 
 
Source: Nielsen, Australian Connected Consumers, 2014, p. 205. 
 
Websites are the second-most cited main source of news.65 There is a wide range of 
news websites, but traditional broadcasting platforms and print newspapers comprised 
all of the top 10 most-visited news sources online in September 2014, demonstrating 
the blurring boundaries between content distribution networks for news content.  
 
Table 5 Australians audiences for online news sites, September 2014 
Position Name Unique audience (’000) Online version of offline media 
1 smh.com.au 3,607 Print newspaper 
2 news.com.au 3,569 Print newspapers 
3 ninemsn news websites 3,129 TV 
4 ABC News websites 2,518 TV 
5 Daily Mail Australia 2,508 Print newspaper (UK) 
6 The Age 2,082 Print newspaper  
7 The Guardian 1,934 Print newspaper (UK) 
8 Yahoo!7 news websites 1,911 TV 
9 Herald Sun 1,713 Print newspaper  
10 BBC 1,492 TV and radio (UK) 
 
Source: The Nielsen Company. 
                                                     
65 Nielsen refers to these websites as online ‘owned’ media, defining them as all websites excluding social 
platforms. 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40%
Social media
Traditional TV (FTA and subscription)
Websites
Traditional radio
Internet TV
Streamed music/online radio
Printed newspaper/magazine
% of online Australians
 
 
  
      |   33 
 
Some observations on existing regulation 
Encouraging diversity in the control of the more influential broadcasting services is an 
object of regulation. The BSA seeks to ensure media diversity in the more influential 
services—commercial broadcast television, commercial broadcast radio and print 
newspapers. To date, diversity of media voices on these platforms has also been 
promoted and managed by placing limits on the control of licensed commercial 
broadcasting services that service specific geographic markets, as well as companies 
that publish newspapers associated with those markets.66 The BSA regulates 
ownership and control through multiple mechanisms, including the Statutory Control 
Rules and the Media Diversity Scheme, which the ACMA administers. Monitoring the 
consumption of news media across all delivery channels is essential to understanding 
media diversity in a multi-platform environment.  
 
The concept of influence is also integral to the regulation of broadcast media in 
Australia, reflecting a view that traditional media is able to influence audience attention 
to particular issues.67 The capacity of media to influence is based on its framing 
(setting the context in which an issue is analysed by an audience) and agenda-setting 
capacity, where the promotion and placing of news content affects the audience’s 
interpretation of an issue’s importance.68 Section 4 of the BSA states that different 
levels of regulatory control will be applied across broadcasting and internet services 
according to the degree of influence they possess in shaping community views in 
Australia. This is based on the idea that the media services that exercise the greatest 
level of influence on the community, in terms of public opinion and cultural identity, 
should be regulated at a higher level than other, less influential, services. 
 
The emergence of online news offers consumers a wider pool of news sources, and 
marks a material change in the environment in which news media is regulated. 
Citizens now have multiple avenues of access to news sources, albeit many of them 
from traditional offline sources such as newspapers, TV and radio. This environment 
offers both opportunities and risks to the state of media diversity. The multiple online 
news sources available to complement print newspapers and broadcast networks 
could be seen as encouraging diversity. But there is also the risk that these online 
news services offer diversity only superficially, as consumers continue to use a select 
set of traditional news providers, even when consuming news online.  
 
The way in which the changing environment for the production, supply and 
consumption of news is affecting media diversity is highly contestable. The online 
platform provides alternative spaces for citizens to produce, share and critique news 
sources. This platform also facilitates collective citizen action in a way that could 
transform existing power dynamics.69 This is supported by research that indicates a 
reduction in traditional media’s agenda-setting influence70, and that independent 
                                                     
66 In some situations, the whole of Australia is treated as one market. For example, the 75 per cent limit 
prohibits a person from controlling commercial television licences whose combined licence area populations 
exceed 75 per cent of the population of Australia. 
67 Ofcom, Annex 7: Media plurality and news—a summary of contextual academic literature, Annex to 
Ofcom’s advice to the Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport, 29 June 2012, p. 3. 
68 Rachael Craufurd Smith and Damian Tambini, ‘Measuring Media Plurality in the United Kingdom: Policy 
Choices and Regulatory Challenges’, Journal of Media Law, 4(1), 2012, p. 38. 
69 Mary Myers, Is there a link between Digital Media and Good Governance? What the Academics Say, 
A Report to the Center for International Media Assistance, 19 June 2013. 
70 For example, Sharon Meraz, ‘Using Time Series Analysis to Measure Intermedia Agenda-setting Influence 
in Traditional Media and Political Blog Networks’, Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly, 88(1), 
2011; Victor Bekkers, Henri Beunders, Arthur Edwards and Rebecca Moody, ‘New Media, 
Micromobilization, and Political Agenda Setting: Crossover Effects in Political Mobilisation and Media 
Usage’, The Information Society, 27, 2011; and Ana Munteanu, Daniel Parlea-Buzatu, Alexandru Dumitru, 
 
 
  
34   |      
 
political bloggers can command an audience that rivals that of traditional media.71 
Traditional media’s influence is also seen to be affected by citizens’ use of 
independent media to evaluate and critique mainstream media.72 Other research 
states that the perception of a reduction in traditional media influence is overstated, 
given that the most popular news sites online are provided by traditional media.73 In 
this context, the online platform is more an amplifier for traditional media news content 
than a home for independent voices. 
 
While online channels for news expand, citizens are consistently using traditional news 
sources on the online platform and television remains the main source of news for 
online Australians. Nonetheless, citizens are consuming a more interactive and 
dispersed set of news sources across a wide variety of service, platforms and devices. 
It is important to monitor these developments in news delivery and audience 
consumption to ensure that existing regulatory structures and processes put in place 
to encourage and monitor media diversity do not result in ineffective or inefficient 
regulation with a misplaced emphasis on one segment of a rapidly evolving market. 
Part of this task may be to identify the most accurate way to measure consumer 
consumption of news online. The accurate measurement of online news and content 
consumption, more generally, is undergoing considerable innovation and is the subject 
of discussion between industry and regulators internationally.  
                                                     
Lucian Trasa, George Lazaroiu, ‘The Democratization of Producer-User Relationships and the Media’s 
Influence on Citizen’s Politics’, Economics, Management, and Financial Markets, 6(2), 2011. 
71 Sharon Meraz, ‘Is there an Elite Hold? Traditional Media to Social Media Agenda Setting Influence in Blog 
Networks’, Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 14, 2009, p. 682. 
72 Victor Bekkers, Henri Beunders, Arthur Edwards and Rebecca Moody, ‘New Media, Micromobilization, 
and Political Agenda Setting: Crossover Effects in Political Mobilisation and Media Usage’, The Information 
Society, 27, 2011, p. 209. 
73 Stanyer cited in Ana Munteanu, Daniel Parlea-Buzatu, Alexandru Dumitru, Lucian Trasa, George 
Lazaroiu, ‘The Democratization of Producer-User Relationships and the Media’s Influence on Citizen’s 
Politics’, Economics, Management, and Financial Markets, 6(2), 2011, p. 517. 

acma.gov.au
Canberra
Red Building 
Benjamin Offices  
Chan Street 
Belconnen ACT
PO Box 78 
Belconnen ACT 2616
T +61 2 6219 5555
F +61 2 6219 5353
Melbourne
Level 32  
Melbourne Central Tower 
360 Elizabeth Street 
Melbourne VIC
PO Box 13112  
Law Courts 
Melbourne VIC 8010
T +61 3 9963 6800 
F +61 3 9963 6899
Sydney
Level 5 
The Bay Centre 
65 Pirrama Road 
Pyrmont NSW
PO Box Q500 
Queen Victoria Building 
NSW 1230
T +61 2 9334 7700 
 1800 226 667 
F +61 2 9334 7799

