A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
21 
 
 
e ISSN 2277 - 3290 
Print ISSN 2277 - 3282 
  Journal of science        Bioinformatics 
 
www.journalofscience.net                                                                     
 
REVIEW ON APPLICATION OF BIOINFORMATICS 
 
A. Elumalai* and M. Chinna Eswaraiah 
 
Department of Pharmacognosy, 
2
Department of Pharmacology, Anurag Pharmacy College,  
Ananthagiri (V), Kodad (M), Nalgonda (Dt), Andhra Pradesh, India, 508 206. 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
Bioinformatics has become an important part of many areas of biology. In experimental molecular biology, 
bioinformatics techniques such as image and signal processing allow extraction of useful results from large amounts of raw 
data. In the field of genetics and genomics, it aids in sequencing and annotating genomes and their observed mutations. It 
plays a role in the textual mining of biological literature and the development of biological and gene ontologies to organize 
and query biological data. It plays a role in the analysis of gene and protein expression and regulation. Bioinformatics tools 
aid in the comparison of genetic and genomic data and more generally in the understanding of evolutionary aspects of 
molecular biology. At a more integrative level, it helps analyze and catalogue the biological pathways and networks that are 
an important part of systems biology. In structural biology, it aids in the simulation and modeling of DNA, RNA, and protein 
structures as well as molecular interactions. 
 
Keywords: Bioinformatics, Gene and protein expression, Biological pathways. 
 
INTRODUCTION  
In biology, Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary 
field that develops and improves upon methods for 
storing, retrieving, organizing and analyzing biological 
data. A major activity in bioinformatics is to develop 
software tools to generate useful biological knowledge. 
One early contributor to bioinformatics was Elvin A. 
Kabat, who pioneered biological sequence analysis with 
his comprehensive volumes of antibody sequences 
released with Tai Te Wu between 1980 and 
1991[1]. Another significant pioneer in the field 
was Margaret Oakley Dayhoff, who has been hailed 
by David Lipman, director of the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information, as the "mother and father of 
bioinformatics [2]. 
Bioinformatics has become an important part of 
many areas of biology. In experimental molecular 
biology, bioinformatics techniques such as image and 
signal processing allow extraction of useful results from 
large amounts of raw data. In the field 
of genetics and genomics, it aids in sequencing and 
annotating genomes and their observed mutations. It plays 
a role in the textual mining of biological literature and the 
development of biological and gene ontologies to 
organize and query biological data. It plays a role in the 
analysis of gene and protein expression and regulation. 
Bioinformatics tools aid in the comparison of genetic and 
genomic data and more generally in the understanding of 
evolutionary aspects of molecular biology. At a more 
integrative level, it helps analyze and catalogue the 
biological pathways and networks that are an important 
part of systems biology. In structural biology, it aids in 
the simulation and modeling of DNA, RNA, and protein 
structures as well as molecular interactions. 
Bioinformatics uses many areas of computer 
science, mathematics and engineering to process 
biological data. Complex machines are used to read in 
biological data at a much faster rate than 
before. Databases and information systems are used to 
store and organize biological data. Analyzing biological 
data may involvealgorithms in artificial intelligence, soft 
computing, datamining, imageprocessing, and simulation. 
The algorithms in turn depend on theoretical foundations 
such asdiscrete mathematics, control theory, system 
theory, information theory, and statistics. Commonly used 
software tools and technologies in the field include Java, 
C#,  XML , Perl , C , C++, Ruby, Python and spreadsheet 
applications [3-5].   
 
Corresponding Author:- A. Elumalai Email:- malairx@gmail.com 
A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
22 
 
Building on the recognition of the importance of 
information transmission, accumulation and processing in 
biological systems, in 1978 Paulien Hogeweg, coined the 
term "Bioinformatics" to refer to the study of information 
processes in biotic systems. This definition placed bio 
informatics as a field parallel to biophysics 
or biochemistry (biochemistry is the study of chemical 
processes in biological systems). Examples of relevant 
biological information processes studied in the early days 
of bioinformatics are the formation of complex social 
interaction structures by simple behavioral rules, and the 
information accumulation and maintenance in models 
of prebiotic evolution [6]. 
At the beginning of the genomic revolution, the 
term bioinformatics was re-discovered to refer to the 
creation and maintenance of a database to store biological 
information such as nucleotide sequences and amino acid 
sequences. Development of this type of database involved 
not only design issues but the development of complex 
interfaces whereby researchers could access existing data 
as well as submit new or revised data. 
In order to study how normal cellular activities are altered 
in different disease states, the biological data must be 
combined to form a comprehensive picture of these 
activities. Therefore, the field of bioinformatics has 
evolved such that the most pressing task now involves the 
analysis and interpretation of various types of data. This 
includes nucleotide and amino acid sequences, protein 
domains, and protein structures [7]. The actual process of 
analyzing and interpreting data is referred to 
as computational biology. Important sub-disciplines 
within bioinformatics and computational biology include: 
 The development and implementation of tools that 
enable efficient access to, use and management of, 
various types of information. 
 The development of new algorithms (mathematical 
formulas) and statistics with which to assess relationships 
among members of large data sets. For example, methods 
to locate a gene within a sequence, predict protein 
structure and/or function, and cluster protein sequences 
into families of related sequences. 
The primary goal of bioinformatics is to increase 
the understanding of biological processes. What sets it 
apart from other approaches, however, is its focus on 
developing and applying computationally intensive 
techniques to achieve this goal. Examples include: pattern 
recognition, data mining, machine learning algorithms, 
and visualization. Major research efforts in the field 
include sequence alignment, gene finding, genome 
assembly, drug design, drug discovery, protein structure 
alignment, protein structure prediction, prediction of gene 
expression and protein–protein interactions, genome-wide 
association studies, and the modeling of evolution. 
The term bioinformatics was coined before the 
genomic revolution. Paulien Hogeweg and Ben Hesper 
defined the term in 1978 to refer to the study of 
information processes in biotic systems [6-9]. This 
definition placed bioinformatics as a field parallel to 
biophysics or biochemistry (biochemistry is the study of 
chemical processes in biological systems). However, its 
primary use since at least the late 1980s has been to 
describe the application of computer science and 
information sciences to the analysis of biological data, 
particularly in those areas of genomics involving large-
scale DNA sequencing. 
Bioinformatics now entails the creation and 
advancement of databases, algorithms, computational and 
statistical techniques, and theory to solve formal and 
practical problems arising from the management and 
analysis of biological data. 
Over the past few decades rapid developments in 
genomic and other molecular research technologies and 
developments in information technologies have combined 
to produce a tremendous amount of information related to 
molecular biology. Bioinformatics is the name given to 
these mathematical and computing approaches used to 
glean understanding of biological processes. 
Common activities in bioinformatics include 
mapping and analyzing DNA and protein sequences, 
aligning different DNA and protein sequences to compare 
them, and creating and viewing 3-D models of protein 
structures. 
There are two fundamental ways of modelling a 
Biological system (e.g., living cell) both coming under 
Bioinformatic approaches. 
 
Static 
 Sequences – Proteins, Nucleic acids and Peptides 
 Interaction data among the above entities including 
microarray data and Networks of proteins, metabolites 
 
Dynamic 
 Structures – Proteins, Nucleic acids, Ligands 
(including metabolites and drugs) and Peptides (structures 
studied with bioinformatics tools are not considered static 
anymore and their dynamics is often the core of the 
structural studies) 
 Systems Biology comes under this category including 
reaction fluxes and variable concentrations of metabolites 
 Multi-Agent Based modelling approaches capturing 
cellular events such as signalling, transcription and 
reaction dynamics 
A broad sub-category under bioinformatics is structural 
bioinformatics. 
 
Sequence analysis 
Since the Phage Φ-X174 was sequenced in 1977, 
[10] the DNA sequences of thousands of organisms have 
been decoded and stored in databases. This sequence 
information is analyzed to determine genes that 
encode polypeptides (proteins), RNA genes, regulatory 
sequences, structural motifs, and repetitive sequences. A 
A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
23 
 
comparison of genes within a species or between different 
species can show similarities between protein functions, 
or relations between species (the use of molecular 
systematics to construct phylogenetic trees). With the 
growing amount of data, it long ago became impractical 
to analyze DNA sequences manually. Today, computer 
programs such as BLAST are used daily to search 
sequences from more than 260 000 organisms, containing 
over 190 billion nucleotides [11]. These programs can 
compensate for mutations (exchanged, deleted or inserted 
bases) in the DNA sequence, to identify sequences that 
are related, but not identical. A variant of this sequence 
alignment is used in the sequencing process itself. The so-
called shotgun sequencing technique (which was used, for 
example, by The Institute for Genomic Research to 
sequence the first bacterial genome, Haemophilus 
influenzae) [12] does not produce entire chromosomes. 
Instead it generates the sequences of many thousands of 
small DNA fragments (ranging from 35 to 900 
nucleotides long, depending on the sequencing 
technology). The ends of these fragments overlap and, 
when aligned properly by a genome assembly program, 
can be used to reconstruct the complete genome. Shotgun 
sequencing yields sequence data quickly, but the task of 
assembling the fragments can be quite complicated for 
larger genomes. For a genome as large as the human 
genome, it may take many days of CPU time on large-
memory, multiprocessor computers to assemble the 
fragments, and the resulting assembly will usually contain 
numerous gaps that have to be filled in later. Shotgun 
sequencing is the method of choice for virtually all 
genomes sequenced today, and genome assembly 
algorithms are a critical area of bioinformatics research. 
Another aspect of bioinformatics in sequence 
analysis is annotation. This involves computational gene 
finding to search for protein-coding genes, RNA genes, 
and other functional sequences within a genome. Not all 
of the nucleotides within a genome are part of genes. 
Within the genomes of higher organisms, large parts of 
the DNA do not serve any obvious purpose. This so-
called junk DNA may, however, contain unrecognized 
functional elements. Bioinformatics helps to bridge the 
gap between genome and proteome projects for example, 
in the use of DNA sequences for protein identification. 
 
Genome annotation 
In the context of genomics, annotation is the 
process of marking the genes and other biological features 
in a DNA sequence. The first genome annotation software 
system was designed in 1995 by Dr. Owen White, who 
was part of the team at The Institute for Genomic 
Research that sequenced and analyzed the first genome of 
a free-living organism to be decoded, the 
bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Dr. White built a 
software system to find the genes (fragments of genomic 
sequence that encode proteins), the transfer RNAs, and to 
make initial assignments of function to those genes. Most 
current genome annotation systems work similarly, but 
the programs available for analysis of genomic DNA, 
such as the GeneMark program trained and used to find 
protein-coding genes in Haemophilus influenzae, are 
constantly changing and improving. 
 
Computational evolutionary biology 
Evolutionary biology is the study of the origin 
and descent of species, as well as their change over 
time. Informatics has assisted evolutionary biologists in 
several key ways; it has enabled researchers to: 
 trace the evolution of a large number of organisms by 
measuring changes in their DNA, rather than through 
physical taxonomy or physiological observations alone, 
 more recently, compare entire genomes, which 
permits the study of more complex evolutionary events, 
such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, and the 
prediction of factors important in bacterialspeciation, 
 build complex computational models of populations 
to predict the outcome of the system over time [13] 
 track and share information on an increasingly large 
number of species and organisms 
  Future work endeavours to reconstruct the now 
more complex tree of life. 
The area of research within computer 
science that uses genetic algorithms is sometimes 
confused with computational evolutionary biology, but 
the two areas are not necessarily related. 
 
Literature analysis 
The growth in the number of published literature 
makes it virtually impossible to read every paper, 
resulting in disjointed sub-fields of research. Literature 
analysis aims to employ computational and statistical 
linguistics to mine this growing library of text resources. 
For example: 
 abbreviation recognition - identify the long-form and 
abbreviation of biological terms, 
 named entity recognition - recognizing biological 
terms such as gene names 
 protein-protein interaction - identify which proteins 
interact with which proteins from text 
The area of research draws 
from statistics and computational linguistics. 
 
Analysis of gene expression 
The expression of many genes can be determined 
by measuring mRNA levels with multiple techniques 
including microarrays, expressed cDNA sequence 
tag (EST) sequencing, serial analysis of gene 
expression (SAGE) tag sequencing, massively parallel 
signature sequencing (MPSS), RNA-Seq, also known as 
"Whole Transcriptome Shotgun Sequencing" (WTSS), or 
various applications of multiplexed in-situ hybridization. 
A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
24 
 
All of these techniques are extremely noise-prone and/or 
subject to bias in the biological measurement, and a major 
research area in computational biology involves 
developing statistical tools to 
separate signal from noise in high-throughput gene 
expression studies. Such studies are often used to 
determine the genes implicated in a disorder: one might 
compare microarray data from cancerous epithelial cells 
to data from non-cancerous cells to determine the 
transcripts that are up-regulated and down-regulated in a 
particular population of cancer cells. 
 
Analysis of regulation 
Regulation is the complex orchestration of 
events starting with an extracellular signal such as 
a hormone and leading to an increase or decrease in the 
activity of one or more proteins. Bioinformatics 
techniques have been applied to explore various steps in 
this process. For example, promoter analysis involves the 
identification and study of sequence motifs in the DNA 
surrounding the coding region of a gene. These motifs 
influence the extent to which that region is transcribed 
into mRNA. Expression data can be used to infer gene 
regulation: one might compare microarray data from a 
wide variety of states of an organism to form hypotheses 
about the genes involved in each state. In a single-cell 
organism, one might compare stages of the cell cycle, 
along with various stress conditions (heat shock, 
starvation, etc.). One can then apply clustering 
algorithms to that expression data to determine which 
genes are co-expressed. For example, the upstream 
regions (promoters) of co-expressed genes can be 
searched for over-represented regulatory elements. 
Examples of clustering algorithms applied in gene 
clustering are k-means clustering, self-organizing 
maps (SOMs), hierarchical clustering, and consensus 
clusteringmethods such as the Bi-CoPaM. The later, 
namely Bi-CoPaM, has been actually proposed to address 
various issues specific to gene discovery problems such as 
consistent co-expression of genes over multiple 
microarray datasets [14].  
 
Analysis of protein expression 
Protein microarrays and high throughput 
(HT) mass spectrometry (MS) can provide a snapshot of 
the proteins present in a biological sample. Bioinformatics 
is very much involved in making sense of protein 
microarray and HT MS data; the former approach faces 
similar problems as with microarrays targeted at mRNA, 
the latter involves the problem of matching large amounts 
of mass data against predicted masses from protein 
sequence databases, and the complicated statistical 
analysis of samples where multiple, but incomplete 
peptides from each protein are detected. 
 
Analysis of mutations in cancer 
In cancer, the genomes of affected cells are 
rearranged in complex or even unpredictable ways. 
Massive sequencing efforts are used to identify previously 
unknown point mutations in a variety of genes incancer. 
Bioinformaticians continue to produce specialized 
automated systems to manage the sheer volume of 
sequence data produced, and they create new algorithms 
and software to compare the sequencing results to the 
growing collection of human genome sequences 
and germline polymorphisms. New physical detection 
technologies are employed, such 
as oligonucleotide microarrays to identify chromosomal 
gains and losses (called comparative genomic 
hybridization), and singlenucleotide polymorphism arrays 
to detect known point mutations. These detection methods 
simultaneously measure several hundred thousand sites 
throughout the genome, and when used in high-
throughput to measure thousands of samples, 
generate terabytes of data per experiment. Again the 
massive amounts and new types of data generate new 
opportunities for bioinformaticians. The data is often 
found to contain considerable variability, or noise, and 
thus Hidden Markov model and change-point analysis 
methods are being developed to infer real copy 
number changes. 
Another type of data that requires novel 
informatics development is the analysis of lesions found 
to be recurrent among many tumors. 
 
Comparative genomics 
The core of comparative genome analysis is the 
establishment of the correspondence 
between genes (orthology analysis) or other genomic 
features in different organisms. It is these intergenomic 
maps that make it possible to trace the evolutionary 
processes responsible for the divergence of two genomes. 
A multitude of evolutionary events acting at various 
organizational levels shape genome evolution. At the 
lowest level, point mutations affect individual 
nucleotides. At a higher level, large chromosomal 
segments undergo duplication, lateral transfer, inversion, 
transposition, deletion and insertion. Ultimately, whole 
genomes are involved in processes of hybridization, 
polyploidization and endosymbiosis, often leading to 
rapid speciation. The complexity of genome evolution 
poses many exciting challenges to developers of 
mathematical models and algorithms, who have recourse 
to a spectra of algorithmic, statistical and mathematical 
techniques, ranging from exact, heuristics, fixed 
parameter and approximation algorithms for problems 
based on parsimony models to Markov Chain Monte 
Carlo algorithms for Bayesian analysis of problems based 
on probabilistic models. 
 
Many of these studies are based on the homology 
detection and protein families computation. 
A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
25 
 
Network and systems biology 
Network analysis seeks to understand the 
relationships within biological networks such 
as metabolic or protein-protein interaction networks. 
Although biological networks can be constructed from a 
single type of molecule or entity (such as genes), network 
biology often attempts to integrate many different data 
types, such as proteins, small molecules, gene expression 
data, and others, which are all connected physically 
and/or functionally. 
Systems biology involves the use of computer 
simulations of cellular subsystems (such as the networks 
of metabolites and enzymes which comprise 
metabolites, signal transduction pathways and gene 
regulatory networks) to both analyze and visualize the 
complex connections of these cellular processes. Artificial 
life or virtual evolution attempts to understand 
evolutionary processes via the computer simulation of 
simple (artificial) life forms. 
 
High-throughput image analysis 
Computational technologies are used to 
accelerate or fully automate the processing, quantification 
and analysis of large amounts of high-information-
content biomedical imagery. Modern image analysis 
systems augment an observer's ability to make 
measurements from a large or complex set of images, by 
improving accuracy, objectivity, or speed. A fully 
developed analysis system may completely replace the 
observer. Although these systems are not unique to 
biomedical imagery, biomedical imaging is becoming 
more important for both diagnostics and research. Some 
examples are: 
 high-throughput and high-fidelity quantification and 
sub-cellular localization (high-content screening, 
cytohistopathology, Bioimage informatics) 
 morphometrics 
 clinical image analysis and visualization 
 determining the real-time air-flow patterns in 
breathing lungs of living animals 
 quantifying occlusion size in real-time imagery from 
the development of and recovery during arterial injury 
 making behavioral observations from extended video 
recordings of laboratory animals 
 infrared measurements for metabolic activity 
determination 
 inferring clone overlaps in DNA mapping, e.g. 
the Sulston score 
Structural bioinformatic approaches 
 
Prediction of protein structure 
Protein structure prediction is another important 
application of bioinformatics. The amino acid sequence of 
a protein, the so-called primary structure, can be easily 
determined from the sequence on the gene that codes for 
it. In the vast majority of cases, this primary structure 
uniquely determines a structure in its native environment. 
(Of course, there are exceptions, such as the bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy– a.k.a. Mad Cow Disease –
 prion.) Knowledge of this structure is vital in 
understanding the function of the protein. For lack of 
better terms, structural information is usually classified as 
one of secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure. A 
viable general solution to such predictions remains an 
open problem. As of now, most efforts have been directed 
towards heuristics that work most of the time. 
One of the key ideas in bioinformatics is the 
notion of homology. In the genomic branch of 
bioinformatics, homology is used to predict the function 
of a gene: if the sequence of gene A, whose function is 
known, is homologous to the sequence of gene B, whose 
function is unknown, one could infer that B may share A's 
function. In the structural branch of bioinformatics, 
homology is used to determine which parts of a protein 
are important in structure formation and interaction with 
other proteins. In a technique called homology modeling, 
this information is used to predict the structure of a 
protein once the structure of a homologous protein is 
known. This currently remains the only way to predict 
protein structures reliably. 
One example of this is the similar protein 
homology between hemoglobin in humans and the 
hemoglobin in legumes (leghemoglobin). Both serve the 
same purpose of transporting oxygen in the organism. 
Though both of these proteins have completely different 
amino acid sequences, their protein structures are virtually 
identical, which reflects their near identical purposes. 
Other techniques for predicting protein structure 
include protein threading and de novo (from scratch) 
physics-based modeling. 
 
Molecular Interaction 
Efficient software is available today for studying 
interactions among proteins, ligands and peptides. Types 
of interactions most often encountered in the field include 
– Protein–ligand (including drug), protein–protein and 
protein–peptide. 
Molecular dynamic simulation of movement of 
atoms about rotatable bonds is the fundamental principle 
behind computational algorithms, termed docking 
algorithms for studying molecular interactions. 
 
Docking algorithms 
In the last two decades, tens of thousands of 
protein three-dimensional structures have been 
determined by X-ray crystallography and Protein nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (protein NMR). One 
central question for the biological scientist is whether it is 
practical to predict possible protein–protein interactions 
only based on these 3D shapes, without doing protein–
protein interaction experiments. A variety of methods 
A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
26 
 
have been developed to tackle the Protein–protein 
docking problem, though it seems that there is still much 
work to be done in this field. 
 
Software Tools  
Software tools for bioinformatics range from 
simple command-line tools, to more complex graphical 
programs and standalone web-services available from 
various bioinformatics companies or public institutions. 
 
Bioinformatics software 
Many free and open source software tools have 
existed and continued to grow since the 1980. The 
combination of a continued need for new algorithms for 
the analysis of emerging types of biological readouts, the 
potential for innovative in silico experiments, and freely 
available open code bases have helped to create 
opportunities for all research groups to contribute to both 
bioinformatics and the range of open source software 
available, regardless of their funding arrangements. The 
open source tools often act as incubators of ideas, or 
community-supported plug-ins in commercial 
applications. They may also provide de facto standards 
and shared object models for assisting with the challenge 
of bioinformation integration.The range of open source 
software packages includes titles such 
as Bioconductor,  BioPerl,  Biopython,  BioJava,  BioRub
y,  Bioclipse, EMBOSS, Taverna workbench, 
and UGENE. In order to maintain this tradition and create 
further opportunities, the non-profit Open Bioinformatics 
Foundation have supported the annual Bioinformatics 
Open Source Conference (BOSC) since 2000 [14]. 
 
Web services in bioinformatics 
SOAP and REST-based interfaces have been 
developed      for    a    wide    variety  of   bioinformatics  
applications allowing an application running on one 
computer in one part of the world to use algorithms, data 
and computing resources on servers in other parts of the 
world. The main advantages derive from the fact that end 
users do not have to deal with software and database 
maintenance overheads. 
Basic bioinformatics services are classified by 
the EBI into three categories: SSS (Sequence Search 
Services), MSA (Multiple Sequence Alignment), 
and BSA (Biological Sequence Analysis).[citation needed 
]The availability of these serviceoriented bioinformatics 
resources demonstrate the applicability of web based 
bioinformatics solutions, and range from a collection of 
standalone tools with a common data format under a 
single, standalone or webbased interface, to integrative, 
distributed and extensible bioinformatics workflow 
management systems. 
 
CONCLUSION 
A Bioinformatics management system is a 
specialized form of a workflow management 
system designed specifically to compose and execute a 
series of computational or data manipulation steps, or a 
workflow, in a Bioinformatics application. Such systems 
are designed to 
 provide an easy-to-use environment for individual 
application scientists themselves to create their own 
workflows 
 provide interactive tools for the scientists enabling 
them to execute their workflows and view their results in 
real-time 
 simplify the process of sharing and reusing 
workflows between the scientists. 
 enable scientists to track the provenance of the 
workflow execution results and the workflow creation 
steps. 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Johnson, George; Tai Te Wua. Kabat Database and its applications: 30 years after the first variability plot. Nucleic Acids 
Res, 28(1), 2000, 214–218.   
2. Moody, Glyn. Digital Code of Life: How Bioinformatics is Revolutionizing Science, Medicine, and Business, 2004. 
3. Waterman, Michael S. Introduction to Computational Biology: Sequences, Maps and Genomes. CRC Press, 1995. 
4. Mount, David W. Bioinformatics: Sequence and Genome Analysis. Spring Harbor Press, 2002. 
5. Claverie JM, Notredame C. Bioinformatics for Dummies. Wiley. 2002. 
6. Hogeweg, P. Searls, David B. ed. The Roots of Bioinformatics in Theoretical Biology. PLoS Computational 
Biology, 7(3), 2011, e1002021.   
7. Hesper B, Hogeweg P. Bioinformatica: een werkconcept. 1. Kameleon. 1970, pp. 28–29. 
8. Hogeweg, P. Simulating the growth of cellular forms. Simulation, 31(3), 1978, 90–96.  
9. Sanger F, Air GM, Barrell BG, Brown NL, Coulson AR, Fiddes CA, Hutchison CA, Slocombe PM, Smith M (February 
1977). "Nucleotide sequence of bacteriophage phi X174 DNA. Nature, 265(5596), 1977, 687–95.  
10. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL. GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res., 36, 2008, D25–30.  
11. Fleischmann RD, Adams MD, White O, Clayton RA, Kirkness EF, Kerlavage AR, Bult CJ, Tomb JF, Dougherty BA, 
Merrick JM. Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus influenzae Rd. Science, 269(5223), 1995, 
496–512.  
12. Antonio Carvajal-Rodríguez. Simulation of Genes and Genomes Forward in Time. Current Genomics (Bentham Science 
Publishers Ltd.) 11(1), 2012, 2012, 58–61. 
A. Elumalai and M. Chinna Eswaraiah. / Journal of Science / Vol 3 / Issue 1 / 2013 / 21-27. 
 
27 
 
13. Abu-Jamous B, Fa R, Roberts DJ, Nandi AK, Peddada SD. Peddada, Shyamal D. ed. Paradigm of Tunable Clustering 
Using Binarization of Consensus Partition Matrices (Bi-CoPaM) for Gene Discovery. PLoS ONE, 8(2), 2013, e56432.  
14. Abu-Jamous B, Fa R, Roberts DJ, Nandi AK. Yeast gene CMR1/YDL156W is consistently co-expressed with genes 
participating in DNA-metabolic processes in a variety of stringent clustering experiments. Journal of the Royal Society 
Interface, 10(81), 2013, 20120990–20120990. 

