IBM Global Business Services
Business Analytics and Optimization
Executive Report
IBM Institute for Business Value
Analytics: Real-world use of big data  
in telecommunications 
How innovative communications service providers are extracting 
value from uncertain data
In collaboration with Saïd Business School at the University of Oxford 
IBM® Institute for Business Value
IBM Global Business Services, through the IBM Institute for Business Value, develops 
fact-based strategic insights for senior executives around critical public and private 
sector issues. This executive report is based on an in-depth study by the Institute’s 
research team. It is part of an ongoing commitment by IBM Global Business Services  
to provide analysis and viewpoints that help companies realize business value.  
You may contact the authors or send an email to iibv@us.ibm.com for more information. 
Additional studies from the IBM Institute for Business Value can be found at  
ibm.com/iibv
Saïd Business School at the University of Oxford 
The Saïd Business School is one of the leading business schools in the UK. The School 
is establishing a new model for business education by being deeply embedded in the 
University of Oxford, a world-class university and tackling some of the challenges  
the world is encountering. You may contact the authors or visit: www.sbs.ox.ac.uk for 
more information.
IBM Global Business Services      1
“Big data” is made for the telecommunications industry. Thanks to 
their networks and the proliferation of smart devices, communications service 
providers (CSPs) have access to a wealth of information about their customers’ 
behaviors, preferences and movements. Big data is a tremendously valuable asset for 
these companies. It puts them in a prime position to win the battle for customers and 
create new revenue streams – provided they can get their acts together. Our newest 
global research study reveals how CSPs are responding to today’s big data 
opportunity.                                 
By Bob Fox, Rob van den Dam and Rebecca Shockley
CSPs have always lived in the world of big data. They have 
very large subscriber bases, and data is generated every time a 
customer makes a call, creates a text or uses the Internet. This 
data provides information about who customers called, what 
web sites were visited, which apps were downloaded, where the 
customer was when the phone was used, as well as his or her 
current location. The data also provides valuable information 
about the customer experience. Did the call go through? Was it 
dropped or interrupted? How fast did the song or app 
download? What was the response latency during the game 
that was played?
Further customer information is generated through direct 
customer relationships via retail shops, web sites, call centers 
and face-to-face interactions. Additionally, the increased use of 
smart devices and the popularity of social networking are 
generating an ever-growing flow of data that reveals customer 
demographics, spending behavior, lifestyle and social 
influences. 
CSPs are at the heart of their customers’ digital universe. They 
are sitting on a gold mine of digital data that enables them to 
understand their customers at an unparalleled level. It is a key 
corporate asset, much needed in a competitive landscape where 
over-the-top (OTT) players, such as Google and Facebook, are 
eating into their revenues. Big data provides the opportunity 
for CSPs to become more competitive and reverse recent 
declines in revenue and profit levels.
With the opportunities it provides, it is no wonder big data has 
emerged as a key topic for telecommunications Chief 
Executive Officers (CEOs) and Chief Marketing Officers 
(CMOs). In the IBM 2011 Global CMO study, for example, 53 
percent of telecommunications CMOs said that the explosion 
of data will have the most impact on their organization over 
the next three-to-five years.1 Among CEOs, 83 percent of the 
telecommunications CEOs in the IBM 2012 Global CEO 
study expressed their intention to improve the ability to draw 
meaningful and executable insights to understand customer 
behavior from available information. 2 
2     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
To more clearly understand how CSPs view big data today and 
for the near future – and to what extent they are currently 
using it to benefit their businesses – we analyzed the CSP 
respondents in our global 2012 Big Data @ Work Study, 
conducted by the IBM Institute for Business Value in 
partnership with the Saïd Business School at the University of 
Oxford.3 Representing both mature and growth markets, the 
survey included 1,144 business and IT executives from 26 
industries, of which 53 were from the telecommunications 
industry.
We found that CSPs are starting to see the enormous potential 
of their customer data and the ways it can be used to help them 
create new revenues and new businesses. CSPs executives told 
us that the use of information and analytics is creating a 
competitive advantage for their organizations. 
More than executives from any other industry we studied, CSP 
respondents define big data as the capabilities needed to 
perform real-time information analysis. In fact, 40 percent of 
CSPs defined big data as such, in contrast to only 15 percent in 
the cross-industries sample. For CSPs the real-time aspect is 
extremely important – as location-based services, smarter 
network operations, intelligent marketing campaigns, next best 
actions and fraud detection require a more contextual 
real-time view of information. 
Though CSPs have handled large amounts of data for years, 
the game-changing aspect of big data today lies in using data 
to derive new insights – mostly real-time or near real-time – to 
become more competitive and to create business value. The 
current focus is on supporting the CSP’s core business, such as 
improving customer experience, driving new products, 
increasing productivity and optimizing networks. 
But a number of CSPs are taking more expansive steps with 
big data to create entirely new revenue streams, adding 
“upstream“ partners – such as retailers, advertisers and car 
manufacturers – to the revenue they already get from 
“downstream“ end-users, such as consumers and enterprise-
customers. This is often referred to as the two-sided business 
model. Some CSPs are expanding to become information 
companies. Sprint, for instance, reports early success selling its 
data to marketing agencies.4 And France’s SFR has found itself 
contributing data to help increase blood donations among its 
customer base, build a better public transport infrastructure in 
Paris and, even, fight crime.5 
Our study found that many CSPs are taking a pragmatic 
approach to big data. The most effective big data solutions 
identify business requirements first, and then tailor the 
infrastructure, data sources and analytics to support the 
business opportunity. These CSPs are initially extracting new 
insights from existing and newly available sources of 
information, defining a big data technology strategy and then 
incrementally upgrading their infrastructure over time.
Our study findings led to five key recommendations for CSPs 
to progress their big data efforts and seek the greatest business 
value from big data:
•	Commit initial efforts to customer-centric outcomes
•	Develop an enterprise-wide big data blueprint
•	 Start with existing data to achieve near-term results
•	Build analytics based on business priorities
•	Create a business case based on measurable outcomes.
IBM Global Business Services      3
CSPs future in big data 
Big data means many things to many people. To understand 
our study respondents’ definition of the term, we asked each to 
select up to two characteristics of big data. For 18 percent of 
the cross-industries sample, “a greater scope of information” 
was selected as the characteristic best describing big data. Forty 
percent of CSP respondents, however, said big data is best 
described by the emerging requirements for more “real-time” 
information (see Figure 1).
While large volumes of data are not new to CSPs – collecting 
millions of call detail records per day has become routine – the 
level of complexity of data today is a significant challenge. The 
voice data that CSPs have always collected is simplistic 
compared to the contextual data provided today by 
smartphones, tablets, personal computers, networks, sensors, 
RFID tags, social media and the like. And analyzing all this 
data in near real-time is becoming increasingly crucial. 
Moreover, with the advent of smart phones, tablets and other 
devices that are application dependent, the volume of signaling 
data – i.e. non-message information about the device, its 
location and updates – has also increased significantly.
CSPs that can ingest and analyze contextual data in real-time 
or near-real time have much to gain. Within big data lies the 
opportunity to derive new insights and predict trends that may 
spark new ways of doing business internally or externally. 
Using big data in delivering location-based services, tailored 
marketing campaigns, next best actions for sales and services, 
network intelligence, social media insights and high-velocity 
fraud detection has the potential of both increasing revenue 
and reducing costs, often while improving the customer’s 
experience.
Real-time information
Non-traditional 
sources of information
A greater scope of 
information
The latest buzzword
New kinds of data and 
analysis
Data influx from new 
technologies
Large volumes of data
18%
11%
13%
21%
15%
40%
Source: Analytics: The real-world use of big data, a collaborative research study by 
the IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the University 
of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 1: For CSPs, big data is best described by the emerging 
requirements for more real-time information.
Defining big data
8%
11%
16%
9%
CSP respondents 
All industry respondents
8%
0%
13%
8%
Although CSPs have historically managed 
large volumes of data, the complexity of data 
today is a significant challenge.
4     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
CSPs hold a treasure of customer-related data, and the 
nuggets of insights buried in big data can be a gold mine. 
Next-generation analytics can help CSPs mine and refine the 
value of this economic asset. CSPs are increasingly starting 
to realize that this stockpile of information is an untapped 
asset. Eighty-five percent of CSP respondents in our study 
– significantly more than the cross-industry average of 63 
percent – reported that the use of information (including big 
data) and analytics is creating a competitive advantage for 
their organizations (see Figure 2). This compares to 38 
percent of CSP respondents in IBM’s 2010 New Intelligent 
Enterprise Global Executive Study and Research 
Collaboration – a 124 percent increase in just two years.6
Using big data as a competitive advantage is key in the 
evolving communications landscape. With the emergence of 
OTT players, coupled with the increase use of smart devices, it 
has never been more important for CSPs to leverage their 
unrivalled data assets to drive greater service innovation and 
deliver the best possible customer service. In doing so, CSPs 
can transform their business and customer engagement models 
and become more competitive, increasing customer value and 
benefit.
An increasing number of CSPs are also thinking about 
exploiting customer information commercially, such as 
generating new revenues from packaging and selling data. 
Some CSPs see great opportunities in making money from 
data and even believe the future of their organization is as an 
information company. The network has become a commodity. 
How CSPs capture data and put sensors in their networks, 
that’s where the real gold is.7 Or, as expressed by Von 
McConnell, director of technology development and strategy 
at Sprint: “If Telco’s became nothing more than a dumb pipe, 
we could make a living just out of analytics.”8
Possibilities abound for CSPs to partner with other parties. 
For example, they can team up with advertisers, retailers, car 
manufacturers and public administrations – just to mention a 
few – for e-commerce, machine-to-machine applications and 
location-based services. They can play a role in smarter cities, 
health care and other areas, both in mature and growth 
markets. France CSP Orange, for example, recently 
participated in an experiment called “Traffic Zen” with 
highway operator Autoroutes du Sud de la France to create 
traffic forecasts.9 And, as previously mentioned, some CSPs 
have had success in selling data to marketing agencies.10
2012
2011
2010
37%
38%
58%
59%
63%
85%
Source: Analytics: The real-world use of big data, a collaborative research study by 
the IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the University 
of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 2: Use of information (including big data) and analytics is 
creating a competitive advantage for CSPs.
Realizing a competitive advantage
CSP respondents
All industry respondents
124%
increase
IBM Global Business Services      5
Whether CSPs are using big data to support their core 
business, or are considering big data sales as a source of 
revenue, they need to develop a roadmap, set up an adequate 
infrastructure and adopt new methods, processes and tools to 
manage the unique volume, velocity, variety and veracity 
requirements of big data. By analyzing survey responses, five 
key findings emerge that reveal common insights and trends:
•	The business case for big data is strongly focused on 
addressing customer-centric objectives
•	A scalable and extensible information management 
foundation is a prerequisite for big data advancement
•	CSPs are beginning their pilots and implementations by 
using existing and newly accessible internal sources of data
•	Advanced analytic capabilities are required, yet often lacking, 
for CSPs to get the most value from big data
•	The emerging pattern of big data is focused on delivering 
measurable business value.
Customer-centric objectives are driving big data 
initiatives
When asked to rank their top three objectives for big data, 
two-thirds of CSP respondents identified customer-centric 
objectives as their organization’s top priority (see Figure 4). 
CSPs are committed to improving the customer experience 
and better understanding customer preferences and behavior. 
Better understanding, predicting and giving today’s 
“empowered customers” what they really want was also 
identified as the top priority for 93 percent of CSP CEOs in 
IBM’s 2012 Global CEO study.11
CSPs are being practical about big data
CSPs are increasingly seeing the enormous potential of big 
data. More than half (54 percent) are in the process of 
developing a strategy and roadmap on big data and how to 
apply it to business challenges. One-third are developing 
proofs of concepts (POCs), or have already implemented big 
data solutions at scale. Only 13 percent of CSP respondents, 
far fewer than other industries, have not started any big data 
activities yet (see Figure 3). 
24%
13% 54% 33%
47% 28%
Source: Big Data @ Work survey, a collaborative research survey conducted by the 
IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the
University of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 3: Most CSPs are in early stages of big data developments.
Big data activities
CSP respondents
All industry respondents
Have not 
begun big data 
activities
Planning big 
data activities
Pilot and 
implementation 
of big data 
activities
6     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
Providing a greater customer experience every time is vital 
for limiting churn and building loyalty. As confirmed by 
IBM’s 2011 Global Telecom Consumer Survey, customer 
loyalty is very low in the telecommunications industry, and 
CSPs are having difficulty retaining customers.12 In addition, 
CSPs are facing stiff competition from over-the-top players, 
such as Google, Apple, Facebook, WhatsApp and Skype, 
companies that have proven adept at creating compelling 
online experiences for consumers. The focus of CSPs, 
therefore, has shifted from reducing cost to delivering a 
superior customer experience over their networks. In today’s 
world, competitive advantage requires a distinctive customer 
experience that goes beyond satisfaction and creates real value 
for the customer.
As customers provide information every day through their 
device and network usage, CSPs are well-positioned to learn 
their customers’ wants and needs. Smartphones are, by nature, 
on virtually all the time, providing CSPs with the opportunity 
to know their customers better than most, if not all, industries. 
Also every less-than-satisfactory customer experience – from 
dropped calls to poor bandwidth performance to excessive 
latency – is known or knowable. CSPs have an unparalleled 
opportunity to link traditional customer insights, segmentation 
and lifetime value to the actual performance of the network as 
experienced by the customer – real or near-real time. From call 
detail records to billing records, to customer profiles and 
location data from mobile devices, CSPs have the information 
to determine how to offer well-tailored products and services, 
as well as to deliver a user experience that is meaningful at the 
right location at the exact right time.
Since CSPs own their networks, the opportunity exists to use 
analytic tools – developed specifically to handle big data – to 
identify problems, perform real-time troubleshooting and 
quickly fix network performance issues, all improvements to 
the user perception of CSP’s services. As an example, if 
high-value smartphone customers are experiencing poor 
through-put performance, big data analytics can enable the 
CSPs to immediately identify the issue and take the necessary 
steps to ensure the customer experience is not affected – or, in 
cases where disruption occurs, acknowledge that the experience 
was affected to minimize the damage.
Customer-centric 
objectives
New business 
models
Risk/financial 
management
Operational 
optimization
Employee 
collaboration
15%
11%
14%
15%
49%
Source: Analytics: The real-world use of big data, a collaborative research study by 
the IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the University 
of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 4: Two-thirds of CSP respondents’ big data efforts target 
customer-centric outcomes.
Big data objectives
18%
8%
0%
CSP respondents 
All industry respondents
66%
4%
IBM Global Business Services      7
Intelligent marketing campaigns use big data analytics to 
create targeted promotions customers are more likely to 
embrace. For example, Telefónica’s Brazilian subsidiary, Vivo, 
implemented a solution that uses call data, demographics and 
predictive modeling to reach out to customers and only offer 
them products and services that match their needs and 
lifestyles.13 This solution, for instance, can preemptively 
contact customers who have recently exceeded their allotted 
calling minutes and offer discounted upgrade options that 
will prevent future overages. This approach demonstrates to 
the customer that Vivo values their business and is likely to 
result in a positive customer experience. These types of 
customized marketing promotions can help to prevent 
churn, increase sales and lower marketing campaign costs.
The ability to anticipate the wants and needs of customers in 
a sales or customer service situation, known as “next best 
action” modeling, can increase revenue, profits and customer 
satisfaction, as well as reduce churn. Next best action 
responses are most effective when they take into account 
recent customer interactions across all sales and service 
channels and automatically determine the best course for 
each customer, such as offering a new service, an upgrade for 
an existing service or a service call to address a specific issue.
In addition to customer-centric objectives, other functional 
objectives are also being addressed through early applications 
of big data. Enabling new business models, for example, was cited 
by 15 percent of CSP respondents to the 2012 Big Data @ 
Work Study. Insights generated from big data have the 
potential to provide access to entirely new business 
propositions and revenue streams, such as the aforementioned 
sale of data to third parties. 
The early successes of CSPs to commercialize the big data are 
evidenced by initiatives from Telefónica and Verizon.14 
Telefónica’s Dynamic Insights division launched its first service 
in November 2012: “Smart Steps.” This service is designed to 
provide insights to retailers to help them tailor local offerings 
for existing stores, and determine the best locations and most 
appropriate formats for new stores. Verizon’s Precision 
Marketing division has already trialed its solution with a sports 
team. Joint promotional opportunities and ticketing packages 
have boosted season ticket sales by up to 35 percent.
Risk and financial management focused activities were identified by 
11 percent of CSP respondents as important objectives for 
early big data efforts. Applying advanced analytics tools, CSPs 
can scour big data for potential fraudulent activities as 
transactions occur, scoring and rating the probability that they 
are fraudulent. The challenge for real-time fraud detection 
– such as the use of cloned SIM cards – includes the need to 
ingest and analyze large volumes of high-velocity data from 
across geographies and subscribers and act quickly enough to 
identify and prevent unauthorized use. One CSP executive 
estimated that using real time analytics tools could reduce 
fraud by more than US$100 million per year.15 As well as 
driving down overall debt-collection costs, targeting risky 
customers also has the added advantage of lowering churn 
rates.
Anticipating customer wants and needs can 
increase revenue and customer satisfaction, as 
well as reduce churn
8     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
Big data is dependent upon a scalable and extensible 
information foundation
The opportunity to achieve significant, measurable business 
value from big data can only be realized if CSPs put into place 
an information foundation that supports the rapidly growing 
volume, variety and velocity of data. We asked CSP 
respondents to identify the current state of their big data 
infrastructures. Those who have already implemented big data 
solutions have an information foundation that is scalable, 
extensible and supports (near) real-time requirements. They 
use technologies such as Hadoop and NoSQL to efficiently 
process large amount of data in less time in distributed 
environments. These technologies provide higher scalability 
than traditional technologies.
It’s no surprise that CSPs rank scalability, extensibility and 
(near) real-time aspects at the top. CSPs all over the world are 
seeing an unprecedented rise in volume, variety and velocity of 
information due to next generation network roll-outs, 
increased use of smart phones and rise of social media. It is 
increasingly important for CSPs to correlate this data in a way 
that it can be used to monitor network performance and to 
provide improved services and customer experience in (near) 
real-time. 
T-Mobile in the United States, for example, is collecting a 
staggering 17 billion events a day from its network, storing this 
data and running analytics on it.16 This analysis enables 
T-Mobile to examine and correlate network performance with 
high-value subscribers and services to better target its capital 
expenditure and networking engineering.
The stream of incoming data, both structured and 
unstructured, CSPs must collect and manage is increasing 
exponentially. According Cisco Visual Network Index, global 
mobile data traffic will increase 13-fold between 2012 and 
2017.17 As a result, the load on CSPs’ big data infrastructures 
will continuously increase. This surge in data promotes the 
concept that, even though the era of big data has barely begun, 
the era of “really big data” is on the immediate horizon. As the 
world becomes increasingly connected, CSPs will play a crucial 
role in enabling mass personalization through contextual-
awareness. Continuously processing data from interconnected 
devices will reveal meaningful inferences that can benefit the 
end user. 
Though scalability, extensibility and real-time aspects are cited 
by CSP executives as the top three components in the 
information foundation, the other components, including 
security and governance, are also important. Strong security 
and governance processes are in place at 50 percent of the 
CSPs that report having active big data initiatives underway. 
While security and governance have long been an inherent 
part of business intelligence, the added legal, ethical and 
regulatory considerations of big data introduce new risks and 
expand the potential for public missteps. Some companies have 
lost control of data or used it in questionable ways. Recent 
privacy blunders, such as copying customers’ contact lists 
without consent, or inadequate privacy policies, serve as 
examples of what customers, regulators and society-at-large are 
willing to accept.
CSPs rank scalability, extensibility and 
real-time aspects as top factors in creating an 
information foundation.
IBM Global Business Services      9
Data security – and especially data privacy – has always been a 
critical part of information management, but big data’s size, 
scale and depth take the need to an entirely new level. Security 
and governance will become even more important and 
daunting as CSPs embrace new sources of information, 
especially social media data. Compounding this challenge, 
privacy regulations are still evolving and can vary greatly by 
country.
“There is the perception that privacy and security is easy, but 
it’s very regulated, very closely watched,” one telecom-
munications industry executive explained.18 And it’s not just 
governmental agencies watching, but also the customers 
themselves. The executive continued: “There are a number of 
new areas – like web browsing data – where a gray area exists 
between what’s legal and what’s right. We have taken the 
approach to consider every action using the standard of what 
the customer would think if (the way we used the data) was 
splashed across the front page.”
Initial big data efforts are focused on gaining insights 
from existing and newly accessible sources of internal 
data
Most early big data efforts are targeted at sourcing and 
analyzing existing data. According to our survey, more than 
half of the CSP respondents reported internal data as the 
primary source of big data within their organizations. This 
suggests that CSPs are taking a pragmatic approach to 
adopting big data. It further indicates that tremendous 
untapped value is still locked away in these internal systems 
(see Figure 5).
Transactions
Log data
Audio, e.g., phone calls
Events
Social media
Geospatial
Emails
External feeds
Free-form text
Sensors
87%
Source: Analytics: The real-world use of big data, a collaborative research study by 
the IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the University 
of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 5: For CSPs, big data is best described by the emerging 
requirements for more real-time information.
Big data sources
79%
67%
58%
46%
45%
44%
40%
36%
33%
Internal data is the most mature, well-understood data 
available to CSPs. By applying analytics, internal data extracted 
from phone calls, transactions, call center interactions and 
events can provide valuable information. Call detail records 
captures information about who made the call, who received it, 
how long the call was, etc. With the proliferation of 
smartphones, a new category of transaction records has 
emerged – XDRs (extended data record) – which capture other 
transactions, such as the purchase and download of a song or a 
video clip, a recharge on a prepaid account or a mobile 
payment. CSPs can make good use of the information they 
already have. They can build a view of their customers across 
all touch points – from wired and wireless networks to 
customer-facing channels – and use it to improve customer 
experience, profile customers, align solutions to customer 
needs, predict the up-selling potential and more. 
10     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
Executive interviews confirmed that many telecommunications 
CIOs guiding their companies’ big data initiatives are 
beginning with these untapped sources of internal information. 
For example, TEOCO, a telecom software solution provider, 
analyzed 500 terabyte of data daily from call detail records and 
inter-carrier invoices to help CSPs identify cost savings and 
improve service delivery. 19 The company helped a Tier 1 
mobile operator save more than US$400 million in four years. 
It also enabled clients to proactively respond to network issues 
before they affected customer service.
The new trend is not only to understand who the customers 
are, but also to have a more contextual, location-based and 
real-time view of them. Terabytes of location data are 
generated every day and adds another dimension for CSPs. 
Forty-five percent of CSPs respondents with active big data 
efforts use location data, for example, to support intelligent 
marketing campaigns, detect fraud and improve network 
quality. 
Forty-six percent of the CSP respondents in our study with 
big data efforts underway extract data from social media 
sources such as Twitter, Facebook, message boards and other 
online locations where consumers chat and post opinions. This 
enables them to quickly detect customer issues and consumer 
sentiments, and provides insight that can enable increased 
revenues, reduced costs and brand protection. 
Big data requires strong analytics capabilities
Big data does not create value, however, until it is put to use to 
solve important business challenges. This requires access to 
strong analytics capabilities that include both software tools 
and the requisite skills to use them. 
Examining those CSPs already engaged in big data activities 
reveals that they start with a strong core of analytics 
capabilities designed to address structured data. Next, they add 
capabilities to take advantage of the wealth of data coming into 
the organization that is both semi-structured (data that can be 
converted to standard data forms) and unstructured (data in 
non-standard forms).
More than 85 percent of CSP respondents with active big data 
efforts reported using core analytics capabilities, such as query 
and reporting, and data mining to analyze big data (see Figure 
6). Beginning with these foundational analytics capabilities is a 
pragmatic way to start interpreting and analyzing big data. The 
need for more advanced data visualization capabilities increases 
with the introduction of big data. Datasets are often too large 
for business or data analysts to view and analyze with 
traditional reporting and data mining tools. In our study, 77 
percent of CSP respondents said that they rely on data 
visualization skills.
Predictive modeling uses algorithms to find patterns in data 
that might predict similar outcomes in the future. Three-
quarters of CSP respondents with big data efforts report using 
predictive analytics. An example of predictive analytics is the 
use of customer data to find out which customers are likely to 
churn. If a CSP can predict the reasons for churn, they can 
take preemptive actions to try to avoid this undesirable 
outcome. 
CSPs are looking to have a more contextual, 
location-based and real-time view of 
customers.
IBM Global Business Services      11
Today, most CSPs are directing their initial big data focus 
toward analyzing structured data. But big data also creates the 
need to analyze multiple data types, including location data, 
social media, data from sensors and natural language text. By 
combining location information with customer profiles and 
usage patterns to separate travel and stationary patterns, CSPs 
can identify network loads and bottlenecks. Location analytics 
enable CSPs to manage the network and user experience, 
identify customers at relevant locations and drive location-
based marketing in real-time. Three-in-five CSP-respondents 
with big data efforts use geospatial analytics.
In more than half of the active big data efforts, CSP 
respondents reported using advanced capabilities designed to 
analyze text in its natural state, such as the transcripts of 
call-center conversations. These analytics include the ability to 
interpret and understand the nuances of language, such as 
sentiment, slang and intentions.
As described in IBM Institute for Business Value’s “Telecom’s 
future is social” study, a number of CSPs have started using 
data from social media to generate richer insights.21 By 
combining social characteristics with existing behavioral 
knowledge, CSPs are able to create extended and deeper 
insights to engage and retain customers. Social network 
analytics can also be used to find key influencers and engage 
them with customized messaging, to evaluate how new 
campaigns, product and services are resonating, and to quickly 
respond to negative chatter to protect their brands and 
reputation. Bharti Airtel, for example, uses social network 
analysis to determine customer issues by tracking mentions of 
the company on social media and following up on any 
problems.22
XO Communications, a wholesale and enterprise-focused CSP 
in the United States, has been using predictive analytics with 
its monthly account-management cycle to predict churn. 
Within the first year, a 60-percent improvement in revenue 
retention rates was realized. Although XO account managers 
have been surprised from time-to time at the likely candidates 
to churn, the use of analytics in this way has enabled an 
improvement in customer experience to the degree that one 
particular XO service line has swung from loss to profit.20
Query and reporting
Data mining
Data visualization
Predictive modeling
Geospatial analytics
Optimization
Natural language text
Simulation
Voice analytics
Streaming analtyics
Video analytics
93%
Source: Analytics: The real-world use of big data, a collaborative research study by 
the IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the University 
of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 6: CSP respondents are applying a variety of advanced 
analytics.
Analytics capabilities
86%
77%
75%
60%
55%
54%
40%
36%
25%
22%
12     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
The emerging pattern of big data adoption is focused 
on delivering measurable business value
The overall challenge that inhibits big data adoption as CSPs 
move through the big data adoption stages – from education 
(building a base of knowledge, through exploration and 
engagement, to execution (implementing big data at scale) – is 
understanding the potential that big data presents, i.e. the 
ability to articulate a compelling business case (see Figure 7). 
The current telecommunications industry climate – especially 
slowing or flat revenue growth and the increasing demand for 
capital expenditures to build 4G/LTE networks – has left CSPs 
with little appetite for new technology investments without 
measurable benefits – a requirement that is of course, not 
exclusive to big data initiatives. Examples of benefits that 
should make big data attractive to CSPs, include greater capital 
and operational expenditure efficiencies, better customer 
relations, or more product/service innovation and speed. 
Decision making is mainly driven by business value. Proposed 
investments not likely to deliver reasonable return are not a 
high priority. 
The limited number of CSPs that report economic and 
competitive advantage from big data – as mentioned before, 
only a few CSPs have already operationalized and implemented 
big data and analytics capabilities within their organizations 
– makes others anxious about the returns forecast from big 
data investments. 
This economic skepticism means that the greatest obstacle 
confronting those in the early stages of big data development 
centers on understanding and articulating a compelling use 
case worthy of the needed investments in big data capabilities 
– and getting management’s attention long enough to have 
them understand and support it moving forward.
Once CSPs begin to focus on a specific business challenge 
through proofs of concepts and pilots, it is no surprise that the 
struggle becomes finding the needed skills to make big data 
real: first, the skills to implement and evaluate the 
technologies; later, quantitative and visualizations skills 
required to perform the advanced analytics and to make the 
insights actionable.
ExecuteEngageExploreEducate
 
 
Obstacles to big data
Analytical skills
Data quality
Technical skills
Management focus 
and support
Understanding how
to use big data
Articulating a compelling business case
Respondents were asked to identify the top obstacles to big data efforts within their organization. Responses were 
weighted and aggregated. Box placement reflects the degree to which each obstacle is dominant in a given stage.
Source: Big Data @ Work survey, a collaborative research survey conducted by the 
IBM Institute for Business Value and the Saïd Business School at the
University of Oxford. © IBM 2012
Figure 7: Understanding key big data adoption obstacles.
IBM Global Business Services      13
Recommendations:  
Cultivating big data adoption
Analysis of our big data survey findings provided new insights 
into how CSPs are advancing their big data efforts. Driven by 
the need to solve business challenges, in light of both 
advancing technologies and the changing nature of data, CSPs 
are starting to look closer at big data’s potential benefits. To 
extract more value, we offer a broad set of recommendations to 
CSPs as they proceed down the path of big data.
Commit initial efforts to customer-centric outcomes
It is imperative that CSPs focus big data initiatives on areas 
that can provide the most value to the business. And that 
means beginning with customer analytics that enable better 
service to customers as a result of being able to truly 
understand customer needs and anticipate future behaviors. 
Better understanding, predicting and giving customers what 
they really want is by far the key priority of 
telecommunications CEOs. 
Mass digitization, one of the forces that helped to create the 
surge in big data, has also changed the balance of power 
between the consumer and the CSP. If CSPs are to understand 
and provide value to empowered customers, they have to 
concentrate on getting to know their customers as individuals. 
They will also need to invest in new technologies and advanced 
analytics to gain better insights into individual customer 
interactions and preferences.
But today’s customers – end consumers or business-to-business 
customers – want more than just understanding. To effectively 
cultivate meaningful relationships with their customers, CSPs 
must connect with them in ways their customers perceive as 
valuable.
The value may come through more timely, informed or 
relevant interactions; it may also come as CSPs improve the 
underlying operations in ways that enhance the overall 
experience of those interactions. Either way, analytics fuels the 
insights from big data that are increasingly becoming essential 
to creating that level of depth in these relationships.
Develop an enterprise-wide big data blueprint
A blueprint encompasses the vision, strategy and requirements 
for big data within the organization. It is critical to establishing 
alignment between the needs of business users and the 
implementation roadmap of IT. It creates a common 
understanding of how CSPs intend to use big data to improve 
business objectives.
For CSPs, big data means a fundamental rethinking of the way 
data is managed. Many CSPs are still organized by products, 
services and function, not by customers; a number do not even 
have someone who owns the data or data strategy. CSPs need 
to break the data silos to enable data to be used in a more 
flexible and innovative way and to increase the velocity of data 
as it flows around the organization. CSPs need to set up an 
enterprise-wide information foundation to move forward.
An effective blueprint defines the scope of big data within the 
organization by identifying the key business challenges to 
which it will be applied, the business process requirements that 
define how big data will be used, and the architecture, which 
includes the data, tools and hardware needed to achieve the big 
data strategy. It is the basis for developing a roadmap to guide 
the organization through a pragmatic approach to develop and 
implement its big data solutions in ways that create sustainable 
business value.
14     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
Start with existing data to achieve near-time results
To achieve near-term results, while building the momentum 
and expertise to sustain a big data program, it is critical for 
CSPs to take a pragmatic approach. As respondents confirmed, 
the most logical and cost-effective place to start looking for 
new insights is within the enterprise.
Looking internally first allows CSPs to leverage their existing 
data, software and skills to deliver near-term business value and 
gain important experience. They can then extend their 
capabilities to address more complex sources and types of data. 
Most CSPs will want to do this to take advantage of the 
information stored in existing repositories while scaling their 
data warehouse(s) to handle larger volumes and varieties of 
data.
When the basic processes, frameworks and technical 
infrastructures needed to capture and manipulate existing data 
have matured, CSPs can extend to other sources. With the 
proliferation of smart devices and sensors and the explosive 
growth in structured and unstructured data, new opportunities 
emerge to provide contextually aware and just-in-time 
personalized services based on individual user views, desires, 
preferences and location. CSPs are in the best position to serve 
the smarter consumer, who increasingly expects unique 
products and services customized to his or her unique 
preferences. 
Build analytics capabilities based on business 
priorities
The first step in leveraging big data is using analytical tools, 
such as query and reporting, dashboarding and scorecarding, to 
support key business processes, including generating key 
performance indicators and customer experience management. 
This can transform data into insight by delivering relevant, 
integrated, timely and actionable information. There is 
enormous value in making real-time network information 
available to the contact center, for example.
With predictive capability, CSPs can start to transition to an 
optimized, outcomes-focused organization. It can create 
foreknowledge and deep awareness of customer, operations and 
network behaviors. Predictive analytics delivers more than 
informed decision making. It can, for example, reveal patterns 
that help identify customers who might have a high propensity 
to buy rich media services, thereby delivering new, untapped 
revenue streams.
The final step – intelligent analytics and autonomics – can help 
create a highly dynamic and efficient information-centric 
enterprise. A system that is automated and aware of real-time 
events can provide input to promote solutions for immediate 
execution. For example, a customer walking past a particular 
coffee shop can be sent an offer for a beverage discount at that 
same store.
As contextual information from the “Internet of Things” and 
data produced by social platforms becomes more important to 
support effective decision making, CSPs should increasingly 
focus on acquiring the capabilities needed to wield prescriptive 
analytics designed to automate actions. New powerful 
technologies – including cognitive systems – are capable of 
evaluating large amounts of both structured and unstructured 
data in or near real-time. 
Watson technology, for example, can sift through an equivalent 
of about 1 million books or roughly 200 million pages of data, 
and analyze this information and provide precise answers in 
less than three seconds.23 Watson applies advanced natural 
language processing, information retrieval, knowledge 
representation and reasoning, and machine learning 
technologies to answering questions. This technology, for 
example, can be useful in enabling CSP call centers to respond 
to customer questions faster, more efficiently and with greater 
accuracy.
IBM Global Business Services      15
In addition to acquiring tools, CSPs should also focus on 
having the right analytical knowledge, not easy in a world 
where there is a high demand for – and critical shortage of 
– appropriate analytical skills.
Create a business case based on measurable 
outcomes
To develop a comprehensive and viable big data strategy and 
the subsequent roadmap requires a solid, quantifiable business 
case. Therefore, it is important to have the active involvement 
and sponsorship from one or more business executives 
throughout this process. Equally important to achieving 
long-term success is strong, ongoing business and IT 
collaboration.
Many CSPs are basing their business cases on the following 
benefits that can be derived from big data:
•	 Smarter decisions – Leverage new sources of data to improve 
the quality of decision making.
•	Faster decisions – Enable more real-time data capture and 
analysis to support decision making at the “point of impact,” 
such as when a customer is at a particular location or on the 
telephone with a customer service representative.
•	Decisions that make a difference – Focus big data efforts toward 
areas that provide true differentiation.
An important principle underlies each of these 
recommendations: business and IT professionals must work 
together throughout the big data journey. The most effective 
big data solutions identify the business requirements first, and 
then tailor the infrastructure, data sources and quantitative 
analysis to support that business opportunity.
Kick off your big data evolution
The ability to systematically collect and analyze data represents 
a new world of exploration open to CSPs. With the wealth of 
information CSPs have about their customers, they have big 
advantages over others in the ecosystem. CSPs that act swiftly 
to capitalize on the insights locked inside the vast volume, 
velocity and variety of big data will position themselves to keep 
ahead of the competition, improve customer experience, drive 
new products, increase productivity, predict future trends, and 
especially, make money. 
CSPs that are able to extract maximum value from their data 
assets can become fully two-sided businesses. They can 
uncover entirely new revenue streams by partnering with 
advertisers, retailers, health care and public administration, just 
to mention a few. The existing telecommunications ecosystem 
creates the potential to become the preferred and trusted 
keeper of personal data, given the industry’s good record in 
dealing with customers’ data, the strict regulatory framework 
already in place, and its inherent data protection obligations. 
CSPs should see big data as a crucial window of opportunity. 
Telecommunications is an industry poised to be at the 
forefront of the big-data wave, using big data analytics as a 
differentiator today and, eventually, as a most valuable core 
capability.
To learn more about this IBM Institute for Business Value 
study, please contact us at iibv@us.ibm.com. For a full catalog of 
our research, visit: ibm.com/iibv
Subscribe to IdeaWatch, our monthly e-newsletter featuring 
the latest executive reports based on IBM Institute for Business 
Value research: ibm.com/gbs/ideawatch/subscribe 
Access IBM Institute for Business Value executive reports on 
your tablet by downloading the free “IBM IBV” app for iPad 
or Android.
16     Analytics: The real-world use of big data in telecommunications
About the authors
Bob Fox is the Global Industry Leader for the 
telecommunications and media and entertainment industries 
for IBM Global Business Services. Bob has spent 30 years 
advising telecommunications service providers around the 
world about business strategy and how to improve customer-
facing operations. He can be contacted at robertfox@us.ibm.com.
Rob van den Dam is the Telecommunications Leader for the 
IBM Institute for Business Value. In this role, he develops 
industry outlooks and business value realization studies for 
telecommunications. Rob has 20 years of experience working 
in telecommunications. He can be contacted at  
rob_vandendam@nl.ibm.com.
Rebecca Shockley is the Business Analytics and Optimization 
Global Research Leader for the IBM Institute for Business 
Value, where she conducts fact-based research on the topic of 
business analytics to develop thought leadership for senior 
executives. Rebecca can be contacted at rshock@us.ibm.com.
Contributors
Scott Stainken, General Manager, Telecommunications 
Industry, IBM Corporation
Nick Gurney, Communications sector leader for IBM Global 
Business Services in Growth Markets
Eric Lesser, Research Director and North American Leader, 
IBM Institute for Business Value
References
1 “From Stretched to Strengthened: Insights from the 2011 
Global Chief Marketing Officer Study.” Institute for 
Business Value. October 2011. www.ibm.com/cmostudy.
2 “Leading Through Connections: Insights from the Global 
Chief Executive Officer Study. IBM Institute for Business 
Value. May 2012. www.ibm.com/ceostudy.
3 Schroeck, Michael, Rebecca Shockley, Dr. Janet Smart, 
Professor Dolores Romero-Morales and Professor Peter 
Tufano. “Analytics: The real-world use of big data. How 
innovative organizations are extracting value from 
uncertain data.” IBM Institute for Business Value in 
collaboration with he Saïd Business School, University of 
Oxford. October 2012. http://www-935.ibm.com/services/
us/gbs/thoughtleadership/ibv-big-data-at-work.html
4 Szaniawaski, Kris. “Telcos get into big data.” 
TelcomsEMEA, December 12. 2012. http://www.
telecomsemea.net/content/telcos-get-big-data
5 Sahota, Dawinderpal. “Customer data creating revenue 
opportunities in unlikely places.” Telcoms.com. October 16, 
2012. http://www.telecoms.com/50865/
customer-data-creating-revenue-opportunities-in-unlikely-
places/
6 LaValle, Steve, Michael Hopkins, Eric Lesser, Rebecca 
Shockley and Nina Kruschwitz. “Analytics: The new path 
to value: How the smartest organizations are embedding 
analytics to transform insights into action.” IBM Institute 
for Business Value in collaboration with MIT Sloan 
Management Review. October 2010. http://www-935.ibm.
com/services/us/gbs/thoughtleadership/ibv-embedding-
analytics.html © 2010 Massachusetts Institute for 
Technology.
IBM Global Business Services      17
7 Gage, Deborah. “Telefonica Digital targets big data in 
Silicon Valley “road trip.” Dow Jones VentureWire. 
October 2, 2012. http://www.totaltele.com/view.
aspx?ID=476702
8 Lennighan, Mary. “Telcos can survive on big data alone 
– Sprint.” Total Telecom. October 17,2012. http://www.
totaltele.com/view.aspx?ID=477094
9 “(Translation) The real-time information service TraficZen, 
developed by ASF and Orange, recognized by the ZELT 
for the quality of traffic information.” Transport-intelligent.
net. http://www.transport-intelligent.net/IMG/pdf/
traficZen-view-php-1.pdf 
10 Szaniawaski, Kris. “Telcos get into big data.” 
TelcomsEMEA, December 12. 2012. http://www.
telecomsemea.net/content/telcos-get-big-data
11 “Leading Through Connections: Insights from the Global 
Chief Executive Officer Study. IBM Institute for Business 
Value. May 2012. www.ibm.com/ceostudy.
12 Fox, Bob, Nick Gurney, Rob van den Dam and Ekow 
Nelson. “Building Advocacy in Telecommunications.” IBM 
Institute for Business Value. October 2011. http://
www-935.ibm.com/services/us/gbs/thoughtleadership/
ibv-telcoadvocacy.html
13 IBM case study. Telefonica | Vivo nets a 30 percent increase 
in marketing revenue via IBM Unica. May 23, 2012. http://
www-01.ibm.com/software/success/cssdb.nsf/cs/SBAT-
8UCTFB?OpenDocument&Site=software&cty=en_us
14 Obiodu, Emeka. “Telefonica and Verizon dial into big data” 
Ovum. October 8, 2012. http://ovum.com/2012/10/09/
telefonica-and-verizon-dial-into-big-data/
15 Information from IBM in-depth interview
16 Smith, Chris. “Giving telcos the tools for big data success.” 
European Communications magazine, pages 40,41, Q2 2012 
issue. St. John Patrick Publishers.
17 Cisco Visual Network Index, http://www.cisco.com/en/US/
solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/
white_paper_c11-520862.html
18 Quote from in-depth interview in IBV Big data study
19 “TEOCO, Helping communications service providers save 
hundreds of millions of dollars.” IBM case study. May 31, 
2012. http://www-01.ibm.com/software/success/cssdb.nsf/
CS/JHUN-8UTKR2?OpenDocument&Site=corp&ct
y=en_us
20 “Putting the Lid on Churn.” IBM case study. November 
2010. http://public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/
ytc03153usen/YTC03153USEN.PDF
21 Fox, Bob and Rob van den Dam. “Telecom’s future is 
social.” IBM Institute for Business Value. January 2013. 
http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/gbs/
thoughtleadership/telecomsocialbusiness/
22 “Airtel’s impact on Social Media.” Telecom Talk. December 
23, 2010. http://telecomtalk.info/
airtel-impact-on-socialmedia/51645
23 “IBM’s Watson Computer Heads to Wall Street for 
Post-Jeopardy Gig.“ Time Magazine. March 7,2012.  
http://business.time.com/2012/03/07/
ibms-watson-supercomputer-heads-to-wall-street/
Please Recycle
© Copyright IBM Corporation 2013
IBM Global Services 
Route 100 
Somers, NY 10589 
U.S.A.
Produced in the United States of America 
April 2013 
All Rights Reserved
IBM, the IBM logo and ibm.com are trademarks or registered trademarks  
of International Business Machines Corporation in the United States, other 
countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked terms are marked 
on their first occurrence in this information with a trademark symbol (® or 
™), these symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law trademarks 
owned by IBM at the time this information was published. Such trademarks 
may also be registered or common law trademarks in other countries. A 
current list of IBM trademarks is available on the Web at “Copyright and 
trademark information” at ibm.com/legal/copytrade.shtml 
Other company, product and service names may be trademarks or service 
marks of others.
References in this publication to IBM products and services do not  
imply that IBM intends to make them available in all countries in which 
IBM operates.
GBE03552-USEN-00

