Copyright EFORT 2010 1
Telecommunications Network and Service
Architectures
Principles, Concepts and Architectures
EFORT
http://www.efort.com
The telecommunications infrastructure of a network operator consists of a set of networks
(transmission network, switching network, access network, signaling network, mobile
network, intelligent network, management network), each performing a particular function
towards the provision of the service to the customer. With the evolution towards IP-based
network, the circuit switched network is migrating towards a new architecture called Next
Generation Network (NGN) which emulates the behavior of circuit switching. With the advent
of broadband access networks, the core network evolves towards IP Multimedia Subsystem
(IMS) which provides IP-based multimedia services.
The objective of this tutorial is to briefly introduce the telecommunication network structure to
acquire the vocabulary of the field, understand the several types of networks involved in the
operator’s “Telecommunication Network”, and gain knowledge on how these networks
interface and interoperate. The various services supplied by each type of network are also
emphasized. Another important objective of the tutorial is to introduce the evolutions of these
networks and services on the medium and long terms.
A Telecommunication network consists of two parts:
• the “network” (transmission, switching, access, signaling, mobile, intelligent network)
• the “business and technical information system” which consists of OSS (Operating
Support System) and BSS (Business Support system).
1 Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
PSTN is the fixed voice network. It consists of the transmission, switching, signaling and
intelligent networks.
The transmission network enables carrying all kinds of traffic (voice, video, data). It consists
of nodes called multiplexers and links among multiplexers. The goal of the multiplexer is to
multiplex/demultiplex traffic onto/from the link. There exists three multiplexing technologies :
PDH, SDH and D-WDM. The link technology is generally optic fiber but may also be coax,
radio, etc. A transmission network generally consists of hundreds of multiplexers and tens of
thousands of kilometers of optic fiber.
The switching network enables switching the traffic from the sender to the appropriate
destination. A switching network consists of switches. All switches rely on the transmission
network which provides digital trunks. A switch receives traffic from the transmission network
at input ports, applies the switching function which forwards the traffic to output port. Then,
the switch relies on the transmission network to send the traffic to an adjacent switch. The
voice network is using the circuit switching technology which provides voice services.
A switching network operates in a connection oriented mode. That means that prior to
enabling users exchanging their traffic, there is a need of reserving resources on the path
between the sender/caller and the receiver/callee. To reserve resources, all switches on the
path exchange signaling information. Signaling information is data. In the case of circuit
Copyright EFORT 2010 2
switching, signaling data is carried over a separate network, i.e., a signaling network called
Signaling System 7 (SS7). This is out-of-band signaling.
The intelligent network is used in the voice network for the provisioning of services such as
freephone, premium rate, virtual private network, account card calling, etc. It consists of a set
of application servers containing service logic and service data.
The access network is the network which enables attaching the user equipment to the
switching/transmission network. The subscriber has a subscriber line, which may be an
analog line, an ISDN line, a leased line, an ADSL line, etc., to connect to the PSTN.
EMSs (Element Management Systems) are sold with the equipment by the telecom vendor.
EMSs enable operators to manage their equipment.
The OSS (Operation Support System) is the management of the network and the services.
The BSS (Business Support System) is the interface to and the management of the
customer.
Figure 1 : Fixed Voice Network : PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network)
2 Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM)
The GSM network is a mobile voice network. It looks similar to PSTN but supports an
additional service called terminal mobility. As for PSTN, it consists of a switching plane
where Mobile switching Centers (MSCs) may be found. The circuit switched network with
MSCs is called NSS (Network Subsystem). The attachment of the mobile terminals to the
network is handled by a radio access network (RAN) called BSS (Base Station Subsystem)
in case of 2G, and UTRAN (UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network) in case of 3G. The
BSS/UTRAN consists of base stations and controllers of base stations.
The MSCs of the GSM network interface with the PSTN network to enable communication
between mobile and fixed terminals.
Since the GSM network is a voice network, SS7 is used for the transport of signaling
information between BSS/UTRAN and NSS and between MSCs within NSS and between
NSS and PSTN.
The Intelligent Network is called CAMEL (Customized Application Mobile Network Enhanced
Logic). GSM provides terminal mobility and CAMEL provides service mobility. CAMEL
SCP
Management Network
Switching and
Access Networks
Signaling Network
Intelligent Network
Transmission Network
Access Network
PSTN
(Circuit Switching Network)
Transmission Network
Operation Support System
Business Support System
Signaling System 7
EMS EMS EMS EMS EMSEMS
Supplementary
Services
Copyright EFORT 2010 3
provides services such as short numbers, VPN and Mobile prepaid. With CAMEL, the user
may access to her/his services from visited networks, the home network has roaming
agreements with.
The management of BSS/UTRAN is handled by OMC-R (OMC Radio). The management of
the MSCs is handled by OMC-S (Switching). OMC-R and OMC-S are supplied by telecom
vendors together with the equipement those OMCs have to manage.
A mobile service provider builds its OSS and BSS that interface with these OMCs.
Figure 2 : Mobile Voice Network : GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications)
3 General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)
GSM provides voice services. GPRS reuses the existing GSM infrastructure to provide end-
to-end packet-switched services, i.e., data services. While the mobile packet core network is
called GPRS, the access technologies which may be considered to access to the GPRS
network are GPRS (BSS), EDGE (BSS), W-CDMA (UTRAN), HSDPA/HSUPA (UTRAN) .
While a voice communication requires 12 kbit/s at the radio access, GPRS enables access to
data services (e.g., WAP) at a bitrate which is associated with the access technology, from
40 kbit/s for GPRS access technology to 1 Mbit/s for HSDPA/HSUPA technologies.
Moreover the cost of the data session is not related to the only duration of the session but
related to several criteria including volume, duration, event, content, etc.
GPRS provides interfaces to Intranet and Internet networks.
GPRS does not impact the GSM BSS (Base Station Station) and 3G UTRAN. This is
important because 65% of the cost of a mobile network is due to the access network while
the remaining 35% is the cost of the core network.
With the GPRS network, the user access to IP-based services, either those of Internet or
those of the mobile service provider. Therefore,  GPRS provides broad IP-based application
support (E-mail, WAP, WEB, instant messaging, multimedia messaging, video streaming,
mobile TV, broadband access to the Internet, etc.).
Management Network
Signaling System 7
SCP
Switching and Access
Networks
Signaling Network
Intelligent Network
CAMEL
OMC : Operations and Maintenance Center
R : Radio; S : Switching
OSS : Operations Support system
BSS : Base Station Subsystem
UTRAN : UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network
SCP : Service Control Point
Transmission Network
2G BSS /
3G UTRAN
GSM Network (Circuit
Switched Network)
PSTN
OMC-R OMC-S
OSS
BSS
Transmission Network
Supplementary
Services
Copyright EFORT 2010 4
Figure 3 : The Mobile Packet Network : GPRS (General Packet Radio Service)
4 Broadband access and broadband services
The trend is to propose broadband access to the customer and an associated bundle of
broadband services including IP TV (broadcast TV, video on demand) and IP Telephony.
This is true for fixed and mobile accesses. Fixed accesses include FTTx, xDSL, cable,
WiMAX technologies while mobile accesses include HSDPA/HSUPA, HSPA+ (3G+), EPS
(4G), and EVDO (Evolution Data Only used for supplying high speed data access in
CDMA2000-based networks).
The same IP network connects whatever broadband access technology and supports the IP-
based service architecture. IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) s a standardized service
architecture for multimedia services such as IP telephony, IP TV, presence, messaging, IP
centrex, Conferencing, etc. Apart from the IP services supplied by the service provider, the
user may access to any Internet services (Web, mail, file transfer, streaming, Internet
telephony, etc.)
UTRAN : UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network
BSS : Base Station Subsystem
UMTS : Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
GPRS : General Packet Radio Service
OMC-G : OMC-GPRS
SIGTRAN : Signaling Transport over IP
Management Network
Switching and Access
Networks
Signaling Network
Transmission Network
2G BSS /
3G UTRAN
GPRS Network (Packet Switched
Network) IP
OMC-R OMC-G
OSS
BSS
Transmission Network
IP Services
MMS, Mobile TV,
Streaming, etc.
Internet
Services
Signaling System 7/ SIGTRAN
Copyright EFORT 2010 5
Figure 4 : Broadband access networks and broadband services
5 From Circuit Switching to Next Generation Network
(NGN)
From the fixed telecommunications circuit-switched network perspective a number of
developments has occurred to give operator’s greater flexibility in the deployment of
networks. Distributed processing has enabled the separation of pure switch/routing
functionality away from the control mechanisms. The separation of contemporary switch
mechanisms into media gateways (MGWs) (containing switching, transcoding and user-plane
transmission aspects) and media gateway control functions (MGCs) (containing switch and
service control functionality), connected via standard interfaces (e.g. H.248/Megaco, Media
Gateway Control Protocol), enables operators to increase the service delivery and control
parts of their networks in relative isolation to the growth of the user traffic parts of the
network. The figure below illustrates the concept behind the distributed processing and
switching mechanisms offered by H.248/Megaco. This approach also enables procurement
towards distributed networks with controller and gateway procured from separate suppliers,
enabling a real progression towards call server ‘farms’ connected to ‘pools’ of resource
control and switching.
The architecture is called Next Generation Network (NGN). This intelligence now resides in
MGC also called Softswitch or Call Agent, which acts as the controlling element. Open
interfaces towards Intelligent Network (IN) applications and new application servers facilitate
rapid service provisioning and ensure a short time to market.
At the media layer, gateways are introduced to adapt voice and other media to the packet
transport network (typically IP/Ethernet network).
DSLAM
IP
Backbone
xDSL
Client BAS
Node B RNC SGSN GGSN
IP Network
UE 3G+
xDSL
ATM
PDGWLAN
Access Network
HESCM
Client
CABLE
HFC, Hybrid Fiber Coaxial
WLAN
CMTS
eNodeBUE EPS
Serving GW
PDN GW
IP Network
MME
MS
BS ASN-GWWiMAX
BTS BSCMS EVDO
PDSN
IP Network IP Network
HA
IP Backbone 
IP Router
Broadband Access Network
Core IP Network
IP Services
IP TV, IP
Telephony, etc.
Transmission Network
Internet Services
Web services, mail, 
Skype, etc.
Copyright EFORT 2010 6
Figure 5 : PSTN versus NGN
The mobile switches of a GSM network may also be replaced by an NGN architecture which
is called R4 architecture.
References
Roger L Freeman, Fundamentals of Telecommunications, 2nd Edition, Wiley 2005.
Tarmo Anttalainen, Introduction to Telecommunications, Network Engineering, 2nd Edition,
Artech House, 2003.
Rogier Noldus, CAMEL, Wiley Editions, 2006.
Regis J. Bates, GPRS: General Packet Radio Service , McGraw-Hill Professional, December
2001.
Pierre Lescuyer and Thierry Lucidarm, « Evolved Packet System : LTE and SAE Evolution of
3G UMTS », Wiley 2008.
Miikka Poikselkä, Georg Mayer, Hisham Khartabil, Aki Niemi, “IP Multimedia Concepts and
Services in the Mobile Domain”, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 2008.
ISUP
SPSPSPSP
Fabric
SP SP
IP/
Ethernet
SP
Voice Circuit
Voice Circuit Voice Circuit
PSTN
Telephony NGN
MGW MGW
MGC or
Softswitch
ISUP
Fabric Fabric Fabricx xx xxx
ISUP ISUP
Fabric
Fabric Fabric
Fabric
ISUP
x x x x
SCP
SSP
MEGACO / MGCP
MGC : Media Gateway controller
MGW : Media Gateway
SP : Signaling Point
SCP : Service Control Point
SSP : Service Switching Point

