1  INTRODUCTION
Telecommunications (or telecoms) and information
technology are set to overtake the automotive sector
in the line-up of the world’s biggest industries.
According to the International Telecommunications
Union (ITU), global telecommunications equipment
and service revenues annually exceed US$575 billion
(£360 billion). Technological convergence means
that, in future, almost any telecommunications
technology will be able to carry almost any
broadcast transmission medium. This will create a
completely new competitive environment, where
telephone companies are able to compete with TV
networks, and where software companies will have
the same ability to distribute information as
telecommunication companies.
In recent years, deregulation has opened up the
telecommunications market to new companies,
putting pressure on existing organisations to become
more efficient or lose customers. New technologies,
such as fibre optic cables, more efficient terrestrial
broadcasting, and satellites are offering greatly
increased bandwidth. This has made possible the
transmission and reception of data from computer
networks, TV programmes, interactive video, and
conventional telephone and fax communications at
greatly reduced costs. These changes have forced
companies to redesign their networks and rethink
their operational procedures. Many now face the
dilemma of whether to extend existing copper
networks to incorporate fibre and radio technology,
or to build new infrastructures from scratch.
Customer expectations have risen as new firms have
introduced additional services to the marketplace.
These demands have forced the pace of change in
the telecommunications industry. Creating and
maintaining up-to-date records on network
infrastructures, engineering works, buildings,
transport routes, and customer account and address
details, have become vital for survival.
Telecommunications companies have begun to
recognise that many of their work practices have
spatial elements and data can be used more
efficiently if shared between all departments. In the
past, operators recorded information on the
locations, compositions, capacities, and conditions
of network equipment on a variety of maps,
diagrams, and reports. These were often dispersed
throughout the company and, if engineers needed to
access data about any part of the network, they
would first have to find the relevant papers and then
interpret the records of previous workers. Often, the
details would be inaccurate, or even obsolete, and
819
58
GIS in telecommunications
C FRY
By any measure, telecommunications is big business. The huge amount of outside plant,
the many and varied communication links, and the need to attract and keep customers in a
changing world are all significant reasons to use GIS. Surprisingly, however, it is only in
recent years that GIS has become widely accepted. Telecommunications companies are
increasingly becoming very large users of GIS technology. Today GIS is extensively used to
plan, build, and operate telecommunication networks and associated services. The
applications of GIS include activities such as planning transmission capacities, locating
cellular telephone transmitters, recording customer complaints, and using geodemographic
information to find new customers.
users would have to make costly field inspections
before beginning work.
The need to cut costs and improve services has
forced companies to rethink how they manage their
information. More and more, departments are having
to compete with other projects for funding,
companies are less willing to spend money on long
data conversion and capture projects, and there is the
need to demonstrate rates of return on project
investment. Although many organisations introduced
computer technology into network records
management some years ago, this was often limited to
automating the planning, design, and engineering
operations of the company. While some inefficiencies
could be tolerated when the organisation was run as a
monopoly, deregulation has changed this. Increased
competition has turned telecommunications providers
into marketing-led organisations, primarily concerned
with how to attract and retain customers by delivering
better services, faster.
2  WHO USES GIS IN TELECOMMUNICATIONS?
GIS is now a standard technology applied throughout
the telecoms industry. Telecommunications service
providers such as Nextel, Pacific Bell, and others use
the technology to plan, build, and operate
telecommunication networks and associated services
(Magalhaes 1997; Moy and Austin 1997). Network
equipment and systems suppliers require information
systems when designing entirely new networks. For
example, in 1994, as part of a US$4 billion deal with
the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Post and
Telecommunications (MOPTT), AT&T contracted
the US-based Intergraph Corporation to supply an
interactive computer graphics system and automated
mapping/facilities management/geographical
information system (AM/FM/GIS) to monitor the
network’s development (see Meyers, Chapter 57, for a
discussion of AM/FM/GIS). Worth US$76.8 million,
the contract included 280 personal workstations, 14
servers, and Intergraph’s Facilities Rule-based
Application Model Management Environment
(FRAMME). The GIS was needed to replace a 20
year old manual system that had become costly and
inefficient to manage. In all, 30 000 paper and mylar
documents needed to be digitised (Pyramid Research
Africa 1995).
Independent telecommunications consultants,
such as CDI Telecom, use in-house GIS software to 
provide engineering and construction services.
Information systems integrators and
telecommunications applications developers like
Bellcore, AT&T Network Systems and NTT
International, and regulatory agencies all rely on
geographical technology to enforce
telecommunications’ licensing rights. Additionally,
research and educational institutions including
universities, schools of electrical engineering, and
the communications departments of business
schools use GIS packages to teach network
planning, operational, and marketing skills.
3  USES OF GIS IN NETWORK PLANNING
In North America and Western Europe, the degree of
change to external plant networks has been
substantial, with fibre-optic cables replacing copper
wire, and microwave or satellite links replacing fixed,
long-distance landlines. For example, in New York,
fibre is replacing the entire conventional copper
telephone network, while in the UK, Cable and
Wireless Communications has bought in excess of
US$20 billion in new infrastructure, primarily fibre-
optic cables. GIS have been used to determine the
most suitable method of transmission (wireless or
cable), plan network layouts, and target customers.
Topography, population density, and predicted
population trends are important considerations
when considering transmission method, while
detailed demographic information, including
employment, affluence, and neighbourhood
characteristics, help telecommunications providers
to assess the best potential areas for new customers
(see Birkin et al, Chapter 51, for an outline of the
sorts of GIS operations that this involves and
Martin, Chapter 6, for an overview of some of the
problems inherent in such applications).
Geodemographic information is important because
telecommunications companies need money upfront,
although affluence indicators are not used in the
same way as much other customer targeting – it is
poorer people who tend to use cable technology.
With traditional technologies, one of the most
important considerations is where duct space is
available. This is because bandwidth is limited by
space, so to send a signal along a tortuous route
using up available duct space can be cheaper than
increasing the duct space along a direct route.
C Fry
820
With an up-to-date GIS, engineers can generate
maps showing existing networks and shape their
plans accordingly.
In countries with less well established networks,
companies have used GIS to plan entire networks
involving thousands of telephone lines. This is the
case in the Philippines, for example, where in April
1997 the international services provider and fixed
network operator Isla Communications contracted
Siemens Public Communications Networks Group
to install 350 000 telephone lines and 20 000
wireless lines (Pyramid Research 1997). The
advantage with starting from scratch is that
operators can build a database designed to meet the
needs of both network planners and sales and
marketing departments. This maximises a company’s
competitive advantage by enabling it to design
networks for providing services to as many homes
as possible.
The European Union’s Medora project used a GIS
to assess the telemetrics requirements of poorly
connected rural areas throughout Europe. The
planners hoped that introducing effective
communication systems to rural areas would reduce
isolation and slow migration to urban centres. Several
pilot planning studies were carried out. In Germany,
the Medora pilot tested the demand-forecasting
capabilities of the data model. Engineers studied
highway and railway network datasets to estimate
travel time to major urban centres, analysed land use
and soil characteristics to determine excavation time
for cable laying, and studied population and other
socioeconomic characteristics to estimate the
purchasing power of communities (Baumann 1995).
An area where GIS has become particularly
important is in cellular network planning. In the last
decade revenues from the mobile telecoms markets
have risen exponentially. Numerous new companies
have entered the field, each vying for a proportion of
the market. This market expansion has been
particularly great in countries with poor cable
telephone networks. In Lebanon, where the
communications infrastructure was badly damaged
during 17 years of war, the cellular phone industry is
booming. Mobile markets in Eastern Europe are
also growing rapidly. Eastern Europe, the Baltics,
and the Commonwealth of Independent States now
hold over 50 cellular operators serving over half a
million subscribers. A 1995 market study by
Pyramid Research predicted that the number of
cellular subscribers in these regions could reach
5.5 million by the year 2000. It further suggests that
Poland and Hungary will both hold more than one
million subscribers by the turn of the century
(Pyramid Research 1995).
Mobile telephone companies use radio
propagation models to find the best sites for
building transmission stations, as shown in Plate
48. The models show engineers the sorts of terrain
and obstacles that a radio signal will have to
contend with. Since companies need to place their
transmitters where there is as clear a signal path as
possible, their engineers need to identify sites that
are higher than the surrounding areas and away
from buildings or vegetation that might interfere
with the signals. Predicting radio propagation
accurately depends largely on the environment
surrounding the mobile phone and the transmitter.
Environmental effects are neutralised by including
‘clutter’ and ‘height’ layers in the model. Examples
of clutter classes include ‘urban’, ‘suburban’,
‘water’, and ‘vegetation’. These are extracted from
paper maps, aerial photography, and satellite
imagery using manual interpretation or
multispectral classification. Height information is
usually held as raster grids, with each pixel
representing a height value. Common sources of
height information are paper maps, stereo aerial
photography, and stereo satellite imagery
(Hurcom 1996).
UK analogue and digital mobile phone coverage
provider Vodafone Ltd uses GIS to plan radio
networks and target new markets. Since the
company switched on its analogue network in 1985,
it has expanded its radio base station network from
200 analogue sites to over 2000 analogue and
digital sites. Initially Vodafone engineers used a
VAX-based application called PACE (Prediction
And Coverage Estimation) to plan the physical
network. It now uses its own graphic tool,
Vodafone GIS, together with Tydac Technology’s
SPANS software, to combine network planning and
marketing activities. For example, Vodafone staff
overlay network information with population
details to expose areas of high population with
poor signal coverage that are likely to yield new
customers. As competition in the cellular
marketplace increases, the trend towards planning
networks for strategic advantage is likely to
continue (Dair and Oldfield 1996).
GIS in telecommunications
821

4  MAINTAINING AND OPERATING
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURES 
The process of maintaining and updating records is
central to a company’s continued success within the
telecommunications industry. Information is now
recognised as a valuable resource, and many
telecommunications companies initially implemented
GIS purely to simplify the task of maintaining
up-to-date records. The sheer volume of data
generated by planning, designing, building, and
altering telecommunications infrastructures, coupled
with the pressure to operate efficiently, makes the job
impossible without a certain level of automation.
Standard AM/FM systems enable operators to reduce
or eliminate the need for paper documents, easily
update cadastral and network information, and
produce maps at a variety of scales to show any part
of the infrastructure. Portuguese telephone company
Telefones de Lisboa e Porto (TLP) switched from
keeping manual records to a digital system in 1995
(Barata 1996). In 1984, the company concluded that
maintaining its manual method of record keeping
would render 60 per cent of its records out-of-date
within ten years. It purchased SICAD GIS from
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme to automate
the management of its records. These covered 200 000
hectares and incorporated data on one million
subscribers, 3200 kilometres of cable conduit and
12 600 kilometres of pipe, plus 6000 topographic maps
at 1:1000 scale and 15 000 cable and duct plans. The
maintenance department at TLP now uses the GIS to:
● update topographic maps supplied by city councils;
● overlay routing and network elements and
prepare cabling and piping maps;
● prepare cabling diagrams incorporating cable
junctions and connection boxes;
● update all these maps, plans, and diagrams in
pre-determined time scales;
● prepare maps, drawings, and sketches required by
external bodies, both for work to be carried out
by engineers in the field and in reply to specific
requests made by third parties for data capture
and conversion.
5  SALES AND MARKETING
In a deregulated telecommunications market, the need
to cut costs, attract new customers, and remain ahead 
of the competition are the business-driving forces. No
longer are pieces of telecommunications equipment
upgraded simply according to age: rather, investment
is allocated first to those parts of the network that are
likely to yield more customers. This change in
emphasis has forced companies to change not only
their general approaches, but also the way they
manage their information. Whereas network
planning, design, and maintenance used to be the
main uses for GIS and AM/FM systems, nowadays
having the means to visualise demographic data such
as population, types of neighbourhood, average
income, and customer preferences is at least as
important. As broadband technologies have increased
the types of services companies can offer, so
companies have had to employ more aggressive
marketing strategies to maintain and increase their
shares of the market.
The best way for telecommunications service
providers to target new markets is for them to be able
to compare information about their networks with
data about present and potential subscribers. The
burgeoning cable communications sector has been
one of the first parts of the telecommunications
industry to adopt GIS software for marketing as well
as engineering purposes. Cable companies have two
key aims: to build networks economically and
effectively, and to generate a fast return on
investment by prioritising sales efforts in areas of
greatest immediate potential. The effectiveness of
sales and marketing strategies within a
geographically-defined territory, such as a cable
franchise, demands a knowledge of potential
customers in that area. Companies therefore use
geodemographic systems to find out about customer
preferences in a particular area. Experian’s MOSAIC
is such a system as it classifies neighbourhoods
according to the lifestyles of their residents. Based on
a mixture of census, electoral roll, credit, and UK
post office data, it provides neighbourhood
descriptions for individual unit postcodes (generally
15 households). By distinguishing the types of
neighbourhoods that are likely to have cable service
customers, cable companies can accurately target
their marketing efforts. In the UK, the majority of
cable operators, including Telewest, SBC, CableTel,
and franchises of Bell Cablemedia (now part of
Cable and Wireless Communications) and General
Cable, use MOSAIC for this purpose (Fuller 1995).
C Fry
822
6  TELECOMMUNICATIONS AROUND
THE WORLD
Global trends within the telecommunications market
are towards deregulation and increased competition.
The speed at which this is happening varies from
region to region and country to country. On
8 February 1996, President Clinton signed the first
major overhaul of the 1934 Communications Act.
This has opened up the US market and paved the
way for all manner of mergers, acquisitions, and
partnerships across the industry as telephone, cable
television, wireless, and information services are
freer to compete in each others’ markets.
In Europe, the Union has been attempting to open
up the markets of its member states since 1987. The
main problem is that not all countries have moved in
unison to adopt the necessary measures to implement
liberalisation and a two or even three speed Europe is
the result. Thirty per cent of the member states
(Greece, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, and Luxembourg)
have been allowed to opt out of liberalisation until
2003, while the remaining countries planned
deregulation by 1 January 1998 (Woollam 1997).
In some countries, old, slow networks are being
upgraded, while in others networks are failing to be
built because of stalled liberalisation. Only those
countries with the optimum regulatory environment
and little existing infrastructure are now able to install
new, very fast fibre networks.
In emerging Asian countries such as Thailand
and Malaysia, the telecommunications markets are
set for rapid change. In Thailand, the fourth version
of its Telecom Development Master Plan was
presented to the Cabinet in mid 1997. This laid
down plans for:
● privatisation of the Telephone Organisation of
Thailand (responsible for local and national
telecommunication access and cellular services);
● establishment of the Communications Authority
of Thailand (responsible for international
telecommunication access, cellular, and
postal services);
● liberalisation of the sector and the establishment
of an independent regulator;
● the setting up of a framework to introduce
additional competition in the Thai
telecommunication sector.
While privatisation is the goal for telecommunications
companies around the globe, the provision of
telecommunications remains uneven. However,
despite signs that the divide between developed and
developing countries has widened in recent years,
there are indications that this is changing. In May
1996, government ministers from major countries met
in South Africa to debate how to create a truly global
information society. In a world dominated by increased
social, economic, and political interdependence,
deficiencies anywhere in the infrastructure could have
serious implications for everyone.
6.1  Case study: Bell Canada
In 1994, a study showed that Bell Canada’s revenues
were down 22 per cent (US$700 million) on 1992
figures. This was accompanied by a marked decline
in the company’s net income because it had not
increased rates in 12 years, its market share was
dwindling, and it had increased its investment in
sales and marketing. At the same time, the company
was facing long distance competition, which the
government had introduced in 1992. As a result of
the study’s findings, Bell began a three-year
transformation plan (1994 to 1997) centred on
targeted marketing and sales, the generation of
revenue, and investment in technology. Central to
this plan was IMap (intelligent mapping,
accounting, and provisioning system), a project to:
● provide on-line access to up-to-date network
records;
● eliminate inefficient manual record-keeping
procedures;
● mechanise work-order design processes;
● improve response time to information queries;
● create software versatile enough to meet future
needs.
Bell’s engineers had already recognised the need for
an AM/FM/GIS and there had been some work
towards this goal since the 1980s. In 1992, the
company’s software developers built the first version
of its IMap AM/FM/GIS on OS/2. By 1993, a project
was under way to convert paper records, using surplus
staff and operations budgets. The conversion was not
expected to be completed before 2005 because of
limited availability of resources and funding.
The transformation plan built upon the existing
work and continues the development of a relational
database management system version of IMap. The
whole system includes digital land-base mapping
software built on Enghouse Systems Ltd’s
GIS in telecommunications
823
CableCAD and GeoNET. It comprises an
engineering CAD workplan tool, an integrated
graphical network environment, a tool to locate and
maintain networks, network administration
software, an analysis and planning tool, network
database management software (Oracle 7 for IMap
version 4), and a work order pricing tool. In short, it
enables all departments needing access to spatial
data to query one database.
Bell Canada provides telecommunication services
to seven million customers distributed across
2.6 million square kilometres. Its equipment includes
ten million access lines, 1040 switching centres and
75 engineering centres. By mid 1997, Bell Canada
had converted 70 per cent of its existing records. The
conversion rejection rate at this stage was between
five and fifteen per cent and falling. Although the
conversion part of the project had to be extended by
seven months – it took longer than expected to teach
the software suppliers the complexities of the
telecoms infrastructure – the overall project cost
increased by less than five per cent.
Bell Canada recognises that it learnt a number of
lessons from the project. These include the
importance of ensuring an accurate land-base, and
the need to ensure that sufficient time is spent
drawing up a detailed specification to enable staff to
monitor the quality of the software as it is developed
and coordinate input from the different vendors
involved. Three years after beginning the project, the
company has met its annual savings objective of
Can$26 million (Connor 1997).
6.2  Case study: Telecom Italia
In 1993, Telecom Italia implemented a GIS to locate
and repair faults in its public telephone network
more quickly, and to set up a network for
authorising electronic payments for telephone calls.
It chose an open, rather than a proprietary system,
so that it could operate various subsystems and
integrate existing technology. The public telephone
infrastructure in Italy comprises 450 000 public
telephone terminals, 100 000 on the street and 350 000
inside buildings such as railway stations. The primary
task for the GIS was to improve Telecom Italia’s
response to reported telephone faults. In 1993, the
average roadside telephone terminal recorded 14
faults a year. Multiplied by the number of terminals,
that meant the company was dealing with 1400 000
faults per year, or over 3835 per day. For the
remaining 350 000 telephone terminals inside
buildings, there were 1438 faults recorded daily.
For each faulty terminal, the company needed to
know which company manufactured the equipment
and who was responsible for repairing it. At the
same time, it needed to be able to check the status of
authorisation methods. Callers in Italy can choose
several cards with which to pay for telephone calls,
including Visa, Mastercard, American Express, and
pre-paid Telecom Italia cards. Even if a phone is
working, but the network is unable to authorise a
payment, the public sees this as a service failure. The
GIS has a separate function to collect information
concerning the fault recording and the payment
method. However, both the information on the fault
repairs and the status of payments is stored centrally
in a Sybase database. Both systems have local area
networks and remote links that allow regional offices
to share the data collected.
The system has enabled Telecom Italia to analyse
its data with a view to identifying areas of poor
customer service. According to Nicola (1996) the
company is using it to:
● assess the quality of the equipment it buys;
● evaluate and improve levels of service;
● calculate the volume of traffic and the profitability
of each public telephone in the network;
● fine-tune the number of response staff in each
area to the demand for their services;
● monitor the test marketing of services in
particular areas;
● identify areas that need more telephone facilities.
6.3  Case study: British Telecommunications
British Telecommunications (BT) first set about
implementing GIS in the 1980s. One system it used
was GFIS, an IBM system used mainly for duct
capacity planning. In the early 1990s the company
turned to GIS again, this time to help it analyse
where its network was in relation to existing and
potential customers. It wanted to protect its earlier
investments in digitised telephone exchange
boundaries at the same time as being able to use the
latest postal boundaries, provided by the
Automobile Association (a private digital database
provider). Attempts to link the two datasets met
with some difficulties. Firstly, the coastlines were not
well matched and secondly, the exchange boundaries
existed in digital form but in an unstructured
format. BT solved this problem by developing an
C Fry
824
‘editor’ tool to highlight inconsistencies in the data
and to automatically eliminate them. It was then
able to use the tool to target customers for its
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) and
Virtual Private Network services (Saeed 1993).
In 1997, BT decided to reassess its information
management once more. This time it wanted to
make its data accessible to all departments by:
● modernising the management of its external
network planning and recording;
● creating a database management system that
could hold the network model and link seamlessly
with information on customers, faults, repairs,
marketing, and asset management.
It was hoped that the system would reduce planning
and building costs, automate processes that were still
being done manually, and increase the quality of its
records which were failing to meet the legislative
requirements. This involved digitising 188000 maps,
168000 duct and cable prints, and 2662000 duct
records. For the data conversion, BT focused its
investment on records of areas that had experienced
the greatest changes to the network, had the highest
operational costs, or held high numbers of
customers. Now, planners, repair and maintenance
engineers, and marketing staff all have real-time
access to a single information source. This has
increased productivity, created a multi-skilled
workforce, and standardised work processes
throughout the company (Ridley 1997).
6.4  Case study: Association Liègeoise d’Electricité
A growing demand for cable TV in France prompted
Association Liègeoise d’Electricité (ALE) to implement
a GIS to help it cut its design times and improve the
accuracy of its drawings. ALE’s Teledis department has
been distributing TV programmes to viewers since 1969.
It mainly uses GIS to design cable infrastructures.
When setting up a network in a new city, ALE
engineers first create a map of the city. This enables
them to see where major features such as rivers,
streets, and buildings are located. The next step is to
design a preliminary network and check its
feasibility in the field. Then the engineers design a
trunk network. This involves positioning amplifiers
and splitting devices and designing the connecting
trunk line. The design is taken onto the streets so the
engineers can check practicalities such as whether a
pavement is wide enough to install an amplifier.
When this plan has been approved, the designers
work out a cabling and distribution infrastructure
for carrying power from the trunk line to cable TV
subscribers. The GIS enables the engineers to place
devices such as amplifiers and directional couplers,
see which ports are available for connections, and
calculate signal strength along sections of cable. If
the signal falls below a given level, the system sends
a warning to the designer.
The final document is a detailed drawing at a
scale of 1:1000 or 1:500. For a city of 25 000
inhabitants, around 100 trunk amplifiers are used to
distribute cable TV signals. In an average year, the
company produces over 500 such drawings.
Switching from manual drawing methods to a GIS
enabled ALE to cut its design times by a factor of
five (Foulon et al 1996).
7  THE FUTURE FOR GIS IN 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
With businesses now reliant on fast and efficient
telecommunications infrastructures, the coming
years are likely to see continued investment in
telecommunications projects around the world.
While even the smallest companies are likely to use
GIS for automating localised tasks such as network
design and planning, the larger telecommunications
operators will increasingly be looking to gain
strategic advantage by standardising information
throughout their organisations. Thus, marketing
staff will be able to use the same data to map
customer distribution as the engineers use to design
fibre networks. All data will be held in a structured
database with seamless interfaces to separate
systems used by individual departments. The
ongoing trend towards privatisation is likely to be
the driving force behind this, although the speed at
which this happens looks set to vary from country to
country. As new technologies such as broad
bandwidth and fibre-optics become the way forward
for telecommunications operators, countries with
little or no existing networks may find themselves at
an advantage compared to countries with well
established networks. Just as the countries with
simple networks will be able to install the new
technologies from scratch, so companies that have
not yet automated their information management
procedures will be able to adopt enterprisewide GIS
without the burden of legacy systems.
GIS in telecommunications
825
References
Barata P 1996 Portugal Telecom: ready for the
Communications Century. GIS Europe 5(3): 46–8
Baumann J 1995 Making connections: GIS helps to link
Europeans. GIS Europe 4(3): 32–3
Connor P 1997 Assisting Bell Canada’s business
transformation by implementing a world class access
network facilities management system. Paper presented at
‘Becoming a Lean Communications Provider, Managing
Network Infrastructure’. Saint-Paul-de-Vence, Unisys
International Industry Forum, France, 11–13 June 
Dair B, Oldfield B 1996 Cellular radio: planning and analysis
using GIS. GIS Europe 5(3): 40–2
Foulon F, Breemersch H, Pallage M 1996 The art of
networking. GIS Europe 5(9): 36–7
Fuller N 1995 Sell as you build: GIS helps cable companies
build viable networks. GIS Europe 4(3): 42–3
Hurcom S 1996 Radio propagation modelling. Mapping
Awareness 10(8): 22–5
Magalhaes G C 1997 Telecommunications outside plant
management throughout Brasil. Proceedings AM/FM
International Conference. Aurora, AM/FM International:
386–92
Moy C C, Austin R F 1997 TIME Telekon’s network inventory
system: AM/FM/GIS in the big durian. Proceedings AM/FM
International Conference. Aurora, AM/FM International:
683–90
Nicola G de 1996 Staying on-line in Italy. GIS Europe 5(3):
44–5
Pyramid Research 1995 Cellular and PCS markets in Eastern
Europe and the Newly Independent States. London, The
Economist Intelligence Unit
Pyramid Research 1997 Telecommunications Development
Report 15 May. London, The Economist Intelligence Unit
12: 18
Pyramid Research Africa 1995 Middle East Newsletter 2(2): 3.
London, The Economist Intelligence Unit 
Ridley M 1997 The case for network information systems:
the BT. Paper presented at ‘Becoming a Lean
Communications Provider, Managing Network
Infrastructure’. Saint-Paul-de-Vence, Unisys International
Industry Forum, France, 11–13 June
Saeed S E O 1993 British Telecom uses GIS to gear investment
to the marketplace. GIS Europe 2(1): 10–12
Woollam R 1997 European liberalisation, the final countdown.
Telecommunications Magazine Online. June
C Fry
826

