Key Facts
cOURse Facts
Why chOOse Us? 
•	 This	course	aims	to	produce	skilled	professional	telecommunications	engineers	who	can	provide	and	manage	
	 communications	networks	and	services	for	commercial	advantage.
•	 It	is	suitable	for	students	from	both	scientific	and	engineering	backgrounds	wishing	to	gain	a	comprehensive	
	 understanding	of	recent	techniques	in	the	design,	development,	administration	and	management	of	
	 telecommunications.
•	 This	course	is	available	only	by	Online	Distance	Learning	through	Resource	Development	International	Ltd	(RDI),		
	 the	world’s	largest	independent	provider	of	UK	university	distance	learning	education.
School	 Computing,	Telecommunications	and	Networks
Application	 For	details	on	how	to	make	an	application	visit		
	 www.bcu.ac.uk/student-info/how-to-apply	
Location	 City	Centre	Campus,	Millennium	Point
Duration	 Part-Time:	2	-	5	years
•	 Our	School	of	Computing,	Telecommunications	and	Networks	is	recognised	both	nationally	and	internationally	for	
	 the	high	quality	of	our	teaching,	research	and	extensive	industry	partnerships.	We	are	established	as	one	of	the	leading	
	 academies	for	Apple,	Microsoft	and	Cisco	Systems.	
•	 We	deliver	computing-related	courses	designed	to	equip	you	with	the	skills	demanded	by	industries	and	employers.	
	 These	include	computer	science,	software	engineering,	information	systems,	e-business	technologies,	electronics,	
	 embedded	systems,	web	technologies,	telecommunications,	networking	and	computer	forensics.	
cOURse OveRvieW
This	course	aims	to	produce	skilled	professional	telecommunications	engineers	who	can	provide	and	manage	
communications	networks	and	services	for	commercial	advantage.
The	course	is	suitable	for	competent	students	from	both	scientific	and	engineering	backgrounds	wishing	to	gain	a	
comprehensive	understanding	of	recent	techniques	in	the	design,	development,	administration	and	management	of	
telecommunications.
www.bcu.ac.uk/tee/ctn 
Telecommunications  
by Distance Learning
PgCert/PgDip/MSc
cOURse stRUctURe
entRy ReqUiRements
assessment
emPLOyaBiLity
Telecommunication Systems
Provides	a	detailed	knowledge	of	the	principles	of	
telecommunications	systems,	while	emphasising	
technologies	that	support	digital	communications.	
Emphasis	is	placed	on	the	characteristics	and	advantages	
of	digital	signals,	as	well	as	issues	relating	to	transmission,	
line	coding	and	modulation.
Data Communications Systems
This	module	provides	detailed	knowledge	and	understanding	
of	the	key	principles	of	the	design,	development	and	
diagnostics	of	data	communication	systems.
Project Management and Research Methodology
Covers	project	planning,	scheduling	and	monitoring	tools	
and	techniques	while	at	the	same	time	developing	research	
philosophies,	strategies	and	methods	relevant	to	the	industry.	
Mobile and Wireless Communications
Provides	an	in-depth	knowledge	of	the	fundamentals	of	
mobile	and	wireless	communications	systems	emphasising	
the	wireless	environment,	mobile	systems,	network	
planning	and	mobile	services.
Management of Network Services
Provides	detailed	knowledge	of	the	requirements	
and	operation	of	networks	and	the	associated	service	
management.
Master’s Project/Dissertation
Allows	you	to	demonstrate	your	ability	to	apply	skills	and	
knowledge	to	the	solution	of	a	practical	problem,	or	to	
an	investigation	into	a	research	topic	appropriate	to	the	
rationale	of	the	course.	
You	would	normally	be	expected	you	to	hold	at	least	a	Second	Class	Honours	degree	or	equivalent	in	an	appropriate	
discipline.	However,	we	can	consider	your	application	without	standard	entry	qualifications	if	you	can	provide	evidence	
of	the	necessary	knowledge	and	skills	to	successfully	complete	the	course.	The	standard	university	English	language	
requirements	will	be	adopted.	International	students	will	require	an	English	language	qualification	equivalent	to	IELTS	6.0	
for	this	programme.
The	course	features	a	series	of	assessments,	including	a	research	element,	to	ensure	that	you	gain	up-to-date	knowledge	
of	both	the	theory	and	practice	of	the	relative	discipline	in	question,	and	a	practical	element	in	which	you	will	assess	
strategic	issues	and	practices.	The	assessment	tasks	will	normally	include	a	number	of	written	reports	and	these	will	be	in	
a	formal	style	with	executive	summary,	analysis,	synthesis	and	discussion.	Some	of	the	assessments	will	be	undertaken	at	
a	scheduled	time	and	over	a	predefined	limited	period.
In	addition	to	further	academic	research	opportunities,	career	prospects	are	expected	to	keep	pace	with	the	rapid	advances	
in	telecommunications	technologies	and	there	is	expected	to	be	continuing	demand	for	competent,	versatile	postgraduates	
who	can	design	and	implement	innovative	solutions	for	industry.	The	course	also	develops	a	wide	spectrum	of	transferable	
skills	to	take	into	a	general	business	career.
TEE-0912
Birmingham city University,  
Faculty of technology, engineering 
and the environment, curzon street, 
millennium Point, Birmingham, B4 7XG
For enquiries:
t: +44 (0)121 331 5595
F: +44 (0)121 331 7994 
W: www.bcu.ac.uk/enquiries
master’s Project
including Project Proposal and Research Plan Development and the write-up
60	Credits
SEMESTER 1
Postgraduate Certificate - 60 Credits
SEMESTER 2
Postgraduate Diploma - 120 credits
SEMESTER 3
msc award - 180 credits
telecommunication systems
20	Credits
Data communications systems
20	Credits
mobile and Wireless communications
30	Credits
Project management and Research 
methodology
20	Credits
management of network services
30	Credits

