 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS COLLECTIONS POLICY STATEMENTS
 
±² Collections Policy Statement Index 
Computer Science, Telecommunication, and Artificial Intelligence 
(Classes QA75-76.9, TK5101-TK6720, TK7800-TK7895,  and Q334-Q390) 
Contents 
I. Scope 
II. Research strengths 
A. General 
B. Areas of Distinction 
C. Weaknesses/Exclusions 
III. Collecting Policy 
IV. Collecting Levels 
I. Scope 
This Collections Policy Statement covers a major subset of the subclass QA – QA75-QA76.9, which deals 
with the general theory and application of computers as well as data processing and computer systems. 
Other works relating to computer technology are classified in TK5101-TK6720, which encompass 
telecommunication technologies (including telegraph, telephone, radio, radar, television and cable 
networks), TK7885-TK7895, which includes works on the design of computer hardware and circuitry as 
well as hardware and electronics, and Q334-Q390, which includes works on artificial intelligence and 
information theory. The advanced and interdisciplinary nature of the research connects computer 
science to such diverse subjects as analysis of algorithms, artificial intelligence, combinatorial 
optimization, computational biology, computational complexity, computational geometry, computer 
graphics, computer vision, computer-aided verification, concurrent data structures and architectures, 
constraint programming, database systems, agents and E-commerce, graph drawing, neural networks, 
software engineering, and static analysis, nanotechnology, scientific visualization and scientific 
computing, security and cryptography, theory of computation, theory of networking, internet 
computing, mobile and ubiquitous computing, randomized algorithms and probabilistic analysis, 
robotics, user interfaces and virtual reality.   Works on applications of computers and artificial 
intelligence can also be found under their representative subjects (e.g. medicine, chemistry, military 
sciences). 
By recent count (OPAC record analysis done June 2008) there were over 93,000 serial and monographic 
works falling within these major subsets (QA75.5-QA76.9 +55,000; TK5101-TK6720 +29,500; TK7880­
TK7895 +6400; Q334-Q390 +2100). 
 The core group of archival collections in the history of computer science/data processing (along with 
the Library of Congress) include the Charles Babbage Institute, the Computer Museum, the Hagley 
Museum and Library, the National Archives and Records Administration, the Smithsonian Institution, and 
the Stanford University Libraries.  IBM, AT&T, Texas Instruments, etc., have corporate archives.  James 
W. Cortada’s Archives of Data-Processing History: a Guide to Major U.S. collections (New York, 
Greenwood Press, 1990) provides additional collections. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
II. Research Strengths 
A. General 
The major strength of the Library's computer sciences and telecommunications collections lies in its 
breadth and depth in both foreign and English language materials, and in its current collecting 
intensity, primarily at the research level. 
The Library has roughly ninety percent of the publications of the major professional associations in the 
field of computer science and artificial intelligence: the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) 
which has a mathematical or theoretical orientation, the Society for Industrial and Applied Mechanics 
(SIAM) which has a engineering or applications orientation, the Institute for Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), and the American Association for Artificial Intelligence (AAAI). 
The Library's Reading Rooms, in an effort to improve on currency and access provides access not only to 
abstracting and indexing services in electronic format but also to full text databases.  Databases of 
interest to the computer science researcher include:  
· Inspec, for computing and information technology, provides coverage from over 3,500 journals, 
1,500 conference proceedings as well as numerous books, dissertations and reports. 
· ACM Guide to Computing Literature. 
· CSA Technology Research Database, provides coverage from over 4,000 periodicals, conference 
proceedings, technical reports, trade journal/newsletter items, patents, books, and press 
releases. 
Other electronic resources that provide support the interdisciplinary areas of computer science include 
EI Compendex, IEEE Conference Search, NTIS, Applied Science and Technology, and Digital 
Dissertations. 
B. Areas of Distinction 
Even though the history of computers, data processing and technology is still fairly brief, the Library 
has a significant collection of materials in its Manuscript Collections including the papers of Herman 
Hollerith (inventor of punch card system for mechanical tabulation), John von Neumann (pioneer in 
game theory), Vannevar Bush (analog computing), Claude Elwood Shannon (“father” of information 
theory) and John W. Backus (FORTRAN). These collections are complemented by several seminal 
papers in the field of information theory that were first published in technical report form and are 
therefore part of the Library's collections.  The growth of the telecommunication industry and its 
history can be documented through the papers of Samuel F. B. Morse, the Bell Family papers,  Lee De 
Forest papers (radio/sound recording), and Harold Sunde (engineer, RCA).  The Library’s American 
Memory site also provides special collections through the Samuel F. B. Morse Papers at the Library of 
Congress and the Bell Family Papers at the Library of Congress. 
-2-
 
  
 
 
 
  
C.  Weaknesses/Exclusions 
One of the most important deficits is the Library’s inability to capture conferences, preprints, and 
papers being published in electronic format only.  Technical reports from large and small university 
departments and from industrial research and development laboratories such as IBM and AT&T are of 
extreme importance in the area of computer science, often more so than traditional published 
literature (which is frequently out-of-date by the time it reaches print). Unless it is received through 
the National Technical Information Service, the Library does not collect domestic technical reports in 
the computer sciences.  (See Collections Policy Statement for Technical Reports, Working Papers and 
Preprints).  Computer science researchers are primarily interested in recent reports, although older 
ones, particularly those with an emphasis on theory, are sometimes requested.
Preprints, which are excluded from the Library of Congress permanent collections, have long been a 
primary information dissemination method in computer science. For working researchers, particularly in 
theoretical computer science, practically all the information dissemination takes place through early 
preprint exchanges and interactions at conferences. The growth of preprint archive resources on the 
web are a sign of their significance. Preprint resources include arXiv.org, cogprints.org, CORR 
(Computing Research Repository), and NCSTRL (Networked Computer Science Technical Reference 
Library). 
With the advent of the Internet, many conferences and papers are being published in electronic format 
only. There is currently no means available to monitor and/or capture all of this information, and much 
of it is being lost to posterity.  Materials that do come into the collection in electronic format (such as 
CD-ROM or DVD) or with mixed print/electronic material are in the custody of the Machine Readable 
Collections (MRC). Due to physical constraints these materials are primarily served in print format 
only. (See Collections Policy Statement on Electronic Resources.)  Some preprint and conference 
resources, especially those from foreign universities and research institutions may also be held retained 
as “current issue only” in the vast, but largely uncataloged, collection held by the Technical Reports 
and Standards Section. (See Collections Policy Statement on Technical Reports, Working Papers and 
Preprints.) 
III. Collecting Policy 
The Library acquires materials in the fields of computer science in all formats and languages, e.g., 
print materials, microforms, and electronic, and from a variety of sources, including Copyright 
deposits, Cataloging in Publication (CIP), the overseas offices, purchase, and gift and exchange. 
Materials from all countries and in all languages are significant, and we collect broadly to ensure full 
representation of the literature. 
Conference proceedings are currently collected comprehensively, however significant portions of 
computer science proceedings are migrating to electronic only (CD-ROM, or participant only access). 
Some e-journal and born digital materials are collected at a lower level than their print counterparts 
because the current Copyright law does not address the deposit of these materials. Also, some of the 
mechanics associated with the Library’s acquisition of, storage and display of digital materials have not 
yet been resolved.  As electronic materials in the fields of computer science, telecommunication and 
artificial intelligence proliferate, it is imperative that these materials are added, through web capture 
or other means, to Library of Congress collections. 
-3-
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
A significant number of requests come into the Library of Congress for older versions of computer 
software and their accompanying manuals.  However current Library of Congress practice is to not 
select software that is designed exclusively for servers or mainframes, software that is designed for 
onetime use (demo discs), software packages that are not “stand alones,” or software that is not 
compatible with IBM type PC’s. Significantly, even more so than print versions, it is difficult to track 
the many versions and releases of software that may be published.  When usage of software depends on 
the availability of an earlier version (updates to a system), a fee, or a restriction imposed by 
registration, then the software title is generally not selected. 
Materials in the fields of computer science, telecommunication and artificial intelligence are collected 
primarily at research and comprehensive levels.  The Library holds a comprehensive collection of 
dissertations issued by Proquest (formerly UMI) and strives to permanently acquire all doctoral 
dissertations accepted by universities in the United States; foreign dissertations are acquired 
selectively.  Related Library policies include “Best Edition” of Published Copyright Works for the 
Collections of the Library of Congress, LC Policy on Acquiring, Retaining and Cataloguing of Publications 
of 50 Pages or Less; Selection Guidelines for Electronic Resources, Collections Policy Statement on 
Bibliography and Library Science, Collections Policy Statement on Dissertations and Theses, Collections 
Policy Statement on Societies and Associations, Collections Policy and Technical Reports, Working 
Papers and Preprints, and Collections Policy Statement on Web Capture and Archiving. 
IV. Collecting Levels 
Computer Science; Telecommunication;  and Artificial Intelligence 
Class Subject Level Comments 
QA75-QA76 Computer science 4 
QA76.38 Hybrid computers 4 
QA76.4 Analog computers 4 
QA76.5 Digital computers 4 
Includes 
microcomputers, 
minicomputers, 
personal computers 
QA76.6 Programming 4 
QA76.7 Programming languages 4 
QA76.75 Software 3 
QA76.76 Operating systems 4 
QA76.8 Computer systems 4 
Includes: fault-
tolerant computing, 
interactive systems, 
virtual computer 
systems, distributed 
processing 
-4-
Computer Science; Telecommunication;  and Artificial Intelligence 
Class Subject Level Comments 
QA76.9 
Other topics A-Z: algorithms, 
computers and civilization, 
computers and family 4 
Includes: Database 
management; 
computer 
architecture; 
computer 
arithmetic; 
computers and 
civilization; 
economic and 
psychological 
aspects; computer 
literacy 
QA76.9 Computers and children 4 
LC has primary RLG 
collecting 
responsibility 
QA76.9 Computer simulation 4 
QA76.9 
Computer standards, codes, 
specifications 5 
The following description of appropriate subclasses of Q is also in Science, General 
and is repeated here for convenience in identifying collection levels for Computer 
Science. 
Q334-342 Artificial intelligence 5 
Q350-390 Information theory 5 
Telecommunication; Electronics--Applications of electronics 
Class Subject Level Comments 
TK5101-TK6720 
Telecommunication 
(telegraph, telephone, 
radio, radar, television) 4 
TK7880-TK7895 
Electronics--applications of 
electronics  4 
Revised November 2008 
-5-

