Overview of the 
Telecommunications Network
1
15
Telecommunication Networks
Basic purpose of a telecommunications network: transmit user information 
in any form to another user of the network.
Many forms of networks, such as voice or data; subscribers may use different 
access network technologies to access the network, for example, fixed or cellular
telephones.
Different services, such as data, fixed, or cellular telephony service.
2
(1) Transmission
(2) Switching 
(3) Signaling.
16
Three technologies needed for communication through the telephone 
network (POTS, plain old telephone service): 
Transmission
Transmission is the process of transporting information between end points
of a system or a network.
Transmission systems use four basic media for information transfer from one point to 
another:
1. Wire-pair (copper) cables, such as those used in telephone subscriber lines (access
network)
2. Optical fiber cables, such as those used in high-data-rate transmission in 
3
telecommunications networks (especially in transport networks)
3. Radio waves, such as microwave radio links, cellular telephones and satellite 
transmission
4. Free-space optics, and infrared communications (limited application, e.g. PC-to-PC 
short range links).
17Fiber optics Twisted pairs Radio links
Manual Switching
4
18
A manual telephone exchange (1896)
An old rotary dial telephone
Automatic Switching
Switching: only a few cable connections  are 
needed between exchanges because the 
number of simultaneously ongoing calls is 
much smaller than the number of telephones.
A basic telecommunications network
Almon B. Strowger in 
1887 developed the first 
automatic switch (i.e. 
First switches were not automatic so switching 
was done manually using a switchboard.
Conceptual operation of a 
step-by-step  (SXS) switch
5
electro-mechanical).
19
If a subscriber dials a “3”, three 
pulses from her telephone are 
transmitted to the switch. The 
switch then steps to level 3 in 
the 1st relay bank. The 2nd relay 
bank is now connected waiting 
for the second dialed digit. It 
accepts the second digit, a “7”, 
and steps to appropriate position 
and connects to the 3rd relay 
bank, and so on.Called subscriber is “375”
Signaling
Signaling is the mechanism that allows network entities (customer premises
or network switches) to establish, maintain, and terminate sessions in a network.
Signaling examples on subscriber lines (i.e. between telephone and its central office):
• Off-hook condition
6
• Dial
• On-hook condition
Signaling needed between exchanges as well because most calls have to be 
connected via more than just one exchange.
20
Operation of Ordinary Telephone 1
Local exchanges have a large-capacity battery that keeps the exchange and subscriber
sets operational for a few hours if the supply of electricity is cut off.
7
A subscriber line, also called “local loop”, which carries speech signals is a twisted pair.
Power supply comes from the exchange site: basic telephone service independent of 
the local electric power network. 
Local loop
Telephone
21
In its simplest form a telephone consists of:
(a) one microphone and one earphone, combined into a single handheld unit
(b) means of signaling the exchange when a call is to be made
(c) means of sending to the exchange the ‘address’ information of the called subscriber
(d) an incoming call alarm
(e) means of signaling the exchange that the call has been answered.
Operation of Ordinary Telephone 2
8
Subscriber A Subscriber B
22
Simplified illustration of the telephone connection
Operation of Ordinary Telephone 3
9
(a) One microphone and one earphone combined into a single handheld unit
Microphone
When we raise the telephone hook, the on/off switch is 
closed and current starts flowing on the subscriber loop 
through the microphone able to convert acoustic energy 
into electrical energy. Originally telephone microphones 
were carbon microphones (i.e. with carbon grains) 
operating as variable resistors supplied with battery 
voltage from the exchange site. Sound waves press the 
(*)
23
Earphone
Alternating current, generated by the microphone, is 
converted back into voice at the receive end. The 
earphone has a diaphragm with a piece of magnet 
inside a coil. The coil is supplied by the alternating 
current; this current generates a variable magnetic 
field that makes the diaphragm to vibrate. This, in 
turn, produces sound waves.
carbon grains more tightly, so loop resistance decrease 
and current slightly increases. The variable air pressure 
generates an alternating current into the subscriber loop.
(*) Located in the Central Office
Operation of Ordinary Telephone 4
10
(b) Means of signaling the exchange when a call is to be made
Signaling functions include the detection of on/off-hook condition and dialing. 
Each telephone has a switch that indicates an on- or off-hook condition. When the hook is 
raised, the switch is closed and current starts flowing. 
This is detected by a relay giving information to the control unit in the exchange. 
(c) Means of sending to the exchange the ‘address’ information of the called subscriber
The control unit activates signaling circuits, which then receive dialed digits from subscriber 
who initiates a call (Subscriber A). The control unit in the telephone exchange controls the 
switching matrix that connects the speech circuit through to the called subscriber  
24
(Subscriber B). Connection is made according to the numbers dialed by Subscriber A.
(d) An incoming call alarm
When the call is being routed to Subscriber B, the telephone exchange supplies to the 
subscriber loop a ringing voltage and the bell of Subscriber B’s telephone starts ringing.
(e) Means of signaling the exchange that the call has been answered
The ringing voltage is switched off immediately when an off-hook condition is detected 
on the loop of subscriber B, and then an end-to-end speech circuit is connected and the 
conversation may start.
Summary of Signaling Procedure
Switch open in the on-hook condition and closed when the hook is off
• indicates to the telephone exchange when a call is to be initiated
• prepare to receive dialed digits
Local loop closed and opened according to the dialed digits, and the number of 
current pulses is detected by the exchange
11
Subscriber signaling
25
Rotary Dialing
Dialing plate with finger holes is rotated clockwise to the end and released
While homing, the switch is breaking the line current periodically and the 
number of these periods indicates the dialed digit (digit 1 has one period, 2 
has two periods, and 0 has 10 periods)
12
Principle of rotary (or pulse) dialing
26
Tone Dialing 1
Electronic circuits make possible the implementation of better means for signaling.
Modern telephones have 12 push buttons (keys A to D in Figure normally are not 
included) for dialing, each generating a tone with two frequencies.
One of the frequencies is from the upper frequency band and the other from the 
lower band. All frequencies are inside the voice frequency band (300–3,400 Hz) and 
can thus be transmitted through the network from end to end, when the speech 
connection is established.
This signaling principle is known as dual-tone multifrequency (DTMF) signaling.
13
27
Tone Dialing 2
Advantages of tone dialing are as follows:
•  It is quicker and dialing of all digits takes the same time.
•  Fewer dialing errors result.
•  End-to-end signaling is possible.
•  Additional push buttons available (*, #) 
to activate supplementary services.
Supplementary services enable subscribers to 
influence the routing of their telephone calls. 
Each digit represented by 
two audio tones.
DTMF signalling allows 10 
digits, plus * and # symbols 
to be coded as shown in 
Table below:
14
These services (for example call transfer) are not 
available with telephones that use pulse dialing. To 
control these services we need control buttons * and 
#, which are available only in push-button telephones 
that use tone dialing.
We use tone dialing also to control value-added 
services (VAS), i.e. services that we can use via the 
telephone network but that are usually provided by 
another service provider, not the telecommunications 
network operator. 28
2 Wires and 4 Wires Circuits
The local loop, which connects a telephone to a local exchange is a two-wire (2W) 
circuit that carries the signals in both transmission directions.
Subscriber loops are two-wire circuits, because they are one of the biggest 
investments of the fixed telephone network.
Long distance connections attenuate the speech signal and amplifiers are needed 
on the line: use two wires for each direction, or four-wire (4W) connections.
15
2W/4W circuits 29
2W/4W Hybrid 1
To connect a 2W local loop to a 4W network a circuit called a 2W/4W hybrid is 
needed (forchetta telefonica).
The signal from the receive pair is not connected to the transmit pair, or at least it 
is much attenuated.
Balance is not ideal and attenuated signal is connected back, which is heard as an 
echo from the far end of the telephone circuit if two-way propagation delay of the 
circuit is long enough:
• e.g., satellite connections, digital cellular networks: both have long delays
and need echo cancellers
16
2W/4W hybrid in long distance connection 30
2W/4W Hybrid 2
The 2W/4W hybrid performs the following operations:
• separates the transmitting and receiving signals
• matches the impedance of the 2W local loop to the network circuit
• provides a loss to signals arriving on the receiving path, preventing
them from entering the transmitting path, which would cause echo.
In every subscriber set quite the same principle as the 2W/4W hybrid is used to 
attenuate the subscriber’s own voice from the microphone to the earphone.
17
31
Generation of echo signal in a 2W/4W  connection

