1
This document was contributed by Steven J. Herro to the EDUCAUSE Information  Resources
Library.  It is the intellectual property of the contributor.  Permission to copy or disseminate all or part
of this material is granted for non-commercial purposes and provided that the ownership and source
are acknowledged. To republish in part or whole requires written permission from the contributor. See
http://www.educause.edu/copyright.html for additional copyright information.
2
The Impact of Merging Academic Libraries and Computer Centers
on User Services
by
Steven J. Herro
An Alternate Plan Paper Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree
Master of Science in Administration in Educational Administration
Minnesota State University, Mankato
December, 1998
3
Chapter I
Introduction
Since Columbia University announced that it was merging (hereafter referred to as
converging)  its library and academic computing services in 1985 and naming Patricia Battin
Vice President and University Librarian, many colleges and universities within the United
States have merged various information technology offices on their campuses. Information
Services  is often used to describe a new administrative unit due to the exploding and
converging of computing and communications technology.
When academic libraries began to apply computer technology to their operations in
the late 1960s, they purchased service and computer storage from computing centers like
other campus departments. Lyman (1989) described specific scenarios when academic
libraries would be heavily dependent on academic computing: when the library system
software is hosted by a central mainframe computer maintained by academic computing,
when the library catalog is accessible over the campus computer network, if the campus
decides to write its own library system software, and if external databases are housed on the
campus mainframe computer. Though the library and academic computing were linked by
these functions, the departments still had to decide the following: which would support
microcomputer hardware and software housed in the library, which was responsible for
storing and providing access to the data files accessed via the library automation system,
which trained users of databases accessible over library automated system, and which
supported instructional software that  was used at the university.
4
By the mid 1980s,  increasingly related and overlapping responsibilities of the library
and academic computing forced universities to begin to consider linking administration of the
two departments.  Woodsworth (1988) specifically noted that the breakup of AT & T led to a
merging of computing and communication that caused universities to reassess computing and
information delivery options. The reporting relationships of the  library (usually academic
affairs), administrative and academic computing (usually administrative affairs), and
telecommunications (usually administrative affairs)  were reconsidered. Convergence was
considered for practical administrative reasons and only toward the end of the 1980s were
collaboration and convergence considered to improve strategic planning, development of
campus information policy, the offering of educational programs, and to provide greater
support to curriculum development (Creth, S. D., 1993). In the 1980s, 200 United States
colleges and universities created Information Services divisions to oversee such areas that
might include any or each of the following academic departments: the library, administrative
and academic computing, voice and data technologies, technology planning, television
services, institutional research, printing, copying, mail, and media service (Rosser & Penrod,
1990).  
In 1987, the Association of College and Research Libraries noted  in preliminary
guidelines to convergence that Brown University, Carnegie Mellon University, Columbia
University, Dartmouth College, Notre Dame University, University of New Mexico,
University California at Berkeley, University of Minnesota, University of Michigan, and
Virginia Technical Institute had already begun to successfully collaborate on computer 
5
networking, public access library catalogs, technology instruction, system maintenance, and
housing of automation equipment (Bass, 1987). Hardesty noted that Richard Dougherty,
Dean of Libraries at University of Michigan, began a publication at this time, Libraries &
Computing Centers: Issues of Mutual Concern, to address issues of convergence.
Convergence became less popular in larger universities following the 1980s, but by the mid
1990s, convergence regained momentum, especially in smaller colleges. Gettysburg, Berea,
Bucknell, Carthage, Coe, Connecticut, Eckerd, Kalamazoo, Lake Forest, Macalester, Mount
Holyoke, and Wellesley all converged libraries and computing centers in the 1990s (1998).
Johnson (1997) published one bibliography listing citations and some abstracts to over 50
sources related to convergence or library reorganization.
The head of Information Services  functions as a chief information officer (CIO). He
or she usually has the title Vice President, Vice Provost, Dean, Associate Provost, Associate
Vice President, Executive Director, Director, Chief Information Officer, or College (or
University) Librarian (Hirshon, 1998). He or she might report to the chief executive officer of
the institution or the chief academic officer. At times, a librarian or computer center director
will become CIO, and add the work of the CIO to his or her previous responsibilities; in some
cases, a librarian or computer center director will be named CIO, and another librarian or
computer center director will take his or her place in the former position;  in other cases, an
engineer or management professional will be named CIO (Hardesty, 1998 and Penrod, J. I.,
Dolence, M. C., & Douglas, J. V., 1990).
Why do institutions converge?  Although some might consider personnel cost savings
as a reason to converge, this is usually not the case in reality. One librarian CIO commented,
6
"How can you save money by combining the old ’bottomless pit’ [the library] with the new
’black hole’ [the computer center]?" (Hardesty, 1998). Most CIOs earn over $100,000 a year
and because the position relates closely to a position outside of academe, higher education
must offer a salary competitive with business for such an officer (Hardesty, 1998). Others
converge to facilitate administration; computing, library, multimedia, and
telecommunications all relate to information: why not realign administration to reflect this
similar function? Higginbotham (1986) noted that both units collect information and assist
end users in using it; if libraries and computing centers remain separate, libraries will lose
out, as electronic information replaces printed information. By converging units, it is clearer
to the end user where to go for service and the institution saves by reducing redundant staff
time and access points.  Converging departments fosters “one-stop information shopping” (p.
15).
Statement of the Problem
  In the field of technology and higher education, to converge is to combine academic
library, computing services, and perhaps additional departments related to information
technology. This research will describe reasons to converge, why convergence might be
difficult, and if users services are directly enhanced after convergence.   After convergence,
do students, faculty, staff, and the general public (hereafter referred to as end users) receive
better personal service when they use information sources? After convergence, are faculty
receiving improved assistance as they attempt to implement information technology in
curriculum development? After convergence, do end users have improved access to the
necessary computer hardware, software, and computer networks to meet  their information
7
needs? 
Definitions
Academic computing--computing hardware, software, and networking provided and
maintained by computing center to enhance electronic  information use by students, faculty,
and staff in colleges and universities for instructional and  research purposes.
Administrative computing---computing hardware, software, and networking provided
and maintained by computing center to enhance institutional record keeping by
administrative departments in higher education (such as the admissions office, development
office, registrar’s office).
Chief Information Officer (CIO)--person with executive  responsibility for the
organization and control of information in a company or organization. Areas of responsibility
in higher education often include academic computing, administrative computing, libraries,
audio-visual collections, broadcasting, and telecommunications; see information services.
Collaboration--cooperation of staff members of individual information departments
(such as library, computing, telecommunications, and audio-visual  media)  to enhance
service to students, faculty, and staff in higher education.
Convergence-- merging of the library and academic computing services and one or
more of the following departments in higher education: administrative computing,
telecommunications, broadcasting,  and audio-visual media.
Information manager--"a position responsible for an operation dealing with
information access, retrieval, technology, or transfer, i.e. computer center director, library
director, media center director, or telecommunications director" (Woodsworth, 1987, p. 6.).
8
Information services--organizational unit that provides print, audio-visual, electronic,
and telecommunications data to enhance acquisition of knowledge by academic users  and or
operation of work place  tasks by nonacademic users in higher education; see chief
information officer.
Telecommunications--"systems that handle voice, data, and/or video transmission
throughout the campus" (Woodsworth, 1987, p. 7).
User services--direct assistance provided to students, faculty, staff, and general public
by workers in information services  to help these individuals acquire necessary information
needed for the completion of their academic, recreational, or occupational information needs.
Procedures of the Study
The study is based on a literature review of  primary and secondary source material
found in the professional literature of technology and higher education and results from a
questionnaire of a stratified sample of 44 United States CIOs of higher education. The sample
represents public undergraduate/graduate institutions, private undergraduate/graduate
institutions, and private undergraduate institutions  A copy of the cover letter (Appendix A)
and questionnaire (Appendix B) are attached as appendices. The list of CIOs was found in
Hirshon (1998, pp. 35-37 ).
Limitations of the Study
Woodsworth (1987), Rosser and Penrod (1990), and Hirshon (1998) all surveyed
CIOs in higher education. Even considering that their works were composed in different
years, there is a significant difference in number of CIOs that each reported. This suggests
that there is not a complete agreement as to whether a college or university has a CIO or not.
9
Furthermore, not every institution includes the same administrative departments under the
heading of Information Services. The results of the survey to CIOs included five responses
from 11 privately funded undergraduate institutions, four responses from nine privately
funded graduate institutions, and five responses from 24 queried publicly funded graduate
institutions, for a total response rate of 32 percent.
10
Chapter II
A study of the primary source literature (primarily graduate papers) and secondary
source literature revealed difficulties associated with convergence, philosophical and
practical reasons to converge or at least collaborate, and  specific examples of effects of
convergence and collaboration on user services.
 Difficulties Associated with Convergence
The greatest reported difficulty associated with convergence was the difference in
cultures between computing and library staffs. Academic library history is as long university
history and library collections have been seen as the heart of the university. The academic
library has well established standards, philosophies, procedures, and connections with the
book trade. Academic computing is roughly 40 years old; it has operated in a rapidly
changing environment and has strong connections to the commercial worlds of computer
hardware and telecommunications (Weber, 1988). Another historical difference is that
libraries have generally offered services free of charge (lending of materials, searching of
databases, transacting interlibrary loans with other libraries, offering library bibliographic
instruction) and focused on the user. Academic computing has historically "charged back"
university departments for its service and emphasized not the user but the tool (Saunders,
1996).
Librarians have seen service as a hallmark of their profession and many librarians
claimed that this is not so in the computer field. Computer professionals have been viewed as
eager to try a new venture, but less likely to support it after it has been installed. One librarian
noted, "Supporting and educating is not in their vocabulary. There is also a sense that
11
solutions are seen as providing hardware and connectivity," and another, "This may appear
smug, but I see librarians more as educators and computer people more as technologists."
Computing staffers have commented, "The library has taken an attitude of being aggressively
helpful, and I have taken an attitude, ’If you ask me, I will help,’"  "I would say that our
concern is much more with getting access, and we do not fret about the uses," and "While our
views are extremely charitable toward the users, theirs [the librarians] are overly
compensatory.There is almost the presumption of the user being lost. ’You cannot do without
us.’". Furthermore,  Hardesty notes that computing center staffs often see convergence as
"takeovers" by the library (Hardesty, 1998). Herro participated in one conversation about the
convergence of library and academic computing services at Minnesota State University,
Mankato. One librarian feared that convergence would lower librarian status on campus.  The
librarians (presently with faculty status and accustomed to being treated with the respect of
university faculty) might be viewed more as technical experts and possibly face a decline in
status (and perhaps salary and benefits as well) in the eyes of academic colleagues on the
campus. 
University classroom faculty might be strong opponents of convergence, accustomed
to libraries as scholarly, academic organizations and fearful that convergence would threaten
library autonomy. Weiskel, a Yale anthropologist wrote of fear of losing traditional library
service after convergence (Martin, 1992).
Woodsworth (1991) presented a historic mistrust of computer staffs by librarians. The
bibliographic record is the intricate data record for each unique item that a library owns.
Librarians have been reluctant to surrender control of these precious data records to
12
non-librarians. The Association of College and Research Libraries formed a task force in the
mid 1980s to prepare guidelines on library and computer center convergence because
academic libraries were untrusting of convergence (the final guidelines submitted by the task
force were not approved). Baker (1990), Associate Director of Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Libraries, noted a degree of fear and paranoia that some librarians have:
In the investigations for this paper, I feel that I have learned the answer to my 
original question: both libraries and computer centers have problems that we
wish alliance with the other would solve. Perhaps both libraries and computing have 
been adventurers, each hoping to making a killing by alliance with the other. 
Nevertheless, the larger problem--the support for information technology
within the university--can best be addressed through an alliance. Not the least of our
strengths may be our record and talent for sound fiscal management. We need to have
a clear sense of the strengths and motivations of our colleagues in computing.
With our eyes open--and with our hands on our wallets--we should form that mutually
beneficial alliance (p. 249).
Though librarians have been viewed as being more "customer oriented" than
computing professionals, Naylor (1988) notes that they might not be best equipped to be the
service providers in an era of electronic information. Does unfamiliarity with electronic
information outweigh perceived customer orientation?   Naylor suggested that the cost of
training librarians to be electronic information professionals might outweigh their tendency to
be user centered professionals. Furthermore, Naylor noted that there is no conclusive
evidence that convergence has led to an increased number of personal computers and work
stations for the public to access the increased amount of electronic information.
Dougherty and McClure (1997) stressed that institutions should have modest
expectations of convergence:
13
Although case studies on restructuring campus information systems are rare, 
anecdotal evidence supports the view that such changes are more likely to be 
successful in smaller academic organizations, than in larger, more complex
research universities....
     For all of the theoretical debates, the promise of quick and easy mergers 
proved to be illusory. Consequently, the goals of reorganization have generally
become more modest. Even a simple streamlining of information units under
one person has not always produced financial savings because the creation of the new 
administration often adds yet another layer to that hierarchy (p. 71).
Philosophical and Practical Reasons to Converge
Libraries and academic computing have much in common. Both services are
concerned with tools and information. Libraries have tended to focus on how people use tools
to meet their information needs while academic computing has tended to focus on how
technology helps meet information needs.  The units have shared networks, share staff
shortages, and share the need to construct flexible facilities to meet user needs in the use of
information (Saunders, 1996).  Librarians are skilled in interpersonal relations, organizing
knowledge, marketing, training, and sales; computer professionals are skilled in system
development, telecommunications, and product development (Creth, 1993). Creth wrote that
not only should libraries and academic computing collaborate  or converge, but that they
must:
Libraries and computer centers are the two organizations within higher education that
can provide leadership and create new directions for the campus through the 
application of information technology. They also have the most to lose. In
order to be leaders--and not losers--librarians and computer professionals will have to
be willing to make fundamental changes in all aspects of their roles and 
responsibilities, skills and knowledge, working relationships and organization 
cultures. By aggressively exploring opportunities to work collaboratively to
deliver services including wholly new services, librarians and computer professionals
can exploit the full potential of information technology in innovative and timely ways
(p. 113).
14
According to Woodsworth and Maylone, both units are involved in the specific
functions of developing training tools and system documentation; designing and operating
local area networks; planning and selecting system hardware and software; collecting
software for end users; managing databases; performing system analyses;  and providing
technical assistance and consulting advice, instructing faculty, staff, and students on research
strategies, file management techniques, and network access. Their professional goals are
similar, to help users make optimum use of hardware, software, and communication systems
to manipulate information. Libraries package information, computing centers store and
retrieve it; libraries lend information, computing centers display it. Libraries acquire and
borrow information and computer centers input it. Both deal with copyright, free access to
information, ownership, standards, site licenses; both are impacted by telecommunications,
and media services (Martin, 1992).
With the library, computing, telecommunications, and other information units
functioning as one administrative unit, universities may achieve a more efficient financial
administration of information technology funds and all computer hardware, software, and
networks could work in greater cohesion (Woodsworth, 1988). Convergence could lead to
greater chances for obtaining capital for new technology initiatives, improved access for
students and scholars, and a greater appreciation for the skills of all staff members involved
in the  information mission (Woodsworth, 1991).
Institutions that converge or collaborate are better at answering users direct questions,
according to Bly (1996):
15
Cooperation between the units would save much replication of effort and, in many
cases, much frustration for both staffs of the library and computer center, as well as
for the user. In many cases, the user does not know whom to ask when confronting a
“computer” problem or is put off by the answer received. At the same time, there are
many times when the academic staff member who is asked does not know who is
responsible for answering the question or solving the problem. A single coherent and
predictable set of channels for dealing with questions and triage techniques 
must be developed among all information providers to meet this need (p. 215).
How does convergence and the establishment of a CIO enhance user service?  Drake
(1991) noted that both computer professionals and librarians are not customer oriented; the
former are machine oriented and the latter are collection oriented. A CIO is needed to insure
that information services prioritizes the provision of quality customer service. The survey of
Penrod, Dolence, and Douglas (1990) of CIOs revealed comments such as, “We are 100
percent service and have no other function,” “Service distinguishes us from similar
institutions”, “If we can’t do it better, faster, cheaper than any other alternative, than we
shouldn’t be doing it at all”, and “Our IRM [information resource management] unit’s
existence is justified based on the services we offer; we seek to understand user expectations
and perceptions by conducting ongoing evaluations of our service and align the services
provided with those needed” (p. 16).
Kesner (1994) suggested integrating total quality management as part of convergence.
 Amongst other steps in a successful convergence, staff members must be superior listeners
of customers and totally customer driven. Implementing total quality management includes
the sharing of ideas all staff to enhance user services. The establishment of information
service help desks and improved  training and documentation for end users are indicative of
total quality management enhancements to users in information services.
16
Kesner (1994) defined information resource management (IRM) as “... the
economical and efficient management, servicing, and support of all information...that is of
value to the organization. The value added component of IRM is the information utility’s
ability to deliver accurate specific information to the end-user in a timely manner” (p. 375).
Information utility was defined, “Within any organization, the information utility includes all
those resources, services, and facilities that comprise, process, and deliver information to the
end-user. More than computer hardware and software, an information utility is an approach to
customer service that emphasizes availability, ease of access, economy, efficiency, and
accountability to the community” (p. 376).
If the library invests in the information utility model, the user would benefit by better
overall customer service and support, delivery of information to the individual desktop,
enhanced integration among all information sources for better overall use of all available
information, greater recognition of all information utilities contribution to the parent
organization’s mission and goals, improved access to new information technologies, better
resource planning, and staff cross training. Kesner noted that librarians are most likely to
understand user needs and if librarians are true partners in information utility, this skill may
be passed onto other professionals to supply improved user service.
Lester (1992) presented a checklist of skills needed for a user services professional in
an information services division. The person must enjoy working with people in a
cooperative environment, and not focus on winning and losing; the person must be willing to
learn and continually experiment in all related areas; the person must possess excellent verbal
and written skills; the person must be able to compromise and negotiate; the person must be
17
able to see the larger and the smaller picture at the same time; the person must be able to
admit ignorance yet search for knowledge; the person must be willing to fail; and the person
must have an enthusiasm for technology, process, organization and public service.
Nguyen (1997) cited Internet training as a perfect example of collaboration between
library and computing staffs to serve the wider university community. Some have noted that
the training could have never been as successful if either unit had done it alone
(“...collaborative workshops provide a further opportunity for these service units to join
forces and offer the university community the experience and expertise developed by each
department” [p. 13]). Creth (1993) also cited librarians and computing professional
combining to help develop new approaches to instruction (such as hyper media); librarians
teaching not only typical library skills, but combining with computer services to instruct
patrons on effective use of all information sources and publishing, print and electronic.
Examples of Convergence and Collaboration
Secondary literature and personal responses have revealed the success of convergence
and or collaboration at Dickinson College,  Rutgers University, San Jose State University,
SUNY Albany, Carthage College, University of Wisconsin--Parkside, UCLA Graduate
School of Management, University of Montana, Rice University, Kalamazoo College, and
Lehigh University.
From 1982-1987, computing and library staff at Dickinson College collaborated to
convert 200,000 library records to electronic format so that the library catalog could be
accessible to over 200 campus users. The new search software enabled keyword searching,
Boolean logic (the ability to combine terms with  and, or, and not searching).  Other colleges
18
have also collaborated to automate the library catalog, but Bechtel (1988) noted:
For such collaboration to be successful, special skills are needed on both sides. The
desire to cooperate is of utmost importance. Individualists, isolationists, and 
superstars need not apply. On the other hand, librarians and computing people
who want to learn, who tend to respect each others’ differences, and who are or who
can become good negotiators, and who are committed to the educational aims of the
institution can find enormous professional rewards in working together to enhance the
educational process ( insert between pp. 34-35).
Rutgers University and San Jose State University typified examples of collaboration
to support improved micro computing for end users in academic libraries. In 1985,
Computing and Information Services of Rutgers received funds to install and provide
hardware and software support for Apple and IBM compatible computers and printers that
would be used to start an unmediated online search service for university users of the BRS
After Dark online information service.  Librarians provided user instruction and consultation
for the online searching, as well as publicity and policies for the services. Librarians felt that
this service was needed for non graduate student users, who seemed to be neglected from
online searching services. As one professional stated, “...We have worked effectively together
and look forward to continued cooperative ventures--both for our mutual benefit and that of
the entire university community (Hoffman, Kesselman, Nash, Langschied, 1988, insert
between 306-307).
The resolution of tensions involved in collaboration at San Jose State Library
stemming from a new microcomputer lab reflect differences in cultures between libraries and
academic computing, but also how these differences can be worked out. In 1986,
Instructional Systems and Computing Group and the library launched a joint microcomputer
19
lab in the library of 23 Apple computers and three printers. Benefits of placing the lab in the
library included the convenient and impartial campus location for users, the number of hours
that the library was open, promotion of the library’s holistic view of information access, and
the opportunity for the library staff to become more computer savvy.  The Computing Group
would hire and train student assistants for the lab, maintain the software and hardware, pay
for supplies, and serve as liaison to the donor (Apple Computer). The library would provide
the space, circulate the software, supervise the student assistants, and provide backup
instructional services (Hafter & Kittinger, 1990).
Within six months after the lab opened, the library and Computing Group discovered
problems. Neither had projected such a high cost for supplies (toner cartridges alone cost the
Computing Group $3500 after six months). The Computing Group wanted the lab to
showcase other Apple products, as it tried to foster the relationship with Apple for future
donations; the library sought to limit the visibility of the Apple Company in the lab.
Furthermore, the library staff was frustrated with the performance of the Computing Group’s
students assistants in the lab and with the nonacademic use of the lab. The lab was not
increasing use of library services as much as promoting recreational microcomputer use.
These differences underscored differences in library and computing cultures. The Computing
Group saw its role as paying bills, providing equipment, and staffing the lab; the library saw
its role as providing user support. The Computing Group was used to a self service model of
service while the library was used to value added through professional service and one to one
service between staff and user. The Computing Group viewed the lab as another campus
computing lab while the library viewed it as an extension of library service (Hafter &
20
Kittinger, 1990).
Differences and problems were resolved when the Computing Group became solely
responsible for hardware and software issues and the library, with its innate service
orientation, became solely responsible for recruiting, training, and staffing the lab. The
library was also charged with funding the lab and it instituted a .25 per page printing fee. The
hybrid facility was not been totally supported by either the Computer Group or the library,
but did bring the greatest satisfaction to the end users. After having learned to collaborate on
the computing lab, the two information units began to collaborate with the implementation of
an online public access library catalog and in campus wide computer planning equipment.
The Computer Group began to apply library circulation policies to loaning of its hardware
and software and the library learned how to better relate to vendors and apply innovative uses
of technology (Hafter & Kittinger, 1990).
SUNY Albany has implemented a model of decentralized service that has become
common for end users. When the university upgraded the technology infrastructure to
increase the number of campus computer network users from 2,000 to 20,000 people, the
CIO knew that this would demand increased trainers by the information units. The university
developed local technology coordinators in every school, college, university department, and
residence hall. These coordinators represent service providers for any information accessible
from the desktop computer, information formerly accessed separately from the library,
computing labs, or telecommunications office. As the single unit, the PC, has become a
nearly comprehensive tool to gather all forms of information, service providers of
information have become adept at serving all kinds of information needs. As long as the end
21
user is able to forgo old service alliances and contacts and depend on the new local service
provider, prospects for more efficient user support are possible (Butler, M. A. & DeLong, S.
E., 1997).
Engledinger (Carthage College) and Meachen (University of Wisconsin--Parkside)
(1996) have written on convergence in smaller institutions. The former rose from director of
a liberal arts college library to a CIO and vice president of the college; the latter rose from the
director of a smaller pubic university library to CIO and a vice president of the university.
Parkside converged in 1992 and Carthage converged in 1993; the two are located near each
other in southeastern Wisconsin. Both library directors became CIOs because, “... each
institution’s top administration believed the interests of their campus would be best served by
the library’s overall vision, its public service philosophy, and its broad view of the use and
importance of information technology. In neither case did the reorganization result from a
grass roots or rank-and-file [sic] staff initiative” (pp. 1-2).
Convergence was obvious at Carthage, as computer service staff troubleshot library
computers and helped install new automated library system software, the newsletters of both
information units were combined, the user instruction room was jointly planned, the units
jointly planned and presented an annual “Information Technology Day” workshop for faculty
and staff as well as “Computer Awareness Week” activities every spring. Furthermore,
numerous instruction sessions related to computer resources, the campus network, and
electronic library resources were planned and presented together by computer and library
professionals for college students, faculty, staff, trustees, prospective students and their
families, and conference participants using Carthage meeting facilities. The college invested
22
heavily in network able full text and other electronic resources and realized that increased
staff would be needed for users to make best use of the tools. Convergence forced cross
training of library and computer center staffs. The Academic Information Services User
Education task force realized that permanent staff and student assistants in former library and
computer centers would have to become adept at providing service in all electronic
information task, ranging from email, to library online public access catalog, to word
processing, to electronic periodical index, to World Wide Web support. (Engeldinger &
Meachen, 1996).
At Parkside, convergence led to the modernization of laboratories and classrooms for
advanced electronic information needs, enhanced faculty use of technology in instruction, the
development of an Information Services newsletter, and enhanced user instruction. The
university created two new positions for software instruction to students, faculty, and staff;
the library became partially responsible for instruction in email, totally responsible for
instruction in the use of the World Wide Web, and the new Computing Assistance Center
received funds and personnel from both the library and the computing center budgets. This
center adapted a library reference desk model of service (Engeldinger and Meachen, 1996).
UCLA John E. Anderson Graduate School of Management pursued collaboration at
the facilities level. Frand, Director of Computing Services, and Bellanti, Director of the
Library, began to discuss an integrated information complex for the school in the late 1980s.
Donations by John E. Anderson and Eugene and Maxine Rosenfeld enabled the university to
construct a single facility to serve as an information complex for the Management School.
Bellanti and Frand surveyed faculty and students of the Management School in order to help
23
determine the future information needs of the school. Their goal was to build a facility in
which patrons could connect to a computer  network anywhere in the complex, as well as
remotely. There are 2467 Ethernet ports in the building, one for every office, desktop, library
and classroom seat. By accessing the computer network, users are able to access large library
catalogs, subject specific CD ROM databases, and hopefully international company data and
industry analyst reports. The two information units had been cooperating in computer training
workshops since 1991 and in the construction of the graduate school home page since 1995
(Bellanti & Frand, 1996). As Frand noted, users should not have to be separated by artificial
divisions of library and computing center and that if convergence has truly occurred, a user
will have  the necessary computer hardware and software at side wherever one consults
information sources. Bellanti agreed by saying, “If it’s information that they need, they
shouldn’t be compartmentalized in how they think about getting it” (Hall, 1990, p. 70).
Samson, Pengally, & Brown (1997) described how collaboration has benefitted the
user at the University of Montana. The university developed an Information Technology Plan
through campus wide planning that included library and Computing and Information Services
(CIS). Since 1991, the two have been offering joint Internet classes to users (presently, 17
different classes are offered), as well as sessions devoted to integrating technology in
curriculum planning for all disciplines, departmental workshops and seminars, conference
workshops, and a three credit Honors course. The library and CIS cosponsored two
information technology conferences and an Internet teleconference and planned, designed,
and maintained the university Gopher site together. From 1993-1994, university CD-ROM
databases and library online public access catalog became remotely accessible through the
24
collaboration of the departments, and they jointly produced written aids to guide user access
to the tools. Hardware and software issues are referred to CIS and information access
questions are referred to the library. In 1994, help desk workers from each information unit
exchanged positions for a limited time in order to provide continuing communication at each
reference point, establish a basis for referrals, and expand communication between the two.
Rice University has had a CIO since 1989. In 1993, a new university department was
formed, User Services Division, from former public service professionals from the library
and academic computing. The division encompasses what had been library reference services,
laboratory services, government documents services, training, and publications. According to
Flowers and Martin (1995), “With our new organization, the focus is on serving customers.
Customers have one interface to the organization, which implies that the rest of the
organization must provide adequate backup support. In the new group, librarians and
computing professionals are working side by side as part of the same team....(pp. 40-41).”
The new division formed a library in the computing center to supply manuals, journals, and
reference service to campus computing users and a computing reference center to allow users
to test and research computer products before investing in them. It was staffed by a librarian.
The division also established a computing lab in the library and developed the Rice’s campus
wide information service (RiceInfo) as a gateway to local university information sources
(such as the library online public access catalog, the course catalog, and a database of
research and grant opportunities for Rice personnel) and links to external information sources
(such as the Library of Congress). User Services also developed a virtual library, as librarians
and computing professionals selected and installed external research databases (such as
25
Current Contents, MLA Bibliography, and Expanded Academic Index) for internal and
external access to university users.
Reference librarians and the training team of User Services have developed a series of
Internet resource workshops for the campus;  reference librarians and divisional
representatives from the academic majors have planned informational presentations to
academic departments; and the marketing and public relations team of User Services has
developed a Technology Showcase in the library, which displays vendors products and
university information system and curriculum development projects (Shapiro & Long, 1994).
Since 1993, Rice has had an Information Arcade in the library that provides small
group computer facilitated interaction and individual information exploration.  It features an
electronic text center, curriculum development center, and electronic classroom. The Arcade
contains a help desk and students, faculty, and staff have space, services, and professional
guidance for the use of electronic information that they never had before (Flowers & Martin,
1995).
Long and Shapiro (1994) described how the new User Services division has
implemented degrees of total quality management. It practices a “90% solution”, a goal that
90 percent of all user needs be successfully addressed as quickly as possible; a tiered staff
that will be in the loop for all information related decisions; and a User Services staff that
will be professionally trained in customer service skills and management of customer
expectations. The division has established written mission and goals to provide superior
customer service for all Rice users.
26
Kalamazoo College formed an Information Services department in 1997, after the
library and computing center were both without a director. Palchick (1988), the new CIO,
reported that a new curricular support division was established to assist faculty in
implementing technology in curriculum, develop computer consulting in residence halls, and
supply a help desk; that the library will implement a new Web based catalog, and that
infrequently used materials will be moved to a off site storage facility to allow more current
materials to expand. Furthermore, under the leadership of the new CIO, the college has
secured grants for nearly 50 percent of all faculty to receive training in integrating technology
in their courses by off campus professionals. The student portfolio requirement has been
strengthened, as what was a Web based portfolio limited to the students’ own floppy disk is
now supported by the college’s technology infrastructure, and the portfolio is now accessible
over the campus computer network. A plan for a building renovation and addition includes
additional teaching and learning facilities; a faculty, student, and staff development center; a
media/video editing and production center, additional user support points, and teaching labs.
The new space will emphasize academic interaction, collaboration, and learning outreach for
all Kalamazoo users.
Foley (1997) described convergence at Lehigh University. The new Information
Resources unit includes the following teams: Lead Team, Client Services Team, Information
Infrastructure and Services Team, Technology Infrastructure and Services Team, and
Resources Planning Team. The university included feedback from three faculty groups, one
staff group, one administrator group, one undergraduate student group, one graduate student
group, and one mixed group before creating its new Information Resources unit. The initial
27
charge produced five recommendations: improvement of client orientation, improved
availability of electronic information, increased usability and accessibility of networked
information, improved quality and availability of classroom technology and support, and a
developed plan for technology life cycle funding. According to Foley, two of the greatest
challenges facing the new administrative structure were to staff  the Client Services team
with professionals who were flexible enough to serve the great multitude of user backgrounds
and to maintain a positive working relationship between those in client services and those in
infrastructure services.
28
Chapter III
Summary of Findings from CIOs
 The author surveyed 44 CIOs of higher education from September 30, 1998-
November 5, 1998 to determine why their institutions converged, how services to users have
improved following convergence, and if institutions would converge again. It was a stratified
sample of privately funded undergraduate institutions, privately funded graduate institutions,
and publicly funded graduate institutions. Fourteen CIOs (or library directors, 32 percent) of
those surveyed responded. The list of CIOs was derived from Hirshon (1998, pp. 35-37).
Improved user services was not given as a primary reason to converge (or in the case
of some, to change reporting relationships so that individual information managers would all
report to a CIO). Six  respondents noted that the structure was changed due to vacancies in
the directorship of the library or the computing areas, the failure of an individual information
manager, or the desire to establish the office of a CIO. In other words, personnel factors and
not enhanced user services were the driving reasons to converge or amend reporting
relationships of information managers to a single CIO. Improved efficiency by cutting some
costs, improving communication and relationships between various information units,
consolidating budgeting and staffing, locating two or more information units in the same
building, joint planning, and  maximizing use of physical and financial resources were also
reported as reasons to converge.
After convergence, or altering reporting relationships so that all information managers
report to a CIO, respondents noted how user services have been improved. Examples of
improved user services include the following: joint training sessions by staffs from different
29
information units;  interchangeable use of staff members from different information units; a
combined help desk to help answer typical library, computing, and telecommunications
questions; development of information consulting teams for individual departments or
colleges within the university; improved integration of technology and curriculum
development; and improved relations between computing staff and academic departments
after the computing center adopted the library’s liaison model. Some universities noted the
specific enhancements of the construction of a new facility that promotes “one stop
information access” for end users, the successful completion of a program to provide students
with interface cards for computers for their residence halls, the establishment of end user
advisory groups, and construction of a “faculty commons” in a new facility that emphasizes
the use of electronic information in teaching, learning, and research.
Based on improved user services, CIOs were asked if they would converge again. One
responded no, because the job was too much for one person. One thought so, but noted that it
was too early to say definitively. Eleven responded yes, some of whom emphasized that the
team approach used by the different information units in order to deliver improved service
has been the greatest reason to converge or ally their reporting relationship.  One respondent
specifically noted that services to students in the continuing education program (who are
distance learners) have particularly benefitted from the university’s converging all
information units. One respondent noted that the question was not applicable to the
institution.
30
Response to Findings from Survey of CIOs and Literature Review
The benefits of synergy, utility, and practicality were more evident than improved
user services when CIOs were asked about reasons to converge and or results of convergence.
The literature does reveal some concrete examples of improved user services following
convergence or joint facilities, such as the examples cited from Rice University, Carthage
College, University Wisconsin--Parkside,  University of Montana, UCLA School of
Management, and Lehigh University, but it appears that information services administration
is guided more by practicality than by user satisfaction.
Like many decisions by administrators in United States higher education today, the
overriding rationale for a decision seems to be financial cost. Many CIOs and much of the
literature emphasize cost savings after convergence; services and staff operations are not
duplicated, some middle management positions have been eliminated or left unfilled, and
there is better fiscal  management of technology resources. As government financial support
continues to decline, income from outside donors becomes more costly to attract, and the
public becomes more and more skeptical of rising tuition costs, colleges and universities will
have to continue to improve  at “doing more [technologically] with less [money]”. Economic
realities, including relatively less income for more expensive instructional services, will
continue to demand that information administrators consider cost efficiency and user services
when making policy.
The experience of the author does conflict with some of the findings of the literature.
Naylor’s (1988) suggestion that librarians might not be able to provide user service in an
electronic environment has been proven wrong. As public service librarians use online
31
catalogs, search the Internet, construct home pages, and train others to do likewise, it is clear
that librarians have adjusted to this era of electronic information.
The “service orientation” of the library culture and the “technical orientation” of the
computing culture, including relationships to end users, described by Hardesty (1998) should
not be generalized to include all colleges and universities. After serving as an academic
librarian for over eight years, I have found academic librarians who have been both service
and non-service oriented; furthermore, I have colleagues in computing services that range
from the “read the darn manual” user response to computing center directors  who have paid
“office calls” to users to personally eliminate the most basic hardware problems. I have
benefitted from classroom training on UNIX, Windows, presentation software, and other
applications by computer service staffers, as well as having learned from their newsletters.
Computer staffers can teach and can care about user support.
After having worked in academic libraries where librarians do not have faculty status
and libraries in which they do, I can say that librarians are more fearful of losing their status
and being associated as “techies” and not “academicians” in universities where they do have
faculty status. Professional competence, and not job title or classification, should determine
one’s credibility in higher education.
Conclusion
Decisions by administrators in higher education must be guided by both financial
expediency and service to students, faculty, and staff, and service to students must remain of
utmost importance. It is for the education of the student that higher education exists.  
Should a college or university converge its information units, or minimally,  alter the
32
administrative structure so that individual information managers report to the same
administrator?  I echo the words of Dougherty (1987):
Over time, the new organizational infrastructure will take shape, but no specific 
structure will be universal. Rather, the organizational structures are more
likely to reflect the history, traditions, and institutional personalities of individual
campuses.
     One guiding principle we should follow as we prepare our profession’s future is
that changes should be based on plans that enhance the educational missions of our
institutions, not on the mere impression that certain redirections are, to be blunt, 
trendy and likely to attract attention (pp. 290-291).
Information service units will lose patrons to commercial book stores and Internet
service providers if service to users is not enhanced by convergence and or collaboration.  Bly
(1996) was correct in stating:
... If academic libraries and computing centers do not work in a cooperative effort to
support the clientele of their universities, then that clientele will go elsewhere to 
find the information and support that they need....If libraries and computer
centers are not able to coordinate and broaden their services to fill the needs of
academia, libraries will become archives and repositories to retain records of the
past, and computing centers will be limited to their old role as data processing
units serving campus administrative needs, if these needs are not also contracted to an
outside forum (p. 222).
As a public service librarian, I have heard library patrons say, “You mean I don’t have
to go to Barnes and Nobles?”. One also must wonder why so many students, faculty, and staff
decide that they must subscribe to America Online for Internet access when their university is
an Internet provider. They are already paying for Internet access through tuition and often
times technology fees, yet the service and support are so inadequate that the user must pay
twice and subscribe to a commercial provider. If converging information units does not
decrease the need for such “double purchasing”, something is wrong.
33
Furthermore, I challenge my colleagues in user services of information units to put
behind their fear of change, paranoia of each others’ departments, and “turf” battles and to
put the user first. Shapiro and Long wrote eloquently (1994):
If the library of the 21st century is to be more than a warehouse of old books 
staffed by a cadre of reference librarians, user services librarians must take the
lead in forging new directions and new relationships with colleagues on campus.
     The transition will not be smooth because there are enormous cultural 
differences and mistrust between library and computing organizations that
must be bridged. But the successful collaboration between our organizations will
benefit not only these two organizations but more importantly our users who are, after
all, at the heart of what we do.... (p. 290).
34
Appendix A
Cover Letter to Questionnaire
September 29, 1998
Dear Chief Information Officer in United States Higher Education:
You have been identified as a chief information officer in United States higher education
today.  As a graduate student in Educational Administration with a concentration in higher
education at Minnesota State University, Mankato, I am researching the effects of the
merging of library and computer services  on library and computing services supplied to
students, faculty, and staff..  There are many reasons to merge, such as improved
communication between library and computing staffs, improved administrative organization,
expected cost savings, etc. but I am specifically concerned with if and  how such a merger
directly improves library and computing services for students, faculty, and staff (i.e.
improved instructional support for use of technology and electronic information,
improved support for integration of information technology in curriculum
development, improved campus  access to electronic information, etc.)
I ask your cooperation with my research by completing a short questionnaire and returning it
in the enclosed self addressed stamped envelope.    Your anonymity will be protected.   An
abstract of my findings will be posted on my home page,
http://www.lib.mankato.msus.edu/staff/herro.html
I ask that you respond by Oct. 25, 1998.  Thank you for your help.
Sincerely,
Steven J. Herro
227 Floral Ave.
Mankato, MN 56001
(507) 389-2507
steven.herro@mankato.msus.edu
35
Appendix B
Questionnaire
1.  Classification of  institution: bachelors institution, masters level institution,
doctoral level institution, or research institution.
2.  Sponsorship of institution: public or privately funded
3.  What was the primary reason that your institution merged library and computing
services?  Use the reverse side if necessary.
4.   If such is the case, how has your students’, faculty’s, and staff’s library and
computing services  been enhanced due to the merger of library and computing services? 
Please be as specific as possible; use the reverse side if necessary.
5.  Based on positive (or lack of)  results experienced by your students, faculty, and
staff, would your institution merge library and computer services again?  Please be as specific
as possible; use the reverse side if necessary.
6.  Please feel free to add any additional comments below and on the reverse side.
36
References
Baker, S. K. (1990). Are the intentions honorable? Some critical questions about
library-computer center cooperation. In M. Gorman (Ed.), Convergence: Proceedings of the
Second National Conference of the Library and Information Technology Association,
October 2-6, 1988, Boston. (pp. 245-249). Chicago: American Library Association.
Bass, R. W. (1987).  Libraries and computer centers. College & Research Libraries
News, 48, 442-447.
Bechtel, J. M. (1988). Libraries and computing centers working together: a success
story. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 14, insert between 34-35.
Bellanti, B. & Frand, J. (1996). Connectivity and Convergence. [WWW Document].
http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty/jason.frand/researcher/articles/librarian96/page1.htm.
Bly, O. (1996). Academic libraries, academic computing centers, and information
technology. In Advances in Library Administration and Organization. (pp. 207-227).
Greenwhich, CN: JAI Press.
Butler, M. A. & DeLong, S. E. (1997). Planning information systems at the University
of Albany: false starts, promising collaborations, evolving opportunities. In C. A. Schwartz
(Ed.), Restructuring Academic Libraries: Organizational Development in the Wake of
Technological Change. (pp. 81-95). Chicago: American Library Association.
Creth, S. D. (1993). Creating a virtual information organization: collaborative
relationships between libraries and computing centers. In M. A. Butler (Ed.), Libraries as
User-Centered Organizations: Imperatives for Organizational Change (pp. 111-132). New
York: Haworth Press, Inc.
Dougherty, R. M. (1987). Libraries and computer centers: a blueprint for
collaboration. College & Research Libraries, 48, 289-296.
Dougherty, R. M. & McClure, L. (1997).  Repositioning campus information units for
the era of digital libraries. In C. A. Schwartz (Ed.), Restructuring Academic Libraries:
Organized Development in the Wake of Technological Change. (pp. 67-80). Chicago:
American Library Association.
Drake, M. A. (1991). Library manager-chief information officer. IAUTL Quarterly, 5,
137-141.
37
Engeldinger, E. A. & Meachen, E. (1996). Merging libraries and computing centers at
smaller academic institutions. Library Issues, 16, 3, 1-4.
Flowers, K. & Martin, A. (1995). Enhancing users services through collaboration at
Rice University. In A. C. Lipow and S. D. Creth (Eds.), Building Partnerships: Computing
and Library Professionals (pp. 31-44). Berkeley, CA: Library Solutions Press.
Foley, T. J. (1997). Combining Libraries, Computing, and Telecommunications: A
Work in Progress. [WWW Document]. URL: http://www.lehigh.edu/tjf0/public/www-
data/acm97/acm97.html.
Hafter, R. & Kittinger, L. (1990). A library-computer center microcomputer lab:
developing hybrid standards of service. In M. Gorman (Ed.), Convergence: Proceedings of
the Second National Conference of the Library and Information Technology Association,
October 2-6, 1988, Boston. (pp. 250-254). Chicago: American Library Association.
Hall, N. (1990). A match made online. American Libraries, 21, 70.
Hardesty, L. (1998). Computer center-library relations at smaller institutions: a look
from both sides. [WWW document]. URL
http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/html/cem9817.html.
Higginbotham, B. B. (1986). Academic libraries and academic computing: rationale
for a modern marriage. Bookmark, 45, 13-16.
Hirschon, A. (1998). Integrating Computing and Library Services: an Administrative
Planning and Implementation Guide for Information Resources. Boulder, CO: CAUSE.
Hoffman, H. B., Kesselman, M. A., Nash, S., Langschied, L. (1988). Student access
to online searching: the library and computing center team up. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 14, insert between 306-307.
Johnson, D. J. (1997). Merging? Converging? A survey of research and reports
between academic libraries and university computing centers. Illinois Libraries, 79, 61-63.
Kesner, R. M. (1994). The library as information center: a utility model for
information resource management and support. Library Trends, 42, 373-394.
Lester, D. (1992). Shuttle diplomacy to teach new technologies. In T. W. Leonhardt
(Ed.), Information Technology: IT’s for Everyone!: Proceedings of the LITA Third National
Conference (pp. 194-195). Chicago: American Library Association.
38
Long, K. B. & Shapiro, B. J. (1994). On paths that have converged: librarians and
computing centers. Library Issues, 14, 6, 1-4.
Lyman, P. (1989). Computing, libraries, and classrooms: Organizing and planning
campus information services. In B. L. Hawkins (Ed.), Organizing and Managing Information
Resources on Campus (pp. 207-227). McKinney, TX: Academic Computing Publications,
Inc.
Martin, M. J. (1992). Academic libraries and computing centers: Opportunities for
leadership. Library Administration and Management, 6, 77-81.
Naylor, B. (1988). The convergence of the library and the computing service: the
central issues. British Journal of Academic Librarianship, 3, 172-186.
Nguyen, K. (1997). Internet Instruction in Minnesota State College and University
Libraries. Unpublished alternate plan paper, Mankato State University.
Palchick, L. (1998). Kalamazoo College Department of Information Services:
Transition, change, and teamwork. College and University Media Review, 4,2, 49-61.
Penrod, J. I., Dolence, M. C., & Douglas, J. V. (1990). The Chief Information Officer
in Higher Education (Professional Paper Series, #4). ERIC Document Reproduction Service
No. ED 323 860.
Rosser, J. M. & Penrod, J. I. (1990). Computing and libraries: a partnership past due.
CAUSE/EFFECT, 13 (2), 21-24.
Samson, S., Pengally, V., & Brown, B. (1997). The collaborative advantage: the
library and computing services at the University of Montana. RQ, 36, 370-374.
Saunders, L. M. (1996). Partnerships and convergence. College and Research
Libraries News, 57, 156-157.
Shapiro, B. J. & Long, K. B. (1994). Just say yes: Reengineering library user services
for the 21st century. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 20, 285-290.
Weber, D. C. (1988). University libraries and campus information technology
organizations: Who is in charge here?  Journal of Library Administration, 9(4), 5-19.
Woodsworth, A. (1987). The Chief Information Officer’s Role in American Research
Universities. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1987). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 49, 04A.
39
Woodsworth, A. (1988). Libraries and the chief information officer: implications and
trends. Library Hi Tech, 6(1), 37-44.
Woodsworth, A. (1991). Patterns and Options for Managing Information Technology
on Campus. Chicago: American Library Association.
Woodsworth, A. & Maylone, T. (1992). Chief information officers, academic
libraries, and the information job family. In G. M. Pitkin (Ed.) Information Management and
Organizational Change in Higher Education: the Impact on Academic Libraries (pp. 66-85),
Westport, CT: Meckler Publishing

