UNITED NATIONS
E-GOVERNMENT 
SURVEY 2014
E-GOVERNMENT FOR THE FUTURE WE WANT
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014 
E-Government for the Future We Want
For more information, please visit:
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
http://www.un.org/desa
United Nations Division for Public Administration and Development Management
http://www.unpan.org/dpadm
United Nations E-Government
Development Database
http://www.unpan.org/e-government
The drawing on the front cover was designed by Ms. Qiuchen Wang who in 2013 served as an intern in the Division 
for Public Administration and Development Management (DPADM) of UNDESA. The drawing was prepared as part of 
DPADM’s submission for the 2013 UN Online Volunteering Award. 
asdf United Nations New York, 2014
ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/188
UNITED NATIONS 
E-GOVERNMENT 
SURVEY 2014
E-GOVERNMENT FOR THE FUTURE WE WANT
Department of Economic and Social Affairs
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat is a vital interface be-
tween global policies in the economic, social and environmental spheres and national action. The De-
partment works in three main interlinked areas: (i) it compiles, generates and analyzes a wide range of 
economic, social and environmental data and information on which States Members of the United Nations 
draw to review common problems and to take stock of policy options; (ii) it facilitates the negotiations of 
Member States in many intergovernmental bodies on joint courses of action to address ongoing or emerg-
ing global challenges; and (iii) it advises interested Governments on the ways and means of translating 
policy frameworks developed in United Nations conferences and summits into programmes at the country 
level and, through technical assistance, helps build national capacities.
Disclaimers
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in 
this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatso-
ever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning 
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authori-
ties, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
The term ‘country’ as used in the text of this publication also refers, 
as appropriate, to territories and areas. Since there is no established 
convention for the designation of ‘developed’ and ‘developing’ 
countries or areas in the United Nations system, this distinction is 
made for the purposes of statistical and analytical purposes only and 
does not necessarily express a judgment about the stage reached 
by a particular country or region in the development process. Men-
tion of the name of any company, organization, product or website 
does not imply endorsement on the part of the United Nations.
Copyright © United Nations, 2014
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or other-
wise, without prior permission.
ST/ESA/PAD/SER.E/188
ISBN: 978-92-1-123198-4
e-ISBN: 978-92-1-056425-0
Sales No. 14.II.H.1
United Nations E-Government Surveys:
2014 E-Government for the Future We Want
2012 E-Government for the People
2010 Leveraging E-Government at a Time of Financial and Economic Crisis
2008 From E-Government to Connected Governance
2005 From E-Government to E-Inclusion
2004 Towards Access for Opportunity
2003 World Public Sector Report: E-Government at the Crossroads
2001 Benchmarking E-Government: A Global Perspective 
Website: http://unpan3.un.org/egovkb/
Printed at the United Nations, New York
   iii 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Foreword
At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development held in Rio de 
Janeiro in June 2012, a global consensus was reached that to achieve our sustain-
able development goals we need institutions at all levels that are effective, trans-
parent, accountable and democratic. E-government holds tremendous potential 
to improve the way that governments deliver public services and enhance broad 
stakeholder involvement in public service.
The 2014 edition of the United Nations E-Government Survey, coming on the heels 
of a ten-year period of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) action 
line implementation, asserts that information and communication technologies are 
potent enablers of the effective, transparent and accountable institutions envis-
aged by world leaders at Rio. Countries in all regions of the world and at all levels 
of development continue to make significant investments in public sector ICT for 
these reasons. It is my view that such efforts are vital to achieving broad public 
participation in decision-making, enhancing access to information and removing 
barriers to public service—all essential if we are to assure a future of equitable eco-
nomic growth and sustainable development that are free of poverty and hunger.
I commend this report to policy-makers, leading officials and analysts consider-
ing the contribution that e-government can make to the future we want and the 
place of effective public management in good governance in the post-2015 era.
WU Hongbo
Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs 
and Secretary-General for the International Conference 
on Small Islands Developing States
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
For the family of and in memory of 
Haiyan Qian, 
Late Director of DPADM, UNDESA, 
for her visionary and dynamic leadership, 
and her dedication to global public policy, e-government, 
public administration and development
   v 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Acknowledgements
The 2014 edition of the United Nations E-Government Survey is the product of 
a collective effort by the Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management (DPADM) of the United Nations Department of Economic and So-
cial Affairs (DESA), as well as by many valued external experts, researchers and 
contributors from other organizations. In particular, the following people are ac-
knowledged for their specific roles in its production.
Preparation of the publication was undertaken by a group of senior e-govern-
ment researchers and advisers initially under the overall guidance of the late 
Haiyan Qian, Director of DPADM, DESA, and then by Vincenzo Aquaro, Chief of 
the E-Government Branch (EGB).
Vincenzo Aquaro also led the Data Management Team in the data collection 
and Survey research. The team included Adriana Alberti, Senior Governance and 
Public Administration Officer; Anni Haataja, Governance and Public Administra-
tion Officer; Wai Min Kwok, Governance and Public Administration Officer; Deniz 
Susar, Governance and Public Administration Officer and it was supported by Elie 
Hobeika, Associate Governance and Public Administration Officer and Oksana 
Yarashuk, Programme Assistant. The team was assisted by Said Maalouf, Dan-
iela Marin Puentes and Quentin Tourancheau, consultants in DPADM. Vincenzo 
Aquaro, Roberto Bellotti, Associate Professor in Experimental Physics, University 
of Bari, Italy; Elena Garuccio and Nicola Amoroso, Quantitative Analysts, Univer-
sity of Bari, Italy, provided technical advice on the refinement of the statistical 
methodology and Elena Garuccio conducted the statistical regressions.
The analytical work was coordinated by John-Mary Kauzya, Chief of the Pub-
lic Administration Capacity Branch (PACB), DPADM. The Report was written 
by a team of DPADM staff members. Chapter 1, the Annexes and the Method-
ology section were drafted by Wai Min Kwok and Anni Haataja supported by 
Elie Hobeika and assisted by Said Maalouf, Elena Garuccio and Daniela Marin 
Puentes. Chapter 2 was prepared by Patrick Spearing, Senior Governance and 
Public Administration Officer; Chapter 3 was authored by Elia Armstrong, Chief, 
Development Management Branch (DMB); Chapter 4 was written by Adriana Al-
berti; Chapter 5 was prepared by Wai Min Kwok while Chapter 6 was authored by 
Seema Hafeez, Senior Governance and Public Administration Officer. Chapter 7 
was written by Seok-Ran Kim, Governance and Public Administration Officer and 
Chapter 8 was prepared by Deniz Susar. Richard Kerby and Jonas Rabinovitch, 
Senior Inter-Regional Advisers in DPADM, provided case studies and field data. 
The Executive Summary, substantive and editorial revision was undertaken by 
Vincenzo Aquaro, Adriana Alberti, Jeremy Millard, Senior Consultant at the In-
stitute of Technology in Denmark and Elie Hobeika assisted by Oksana Yarashuk 
and Daniela Marin Puentes. 
The Survey benefited from the advice and guidance provided by a group of 
experts who met in New York in December 2012. The group consisted of Mr. 
Abdulla Al Hamid, Executive Director of INVESTATE Group, Bahrain; Mr. José 
 vi 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014AckNOwlEDGEMENTS
M. Alonso, Program Manager at World Wide Web Foundation, Spain; Mr. Den-
nis Anderson, Professor and Chair at St. Francis College, United States; Mr. Kim 
Andreasson, Managing Director of DAKA advisory, Sweden; Ms. Julia Glidden, 
Senior Research Fellow at Vrije Universiteit Brussel - Institute for European Stud-
ies, United Kingdom; Mr. Andre Griffith, eGovernment Advisor at the Caribbean 
Centre for Development Administration, Barbados; Mr. Nagy Hanna, Innovation 
and e-Transformation Strategist, Senior Fellow and Board Member at the Center 
for Policy on Emerging Technologies, United States; Mr. Tomasz Janowski, Head 
at the Center for Electronic Governance, United Nations University -International 
Institute for Software Technology, China; Mr. Driss Kettani, Professor at Al Akha-
wayn University, Ifrane, Morocco; Mr. Swee Cheang Lim, Director at the Institute 
of Systems Science of the National University of Singapore; Mr. Jeremy Millard; 
Mr. Rajkumar Prasad, Head-Business Development of South Asia at OCR Services 
Inc., India; Mr. Charles Senkondo, Executive Director at Tanzania Global Learning 
Agency; Ms. Barbara Ubaldi, E-Government Project Leader at the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), France. 
The collection of Survey data on online services was overseen by Vincenzo Aquaro 
and managed by Wai Min Kwok, Deniz Susar, Anni Haataja and Dennis Anderson. 
Oksana Yarashuk coordinated the selection, liaison and communication with the 
United Nations Volunteers (UNVs). The data research team included the follow-
ing staff members of the United Nations Secretariat: Maria Bovey, Enkel Daljani, 
Madoka Koide, Arpine Korekyan, Andriani Mortoglou, Broddi Sigurdarson, Jacky 
Tong and Michal Ziemski; as well as United Nations interns and UNVs: Hamed Alg-
hazali, Slavea A. Assenova, Serhan Ayhan, Idersaikhan Byamba, Amra Cenanovic, 
Maria Covalenco-Tietz, Jocelyne Cumunel, Weiluan Dai, Beth De Beer, Pennie 
Douligeris, Marina Echegaray, Elena Garuccio, Leo Gil, Marga Gual Soler, Kalle 
Gutmann, Ahad Hadian, Shaopeng He, Blanca Hormaechea, Saw Htoo, Dmytro 
Iarovyi, Gvantsa Iremashvili, Xiaochao Jin, Justin Joseph, Naryngul Kasymova, 
Anna Katrechka, Prasida Khanal, Jacob Kim, Ye Ra Kim, Sonya Kuki, Rachana Ku-
mar, Anna Kusnir, Joe Lahoud, Seunghui Lee, Mihaela Lovu, Said Maalouf, Elia 
Marconi, Daniela Marin Puentes , Lea-Kristin Martin, Valeriya Mechkova, Silky Mis-
ra, Louis-Marie Ngamassi, Theresa Lin Nguyen, Robert Niewiadomski, Tim Olsen, 
Gokce Ozkaynak, Liv Pelt, Karolina Pertkiewicz, Yordan Petrov, Yen T. Pham, Ja-
cob Prester , Vladan Rovcanin, Alvaro Salas, Filip Sasic, Teodora Serafimova, Li-
lani Seram, Michael Shum, Hui Ging Sii, Patima Srivakul, Simona Szabova, Moe 
Kyaw Than, Lise Toft Hesselund, Tamas Toth, Haris Trbonja, Jessi Jou Tseng, Tat-
janaTurkovic, Merel Van Hoeve, Agata Voss, Amruta Vyas, Jamie Walker, Qiuchen 
Wang, Wenhao Wu, Peng Xu, Xinru Yang and Xuan Zhou.
A comprehensive second stage data assessment was conducted by a group of 
United Nations staff members and interns coordinated by Wai Min Kwok, Anni 
Haataja and Deniz Susar. The team included Maria Bovey, Victoria Ceban, Joce-
lyne Cumunel, Marina Echegaray, Elena Garuccio, Elie Hobeika, Yu Jung Victoria 
Kim, Madoka Koide , Said Maalouf, Daniela Marin Puentes, Andriani Mortoglou, 
Broddi Siguzdarson and Michal Ziemski.
   vii 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Telecommunication infrastructure data and education data were respectively 
provided by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the United Na-
tions Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
Technical data management and support was provided by the United Nations 
Public Administration Network (UNPAN) Management Unit (UMU) of DPADM, 
coordinated by Gerald Kandulu who supported the data assessment platform 
for the collection of data on online services. Elie Hobeika, Oksana Yarashuk and 
Daniela Marin Puentes updated and maintained the data assessment platform. 
We are most grateful to the Copy Preparation and Proofreading Section (CPPS) of 
the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM), 
especially to William Hamill, Chief of CPPS, and Alexandra Kollontai, Graphic Arts 
Assistant, for their copy-editing services and design of the publication. Adriana 
Alberti, Elie Hobeika, Wai Min Kwok and Oksana Yarashuk coordinated the work 
with CPPS. Special thanks to the Graphic Design Unit (GDU), particularly to Ziad 
Al-Kadri and Armin Kadic, for designing the cover of the publication.
In November 2013, the United Nations Volunteers programme announced that 
UN DESA was one of the ten winners of the “Online Volunteering Award 2013” in 
recognition of the effort undertaken by the United Nations E-Government Sur-
vey 2014 Data Team led by the E-Government Branch of the Division for Public 
Administration and Development Management.
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
   ix 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Acronyms 
API Application Programming Interfaces
BYOD Bring Your Own Device
CDO Chief Data Officer
CIO Chief Information Officer
DAE Digital Agenda for Europe
DPA Data Protection Act
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
EGDI E-Government Development Index
EPI E-Participation Index
EU European Union
FOI Freedom of Information
G2C Government-to-Citizen
G2G Government-to-Government
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNI Gross National Income
HCI Human Capital Index
HDI Human Development Index
ICT Information and Communications Technology
IT Information Technology
ITU International Telecommunication Union
LDC Least Developed Countries
LLDC Land-Locked Developing Countries
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
NEPAD The New Partnership for Africa’s Development
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OGD Open Government Data
OSI Online Service Index
PPP Public-Private Partnership
RSS Really Simple Syndication
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SMS Short Message Service
TII Telecommunication Infrastructure Index
UNDESA United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
WAP Wireless Application Protocol
WOG Whole of Government
W3C World Wide Web Consortium
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
   xi 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Contents
Foreword iii
Acknowledgements v
Acronyms  ix
Executive summary 1
Chapter 1: World e-government rankings 13
1.1. Introduction 13
1.2. Progress at a glance 14
1.3. Regional development 20
1.4. Country groups 36
1.5. Conclusion 44
Chapter 2: Progress in online service delivery 45
2.1. Introduction 45
2.2. Global analysis 46
2.3. Leading countries by income group 53
2.4. Conclusion 58
Chapter 3: E-participation 61
3.1.  Introduction 61
3.2.  Assessing e-participation: what is included in the 2014 Survey? 63
3.3. Global and regional ranking 64
3.4. Trends by levels and sectors of e-participation 66
3.5.  The potential of e-participation for sustainable development: opportunities 
and challenges 72
3.6. Conclusion 73
Chapter 4: Whole of government and collaborative governance 75
4.1. Introduction 75
4.2.  The critical role of whole of government to promote holistic and integrated 
approaches to sustainable development 76
4.3.  Opportunities and challenges of designing and implementing 
a whole-of-government approach to service delivery 77
4.4.  Transforming government through a whole-of-government approach: enabling factors 79
4.5. Conclusion 92
 xii 
TAblE Of cONTENTS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Chapter 5: Mobile and other channels for inclusive multichannel service delivery 95
5.1. Introduction 95
5.2. Global trends of the delivery landscape 96
5.3.  Building an inclusive multichannel e-government strategy 109
5.4.  Challenges and opportunities of the emerging channels 116
5.5. Conclusion 120
Chapter 6: Bridging the digital divide 123
6.1. Introduction 123
6.2. Characteristics of the digital divide 124
6.3.  Disparity in technology access: trends in the digital divide 125
6.4.  National income as a determinant of socioeconomic digital disparity 128
6.5. ICT skills, language and content barriers 131
6.6.  Lack of e-services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups compounds digital 
disparities 134
6.7. Conclusion 139
Chapter 7: E-Government for the post-2015 era: the usage perspective 141
7.1. Introduction 141
7.2.  E-Government usage: the current landscape 141
7.3.  Towards greater service uptake in a multichannel world 147
7.4.  Capturing e-government benefits: selected issues and cases 150
7.5. Conclusion 160
Chapter 8: Open Government Data 163
8.1. Introduction 163
8.2. Global and regional trends 164
8.3. Opportunities and challenges 171
8.4. Conclusion 176
Annexes
Selected messages on ICT and public service delivery  181
Regional and subregional classification 183
Survey Methodology 185
A.1. Introduction 185
A.2. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (TII) 187
A.3. Human Capital Index (HCI) 189
   xiii 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A.4. Online Service Index (OSI) 191
A.5.  Challenges in reviewing a country’s online presence 193
A.6. E-Participation Index (EPI) 196
A.7.  Country classifications and nomenclature 
in the Survey 197
A.8. United Nations e-government knowledge base 198
Data tables 199
Notes 249
References 257
Boxes
1.1. Case study on citizen consultation in Morocco 23
1.2.  Case study on the Small Island Developing State of Mauritius 23
1.3. The potential of e-Government development in Latin America 26
1.4. Sri Lanka’s One for All 29
1.5.  Digital Agenda for Europe and the European e-Government Action Plan 33
1.6. Italy: Compass of Transparency 35
1.7.  Haiti: Response and recovery with Sahana  
free and open disaster management system 39
1.8. Trinidad and Tobago: m-fisheries 39
1.9. Nepal: On the Road to the Knowledge Based Society 41
1.10. Yemen: Reaping the benefits of long-term planning 43
2.1.  France public service—commitment to continuous improvement 47
2.2.  New Zealand—online transactional services at the forefront of government 
transformation 50
2.3. Rwanda—“Our Environment Our Future” 57
2.4. Colombia—fishbowl government 57
2.5. Ethiopia—investing in the future 57
3.1. Ureport of Uganda: Mobile Participation 68
3.2. Slovenia “I suggest to the government” 69
4.1.  DBAS: Korea’s integrated financial management information system  
(Ministry of Strategy and Finance) 86
4.2. Emirates ID Authority Smart ID Cards 86
4.3. National Environment Agency Singapore (NEA) 87
4.4.  France: Access to numerous government entities through a single national page 88
5.1. Some significant global and regional ICT trends 96
 xiv 
TAblE Of cONTENTS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.2. Innovative applications of SMS service in Jordan 99
5.3. Life-saving SMS service in Sweden 100
5.4. Mobile government for poverty eradication and economic growth 102
5.5. Mobile government for gender equality and social inclusion 103
5.6.  Mobile government for environmental protection and disaster management 103
5.7.  Lungisa (“fix it”): Fixing service delivery problems using social media (Cape Town, 
South Africa) 105
5.8.  United States: promoting self-developed applications through open government 
and application interfaces (API) 108
5.9.  Channel integration and channel optimization 112
6.1.  Brazil’s efforts at mitigating the digital divide: universal access to the web 130
6.2.  e-ACE Project in Australia: providing language content to integrate communities 133
6.3. US portal devoted to disability providing comprehensive services 135
6.4.  Pakistan puts immigrant services among the top popular searches 136
7.1. “Start-up Chile”—Service uptake by non-Chilean users 149
7.2.  We need affordable broadband internet for m-learning in Senegal  
(and many other countries) 152
7.3. The SMS-based literacy programme for women in Pakistan 152
7.4. Taking m-health to scale: Mwana programme (Malawi and Zambia) 155
7.5. Further privacy and security concerns: social media use in health 156
8.1. Bahrain open government data portal 168
8.2. Promoting OGD usage in Moldova 175
A.1. E-Participation Framework  197
Figures
1.1. The three components of the E-Government Development Index (EGDI) 14
1.2. Percentage of countries grouped by EGDI 16
1.3. Distribution of countries by EGDI, 2014 18
1.4. Distribution of EGDI and its three components, 2014 18
1.5. Relation between EGDI and national income (GNI per capita) 19
1.6.  Relation between EGDI and national income (GNI per capita), lower-middle income 
countries 20
1.7. 2014 regional averages of e-government development 20
2.1.  Percentage of United Nations Member States with no online presence, 2003–2014 48
2.2. Distribution of Online Service Index values 48
2.3. Croatia and Uruguay in comparison 49
   xv 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
2.4. Transactional services online 52
2.5. Types of services online, by sector 52
2.6 a–d. Distribution of Online Service Index values, by income group 55
3.1. Top 50 countries on e-participation, by region 65
3.2. Top 50 countries on e-participation, by income level 65
3.3. Archived information, by sector 67
3.4. Countries delivering environment information, by region 67
3.5. Delivery of environment information, by income level 68
3.6. Tools used by governments for e-consultation 69
3.7. E-consultation in the past 12 months, by sector 70
3.8. E-decision making features in the past 12 months, by sector 71
3.9. Countries with online e-participation policies 71
4.1.  Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in whole of government, by region 83
4.2.  Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in whole of government,  
by income group 83
4.3. Number of countries with online information about a CIO or equivalent 84
4.4. Portals linking to local/regional government websites 89
4.5. Online portals indicating security features 91
4.6.  Number of government agencies using the same identity management feature 
at the national level 92
5.1. Percentage of countries providing updates via email or feeds 98
5.2. Slight growth of the SMS text channel from 2008 to 2014 99
5.3.  Percentage of countries offering mobile government services in 2012 and 2014 101
5.4.  National portals offering mobile apps versus mobile portal/websites in 2012 and 2014 102
5.5. Social media users worldwide (2011–2017) 104
5.6. Number of countries using social media for e-consultation 106
5.7. Number of countries using social media for e-government 106
5.8. Number of countries using public kiosks 106
5.9. Number of countries with PPP e-service 108
5.10.  Number of countries showing full address of any government agency 
in its web portal, 2014 109
5.11.  Service principles and framework of multichannel approach to e-government delivery 112
5.12.  Channel use for each stage of the UN model of e-government development 113
5.13.  Correlation between channel optimization, online service and income (GNI per 
capita; represented by bubble size) of selected countries 113
5.14.  Illustration of integrated channels—web portal promoting phone and public kiosk 114
 xvi 
TAblE Of cONTENTS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.15. Global smartphone versus mobile phone users in 2013 118
5.16. Countries36 offering SMS text and mobile web/app services 119
6.1. Change in percentage of people using the Internet, selected countries 125
6.2.  Disparity in use of Internet between developed and developing countries, 2013 126
6.3. Percentage of households with access to Internet in 2013, by region 127
6.4. Active mobile broadband subscriptions in 2013, by region 127
6.5. Services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, by income 129
6.6.  Lack of content in own language as a barrier to accessibility, selected countries 132
6.7. Online services in more than one language, by region 133
6.8. Accessibility attributes on national websites, by region 133
6.9.  A higher percentage of total services are aimed at disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups in high human development countries 134
6.10.  Online services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in Eastern Europe 
and Southern Asia, selected countries 136
6.11. Online services for immigrants, by region 136
6.12. Disparity in use of Internet between men and women 137
6.13. Countries providing online services for women and youth, by region 138
6.14. Updates via email and RSS source, by region 139
7.1.  Citizens using the Internet to interact with public authorities in OECD countries (2012) 142
7.2.  EU Digital Agenda targets and actual performance 2012 143
7.3.  Usage-facilitating features in comparison with other e-government features for 193 
United Nations Member States 144
7.4. Percentage of mobile in IT budget, by sector 151
7.5.  Youth unemployment in Bangladesh, Ghana, Indonesia and Spain: Job search 
challenges 157
7.6. Saudi government’s employment service website 157
7.7. Users seeking online job opportunities, by employment status 158
8.1a. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent, by region 165
8.1b. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent, by income level 165
8.2. Number of countries offering data, by sector 166
8.3. Countries with OGD portals, by region 167
8.4. Availability of data types in different formats 167
A.1. The three components of the E-Government Development Index (EGDI) 187
A.2. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (TII) and its components 188
A.3. Human Capital Index (HCI) and its components 190
A.4. The four stages of online service development 195
   xvii 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Tables
ES.1. World and regional e-government leaders 5
ES.2. World and regional e-participation leaders 7
1.1. World e-government leaders (Very High EGDI) in 2014 15
1.2. Countries grouped by EGDI in alphabetical order 17
1.3. Top 20 countries in Africa 22
1.4. Top 20 countries in the Americas 24
1.5. Top 20 countries in Asia 28
1.6.  E-government development of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 30
1.7. Top 20 countries in Europe 31
1.8. E-government development in the European Union (EU) Member States 34
1.9. Countries in Oceania sorted by EGDI ranking 36
1.10. Top 10 Small Island Developing States 38
1.11. Top 10 Landlocked Developing Countries 41
1.12. Top Least Developed Countries 42
2.1. Top 20 countries in online service delivery 47
2.2. Extent of e-service delivery stages in selected countries 50
2.3. Availability of selected basic features 51
2.4. Availability of selected enhanced features 51
2.5. Top countries in online service delivery, by income group 54
2.6. High online service performance relative to income 56
2.7. Low online service performance relative to income 56
3.1. Summary of features assessed related to e-participation 64
3.2. Top 50 performers on e-participation 65
3.3.  Countries that score more than 66.6 per cent in all three stages of e-participation 66
3.4. Consultation with citizens on improving e-government services 70
4.1. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in whole of government 82
4.2. Countries publicizing a CIO or equivalent by region, in 2014 84
4.3. Countries with online portals with links to ministries  87
4.4. Use of electronic identity management feature 91
4.5. Countries providing procurement announcements, evaluations and results 92
5.1. List of channels (non-exhaustive) 97
5.2. List of social media channels (order by general popularity) 105
5.3. Service principles of a multichannel approach 111
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
6.1.  National income and provision of services to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 
in South-East Asia 129
6.2. Downloadable forms for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 130
6.3. Disparity in Internet content and language 131
6.4. Overview of online services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 135
6.5.  Online archived information and data for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 138
7.1. Number of countries with selected usability features 146
8.1. Summary of features assessed related to data publishing 164
8.2. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in data publishing 165
8.3. Examples of Open Government Data competitions 174
A.1. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and changes of its components (2003–2014) 188
A.2. Human Capital Index and changes of its components (2003–2014) 190
Data Table
1. E-Government Development Index 199
2. E-Government Development Index by region—AFRICA 205
3. E-Government Development Index by region—AMERICAS 207
4. E-Government Development Index by region—ASIA 208
5. E-Government Development Index by region—EUROPE 210
6. E-Government Development Index by region—OCEANIA 212
7. E-Government Development Index of Small Island Developing States 213
8. E-Government Development Index of Landlocked Developing Countries 214
9. E-Government Development Index of Least Developed Countries 215
10. Online Service Index and its components 217
11. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and its components 223
12. Human Capital Index and its components 229
13. E-Participation Index and its utilisation by stages 237
14. Regional and Economic Grouping 243
   1 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Summary
Executive summary
The linkages of e-government and sustainable 
development 
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) set by world leaders more than ten 
years ago have made a huge impact on the lives of billions of people. In par-
ticular, extreme poverty has decreased in every region and substantial progress 
has been made in access to safe-drinking water, decent housing and life-saving 
HIV treatment, while between 2000 and 2011 the world has achieved parity in 
primary education between girls and boys with more than 40 million children 
attending school. However, progress has been uneven: more than one billion 
people still live in extreme poverty and there are persistent challenges in eradi-
cating hunger, improving health, promoting gender equality, enhancing access 
to clean water and sanitation, among others. As the United Nations continues to 
promote prosperity, equity and peace beyond 2015, a global conversation has 
begun to define a concrete sustainable development framework that embodies 
these bold, ambitious and universal values.
The United Nations General Assembly in its resolution entitled ”The Future We 
Want” has reaffirmed the strong need to achieve sustainable development by 
promoting sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth, creating greater 
opportunities for all, reducing inequalities, raising basic standards of living, fos-
tering equitable social development and inclusion and promoting the integrated 
and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems. It stressed 
that all levels of government and legislative bodies play an important role in 
promoting sustainable development. Overall, “the goal of sustainable develop-
ment is to ensure the promotion of an economically, socially and environmentally 
sustainable future for the planet and for present and future generations. Sustain-
able development emphasizes a holistic, equitable and far-sighted approach in 
decision-making at all levels. It rests on integration and a balanced consideration 
of social, economic and environmental goals and objectives in both public and 
private decision-making. It emphasizes intragenerational and intergenerational 
equity”. (E/2013/69, para. 6).
As we near the 2015 deadline for the current MDGs and start to prepare the 
ground for the next steps in global sustainable development, it is clear that all 
governments are faced with a set of complex, multi-faceted and interdepend-
ent challenges. Global challenges including poverty, inequality, climate change, 
peace and security, are such that no single actor—let alone single government 
 2 
ExEcUTIVE SUMMARY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
or single ministry—can effectively deal with them on their own. Effective collabo-
ration among agencies across all levels of government is essential, as it is with 
non-governmental actors, to ensure good governance and good development 
outcomes. Collaborative governance, underpinned by a well-functioning public 
administration, is crucial to improving people’s lives. The public sector must de-
liver, equitably and efficiently, essential services that meet citizen needs, provide 
opportunities for economic growth, as well as facilitate citizen engagement and 
participation in public policymaking and service delivery, so as to promote the 
empowerment and well-being of all people.
E-government and innovation can provide significant opportunities to transform 
public administration into an instrument of sustainable development. E-govern-
ment is “the use of ICT and its application by the government for the provision of 
information and public services to the people” (Global E-Government Readiness 
Report 2004). More broadly, e-government can be referred to as the use and ap-
plication of information technologies in public administration to streamline and 
integrate workflows and processes, to effectively manage data and information, 
enhance public service delivery, as well as expand communication channels for 
engagement and empowerment of people. The opportunities offered by the 
digital development of recent years, whether through online services, big data, 
social media, mobile apps, or cloud computing, are expanding the way we look at 
e-government. While e-government still includes electronic interactions of three 
types—i.e. government-to-government (G2G); government-to-business (G2B); 
and government-to-consumer (G2C)—a more holistic and multi-stakeholder ap-
proach is taking shape.
Through innovation and e-government, public administrations around the world 
can be more efficient, provide better services and respond to demands for trans-
parency and accountability. E-government can help governments go green and 
promote effective natural resource management, as well as stimulate economic 
growth and promote social inclusion, particularly of disadvantaged and vulner-
able groups. ICTs have also proven to be effective platforms to facilitate knowl-
edge sharing, skills development, transfer of innovative e-government solutions 
and capacity-building for sustainable development among countries. E-govern-
ment can generate important benefits in the form of new employment, better 
health and education.
The conceptual framework  
of the United Nations E-Government Survey
Since its inception in 2003, the conceptual framework of the United Nations E-
Government Survey has adopted a holistic view of e-government development 
resting on three important dimensions: (i) the availability of online services, (ii) 
telecommunication infrastructure and (iii) human capacity. The methodological 
framework has remained consistent across survey periods while carefully updat-
ing its components to reflect evolving successful e-government strategies, pio-
neering practices and innovative approaches to tackling common challenges for 
sustainable development.
   3 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The United Nations E-Government Survey’s conceptual framework is based on 
the following guiding principles.
 • First, e-government in this Survey is considered to be the means to an end, 
the end being development for all. It is considered to be a powerful tool at the 
disposal of governments, which, if applied effectively, can contribute substan-
tially to eradicating extreme poverty, protecting the environment and promot-
ing social inclusion and economic opportunity for all. It is intended to support 
the development efforts of United Nations Member States.
 • Second, the Survey and its results must be placed in the context of the overall 
pattern and level of development of each country concerned. It is vital that 
the assessment of the on-line presence of governments highlighted by the 
Survey does not provide a distorted picture of the progress made—and chal-
lenges faced—by Member States. At the same time, it is equally important to 
underscore the promise of e-government. Therefore, main measurements in 
this Survey are based on e-government readiness, which duly takes into ac-
count not only countries’ specific e-government initiatives, as evidenced by 
web presence, but also their infrastructure and human resource endowments.
 • Third, the focus of the Survey is on provision of socio-economic and environ-
mental services to the population through the use of e-government as a pro-
grammatic tool, as well as on participation and social inclusion.
 • Finally, the Survey assesses e-government readiness worldwide, taking the 
view that the ultimate objective remains the “inclusion of all” in development.
An overview of the 2014  
United Nations E-Government Survey
The United Nations E-Government Survey is produced every two years by the 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. It is the only report in the world 
that assesses the e-government development status of the 193 United Nations 
Member States. It serves as a tool for decision-makers to identify their areas of 
strength and challenges in e-government and to guide e-government policies 
and strategies. The publication also highlights emerging e-government trends, 
issues and innovative practices, as well as challenges and opportunities of e-gov-
ernment development. Each chapter provides an analysis of the Survey’s data, as 
well as highlights strategies, challenges and opportunities so as to provide policy 
options. The Survey is intended for government officials, academics, intergov-
ernmental institutions, civil society organisations, the private sector and citizens 
at large.
The theme of the 2014 edition of the United Nations E-Government Survey—E-
Government for the Future We Want—is particularly relevant to addressing the 
multi-faceted and complex challenges that our societies face today. The publi-
cation addresses critical aspects of e-government for sustainable development 
articulated along eight chapters.
 4 
ExEcUTIVE SUMMARY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Chapter 1 presents an overview and broad analysis of the 2014 Survey data by 
providing progress at a glance, regional developments and information by spe-
cific country groups, including Small Island Developing States, Landlocked De-
veloping Countries and Least Developed Countries. Chapter 2, on progress in 
online service delivery, presents how online services are measured and explains 
what is new in the 2014 Survey. Chapter 3, which focuses on e-participation, 
examines global and regional rankings of e-participation, as well as trends by 
sectors and levels. It also highlights opportunities and challenges in this area. 
Chapter 4 focuses on the critical role of whole of government to promote holis-
tic and integrated approaches to e-government development. It explores how 
to promote collaborative leadership, shared organizational culture, institutional 
frameworks for effective coordination and accountability; innovative processes 
for service delivery and citizen engagement; and IT management strategies for 
enhanced collaboration. Chapter 5, which focuses on mobile and other chan-
nels for inclusive multichannel service delivery, explores the global and regional 
trends of various channels of public service delivery, including web portal, email, 
SMS text service, mobile portal and mobile application, social media, public ki-
osks, public-private partnerships, counter and telephone services. It also exam-
ines principles of a multichannel approach. Chapter 6 looks at trends in bridging 
the digital divide and offers an overall picture of digital connectivity with a spe-
cific focus on e-services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups at the national 
level. It seeks a better understanding of the challenges that Member States face 
in tackling this important issue. Chapter 7 outlines the current situation of e-gov-
ernment usage and highlights the efforts made by 193 United Nations Member 
States. It offers insights into greater service uptake in a multichannel world and it 
captures e-government benefits for sustainable development through increased 
user uptake. Chapter 8 offers global and regional trends in Open Government 
Data (OGD) and examines the findings of the 2014 Survey in this area.
Global trends in e-government
Due to a number of factors, there are wide disparities among regions and coun-
tries in their state of e-government development as observed throughout the 
2014 Survey. One clear observation is that the income level of a country is a 
general indicator of economic capacity and progress, which thus influences its 
e-government development. Access to ICT infrastructure and the provision of 
education, including ICT literacy, are related to the income level of a nation. The 
absence of these factors hinders the implementation of e-government initiatives. 
However, it is clear that national income does not, by itself, constitute or guar-
antee e-government development. There are many countries that have signifi-
cantly advanced their e-government despite relatively low national income, just 
as there are many countries which are lagging behind despite their relatively high 
income and thereby have good opportunities for future improvement. 
The Republic of Korea has retained the top spot in 2014 with its continued lead-
ership and focus on e-government innovation. Australia (2nd) and Singapore (3rd) 
have both increased considerably over their 2012 global rankings. As in previous 
years, the 2014 Survey shows that Europe continues to lead with the highest re-
gional E-Government Development Index (EGDI) followed by the Americas led 
   5 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
by the United States of America (ranked 7th globally); Asia led by the Republic of 
Korea; Oceania led by Australia; and Africa led by Tunisia (ranked 75th globally). 
Nevertheless, the 2014 Survey shows that each geographical region exhibits high 
internal diversity. The leading nations in Europe include France (4th), Netherlands 
(5th), United Kingdom (8th) and Finland (10th). There is little doubt that underpin-
ning this aggregate snapshot is the level of economic, social and political devel-
opment of the countries concerned, and one of the primary factors contributing 
to a high level of e-government development is past and current investment in 
telecommunication, human capital and provision of online services.
Table ES.1. World and regional e-government leaders
World e-government leaders Regional e-government leaders
Republic of Korea 
AFRICA
Tunisia 
Australia Mauritius 
Singapore 
AMERICAS
United States of America 
France Canada 
Netherlands 
ASIA
Republic of Korea 
Japan Singapore 
United States of America 
EUROPE
France
United Kingdom Netherlands 
New Zealand 
OCEANIA
Australia 
Finland New Zealand 
The 2014 Survey also examined the specific challenges and progress of e-gov-
ernment in the following three country groups: the Least Developed Countries 
(LDCs), Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and Land-Locked Developing 
Countries (LLDCs). Despite the serious economic, social and environmental chal-
lenges which many of these regions and groups face, they each show outstand-
ing examples which overcome their regional and income constraints to achieve 
significant e-government development.
In terms of online service delivery, the 2014 Survey saw an increased emphasis 
on e-participation features and evidence of Open Government Data initiatives on 
national websites given the evolving expectations about transparency and par-
ticipation in public affairs. E-environment was also included in the basket of basic 
online services assessed—alongside education, health, finance, labour and social 
welfare functions—given the need to promote environmental stewardship. 
Progress in online service delivery
In 2014 for the first time, all 193 United Nations Member States now have na-
tional websites, but the majority remain at the low or intermediate levels of e-
government development, termed emerging and enhanced stages in the United 
Nations four stage online service model. Even in the case of countries with highly 
advanced ICT infrastructures and human resources, it can be difficult to move 
to the higher stages with transactional and connected services, given that these 
 6 
ExEcUTIVE SUMMARY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
typically require robust data protection and online payment systems, as well as 
secure data sharing across government institutions. It is again clear that factors 
other than national income are equally important, including high-level political 
support and leadership, strengthened institutional capacity, public accountabil-
ity and citizen engagement, as well as adequate e-government programmes, ICT 
infrastructure and education.
In terms of usability features, a large majority of countries provide users with 
basic search tools to locate content, and most now do so in more than one lan-
guage. However, only about half of the United Nations Member States maintain 
an advanced search engine, only 40 per cent enable user opinion features, such 
as tag clouds and ‘hot topics’ lists and less than one third show the availability 
of a secure connection. There also appears to be substantial underutilization of 
the potential of text-based Short Message Service (SMS) despite the dramatic 
global growth of mobile devices usage, including in the low income countries. 
The most frequently found transactional services include setting up of personal 
online accounts, income tax filing and business registration, but overall there is 
great diversity in types.
On the whole, therefore, the 2014 Survey data shows substantial variability in 
the scope of online service delivery. Differences between the highest and lowest 
online service scores and between the different stages of e-service development 
are considerable, despite progress in some areas. A large number of countries 
fall in the bottom third of the Online Service Index (OSI), and there appears to be 
a widening gap between the e-government ‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’ as technol-
ogy evolves. Improved access to telecommunication infrastructure has facilitated 
e-government development in some cases, but in general the most advanced 
countries have continued to outpace the less developed in online service delivery.
Empowering people through expanding e-participation
There are clear opportunities for the future improvement of e-participation, in-
cluding technology trends towards, for example, social media and mobile devic-
es/technology which are inherently interactive, as well as crowdsourcing. There 
are also severe challenges, including the digital divide, low user take-up and the 
lack of incentives to participate. These opportunities and challenges call for ef-
fective strategies to create an enabling environment for e-participation, includ-
ing appropriate legal and institutional frameworks, capacity-development for 
digital media literacy for citizens and a seamless integration of online and offline 
features for public participation. 
Successful strategies need to address both formal and informal approaches to citi-
zen engagement. To increase the likelihood of success for e-participation strategy, 
governments can benefit from those platforms and channels that are already in use 
by citizens rather than creating new ones. Promoting a clear idea and understand-
ing of e-participation by integrating both online and offline communication tools 
and channels will help reach groups that are difficult to reach. Governments should 
encourage issues-related participation and provide consistent feedback on consul-
tations to citizens. Motivating engagement depends more on a sense of belonging 
   7 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
to a political community with shared traditions and values than simply civic duty, as 
it does on linking these directly to the pressing issues of sustainable development.
The Netherlands (1) and the Republic of Korea (1) are leading the world e-partici-
pation ranking, followed by Uruguay (3). Morocco and Kenya are the frontrunners 
in Africa, Uruguay and Chile head the rankings for the Americas. The top per-
forming countries for e-participation in Asia are the Republic of Korea and Japan. 
Finally, Australia and New Zealand still lead Oceania. 
Table ES.2. World and regional e-participation leaders
World e-participation leaders Regional e-participation leaders
Netherlands
AFRICA
Morocco 
Republic of Korea Kenya 
Uruguay 
AMERICAS
Uruguay
France Chile 
Japan
ASIA
Republic of Korea 
United Kingdom Japan 
Australia
EUROPE
Netherlands
Chile France
United States of America
OCEANIA
Australia 
Singapore New Zealand 
The critical need for whole-of government-approaches 
and collaborative governance
Although sustainable development challenges have significantly changed over 
the past decades and are becoming increasingly interdependent, government in-
stitutions and their functions are still largely shaped by early 20th century models 
of public administration in which ministries and their leaders work in “silos” and is-
sues are tackled through a sectoral rather than a collaborative perspective. At the 
same time, citizens and businesses are demanding more open, transparent, ac-
countable and effective governance, while new technologies, especially ICT, are 
enabling effective knowledge management, sharing and collaboration between 
all sectors and at all levels of government whether cross-border, national or local. 
The 2014 Survey focuses even more than in previous years on whole of govern-
ment and collaborative public governance issues at the national level as the key 
to addressing these complex and wide scope challenges which require integrated 
responses. In this context, a number of enabling factors are needed to advance 
whole of government. First, there is a critical need for new forms of collaborative 
leadership and shared organizational culture, including re-shaping values, mind-
sets, attitudes and behaviours in the public sector through visible guiding prin-
ciples and leadership. Second, new forms of institutional frameworks for effec-
tive coordination, cooperation and accountability need to be put in place across 
government, between governments and with relevant non-public actors which 
can contribute to creating public value. Third, innovative coordination processes 
 8 
ExEcUTIVE SUMMARY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
and mechanisms for service delivery, and citizen engagement and empowerment 
are essential, as is making such services inclusive and accessible by all groups in 
society, including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. Fourth, and linked to 
this, collaborative mechanisms are required to engage citizens in service delivery 
and decision-making processes which are citizen- and user-centric and, where 
relevant, user-driven via co-creation and crowdsourcing through decentralized 
governance systems.
Finally, and often underpinning the other enabling factors, it is essential to har-
ness the power of new technology through appropriate ICT management strate-
gies for enhanced collaboration. The global spread of the Internet and the appli-
cation of ICT in government, as well as greater investments in telecommunication 
infrastructure coupled with capacity-building in human capital, can provide op-
portunities to transform public administration into an instrument of collaborative 
governance which directly supports sustainable development outcomes. 
Reaching out to citizens through mobile, social media 
and inclusive multichannel service strategies
There is increasing expectation for easier access to more public information and 
public services from anywhere, anytime through multiple channels or citizen 
touch-points. The 2014 Survey shows that digital channels, with both their di-
versity and spread, are being increasingly adopted by almost all countries, while 
counter (face-to-face service) and telephone (voice) services, have continued to 
serve as fundamental channels.
In 2014, all 193 United Nations Member States have some form of online pres-
ence, as compared to 18 countries with no online presence in 2003 and three 
countries in 2012. Although the use of email increased only slightly between 2012 
and 2014 to just over two-thirds of countries, it is likely to continue to grow in the 
future, especially for notification and information provision. Similar uses are seen 
for SMS via mobile devices, although still more than 80 per cent of countries have 
not yet exploited this potential mass channel which is only a slight advance from 
2012. As far as the use of mobile phones themselves are concerned, there are to-
day over 1.5 billion smart phones in use globally, and this is growing exponentially. 
Between 2012 and 2014, the number of countries offering mobile apps and mo-
bile portals doubled to almost 50 countries, where they are often used directly 
to support poverty eradication, gender equality and social inclusion, as well as 
promote economic development, environmental protection and disaster man-
agement. The use of social media by governments is also increasing fast with the 
number more than tripling from 2010 to 2012 and with another 50 per cent rise 
in 2014, so that today 118 countries use it for e-consultation and 70 for e-govern-
ment generally. Both social media and mobile channels typically do not require 
high investment costs as they ride on consumerisation and non-governmental 
platforms, but they often need a business transformation and strong commit-
ment in the public administration to maximise benefits.
There is also an increasing use of public kiosks from 24 countries in 2012 to 36 
in 2014 for use as open-access facilities in public spaces and locations providing 
   9 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
free use of online services, especially in marginalised or remote areas and where 
the individual use of ICT is not widespread. Similarly, both over the counter and 
telephone services remain fundamental channels with the majority of countries 
providing at least some services using these routes. They are often seen as im-
portant supplements for individual problem solving compared to, for example, 
websites, which are generally better at providing information.
It is imperative for government managers to leverage the different advantages 
offered by various channels and find smart ways to increase usage of online ser-
vices and reach out to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups for social inclusion. 
A multichannel approach in public service delivery is akin to a whole of govern-
ment roadmap to e-government development and needs to be driven with a 
focused agenda and strong facilitation across all levels. Public service delivery 
can be greatly improved through a smart blend of channel mix, optimising the 
characteristics of different channels to satisfy diverse citizens’ needs and having 
a consolidated view and analysis of channel performance.
The challenge of the digital divide
While initially the digital divide was considered primarily an issue of access to 
relevant information technology infrastructure, it is increasingly about capability 
and ability to access and use ICT. The digital divide arises from broad socio-
economic inequality, and at the root of both are economic and social disparities 
between countries, groups and individuals which impact their ability to access 
and use ICT to promote well-being and prosperity. As such, the digital divide in 
one form or another affects people both in developed and developing countries. 
Overall, despite some progress in providing a plethora of e-services and online 
information, efforts at mitigating the digital divide in any meaningful way have 
not reaped large dividends. Although meaningful access to ICT has gone be-
yond connectivity issues, e-government has still not yet adequately embraced 
human, economic and social resources, institutional structures and governance 
networks, which are central to developmental outcomes.
In recent years, policy makers have progressively focused on the link between 
use of new technologies, education and social inclusion, particularly of disadvan-
taged and vulnerable groups. By 2014, 64 per cent of the national government 
portals and websites provided integrated links to sources of archived information 
(policies, budget, legal documents, etc.) related to some disadvantaged and vul-
nerable groups, namely people living in poverty, persons with disabilities, older 
persons, immigrants and youth. 
One aspect of the digital divide is also the e-government usage divide, which 
is generally correlated with demographic and socio-economic characteristics, 
such as income, education and age. Furthermore, as more government tasks are 
moved online, there is an increasing concern that a significant portion of the pop-
ulation will be shut off from jobs, health care, education and other government 
services. This is especially the case in a few of the most advanced e-government 
countries, for example in some European countries, with ‘digital by default’ strat-
egies where many services are only available online largely driven by the cost 
savings governments can make, as well as the burden reductions which can be 
 10 
ExEcUTIVE SUMMARY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
achieved for all stakeholders. Clearly, this significantly boosts e-government us-
age, even though additional special provision needs to be made for groups and 
individuals who cannot get online.
Promoting usage is key to delivering development impacts
Leveraging e-government to deliver development impacts depends on effec-
tive usage. While the provision of e-government services on the supply side is 
generally increasing, improvements are also needed to the demand side of the 
equation, i.e. on e-government uptake. In the member countries of the Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), e-government usage 
averages out at 50 per cent, but there is great variation among countries and the 
use of more advanced services such as accessing and sending forms online is 
much less, especially as such services require robust security and payment sys-
tems. In developing countries these numbers are even lower. Countries’ efforts 
to develop e-government therefore need to go hand in hand with their efforts to 
increase demand through usability features such as simplicity and personalisa-
tion, usage monitoring and tracking and user feedback and usage promotion. 
Indeed, many countries are doing this, although it is far from being the norm.
Increasing uptake is also dependent on aligning, mixing and integrating channels 
appropriate to specific service types and user groups. In this context, both mo-
bile and social media are becoming more important both to deliver services and 
to interact with users in a variety of ways. This also helps government listen to 
and work with users and help design more appropriate, user friendly and useful 
services, which is in turn likely to increase take-up and impact. There are increas-
ing examples where this is being done in sectors like education, health, poverty 
eradication, employment and environment, which directly support sustainable 
development through increased user uptake.
Policy to promote both supply side and demand side must go hand in hand. 
Policy efforts to increase take-up should, however, not aim just to increase usage, 
but should also focus on obtaining the maximum benefit from that usage for all 
stakeholders.
Open government data as a new development resource
The recent recognition of the importance of Open Government Data (OGD) in 
meeting the rights of individuals, businesses and civil organizations to access 
and use government information, to engage in policymaking, to improve existing 
public services as well as to co-create and even create new public services, is sig-
nificant. Opening up government data is fundamentally about more efficient use 
of resources and improving service delivery. However, OGD has limited value if 
the data published is not utilized, which means involving stakeholders and focus-
ing on developing sustainable ecosystems of users. Much more work also needs 
to be done in measuring and understanding the return on investment of OGD. 
Although early indications are positive on this point, precisely how successful use 
and business models operate remains at the experimental stage.
   11 
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Data has always been a strategic asset for any organization, but its importance 
has exponentially grown in the last decade due to the enormous amount of data 
creation and advances in data collection, processing and analysis technologies. 
However, while the use of data in developed countries has made enormous 
progress in recent years, developing countries have made much less headway; 
therefore, they need to increase awareness, provide sufficient capacities and as-
sist public officials with the implementation of open government data initiatives. 
In all countries, governments should focus even more on starting, growing and 
sustaining open data initiatives through updating their policy, legal and institu-
tional frameworks as well as improving leadership and raising awareness at high-
er decision making levels. The amount of data that government agencies collect 
is likely to grow exponentially in the coming years. Although open data provides 
many opportunities and capabilities for government agencies, its real impact will 
not be realized without carefully planned data governance, both within the public 
sector as well as with appropriate non-public stakeholders.
The 2014 Survey introduced new questions related to OGD, including the exist-
ence of dedicated portals, the types of technical formats and location informa-
tion, the availability of user guidelines and support and the possibility for users 
to propose new datasets. The 2014 Survey found that while many countries use 
government websites to share data, only 46 countries have dedicated data por-
tals. Most main government sectors are making OGD available and most of this 
is in machine-readable format. Apart from the provision of OGD, there is a need 
to develop appropriate policy, legal and institutional frameworks to ensure that 
basic rights to information are available and well known. Since OGD initiatives 
require cooperation between various government agencies, strong political and 
top-level vision and management are essential. In addition, issues concerning 
data quality related to authenticity, integrity and re-use standards are important, 
as is data privacy and protection against misuse. Governments, therefore, need 
to ensure an appropriate balance between the need for privacy on the one hand 
and openness on the other.
Going forward
A post-2015 development agenda that is both unified in focus and universal in 
form is emerging, tackling poverty eradication and sustainable development. 
Such an agenda would have major implications for the expected role of e-gov-
ernment in supporting its implementation. As shown throughout the 2014 Survey, 
it is clear that e-government can contribute towards the post-2015 development 
agenda by strengthening national capabilities, enhancing governments’ perfor-
mance, increasing efficiency, effectiveness and inclusiveness of public services, 
promoting transparency and reducing corruption in the public sector, helping 
governments “go green”, facilitating effective disaster management, favouring 
an enabling environment for economic growth, as well as promoting social inclu-
sion through equitable access to services. Whole-of-government approaches, 
which are enhanced through ICTs, can promote integrated and inclusive service 
delivery. The application of ICT in government provides opportunities for mul-
ti-stakeholder engagement by strengthening collaboration mechanisms, both 
 12 
ExEcUTIVE SUMMARY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
within the public sector and with relevant actors outside, such as business, civil 
society, communities and individual citizens. It allows for broader participation in 
national and local policymaking and service delivery through new channels and 
modalities of communication. 
The 2014 Survey shows that progress in e-government development has been 
attained through increased e-participation, growth of the mobile channel and 
social media, expanded usage and the burgeoning of open government data. 
However, although there are numerous inspiring exceptions, many challenges 
remain, such as low income, ongoing digital divides, the inadequacy of institu-
tional change processes and lack of innovative e-government leadership. Ad-
dressing e-government challenges is often dependent on the national capacity 
for change and innovation, which itself largely determines the success of e-gov-
ernment goals. In the same vein, countries that have a more vibrant information 
society are able to better leverage human talent and ICT services for improved 
e-government performance. 
Based on good practices from around the world, the 2014 Survey highlights that 
effective e-government development depends on strong political will, collabora-
tive leadership and new governance frameworks to support and manage a citizen 
centric service delivery model, including a national ICT policy and e-government 
strategy, as well as strengthening institutions and building the capacities of pub-
lic servants. The effective approaches and modalities as well as the comparative 
advantage of the whole-of-government approach should be considered in form-
ing the future framework for e-government development. Commitments to col-
laboration, openness, transparency, accountability and participation in national 
public governance, backed by robust ICT infrastructure, adequate human capital 
and online service delivery, are also of critical importance to the development of 
effective e-government for a sustainable and desirable future.
In this chapter:
Chapter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.1. Introduction 13
1.2. Progress at a glance 14
1.2.1. Highlights of 2014 e-government rankings 15
1.2.2. National income and e-government development 19
1.3. Regional development 20
1.3.1. Africa 21
1.3.2. Americas 23
1.3.3. Asia 27
1.3.4. Europe 31
1.3.5. Oceania 36
1.4. Country groups 37
1.4.1. Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 37
1.4.2. Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs) 40
1.4.3. Least Developed Countries (LDCs) 42
1.5. Conclusion 44
World e-government 
rankings
1.1. Introduction
It has been over a decade since the United Nations started 
assessing the global e-government development through 
the initiative1 “Benchmarking E-government: Assessing 
the United Nations Member States” in 2001. Since then, 
there has been increasing evidence through public pol-
icy formulation and implementation that e-government, 
among others, has played an effective enabling role in 
advancing national development. At the same time, the 
United Nations E-Government Survey has gained wide ac-
ceptance as a global authoritative measure of how public 
administrations provide electronic and mobile public ser-
vices. The biennial edition of the United Nations E-Gov-
ernment Survey aims to exemplify successful e-govern-
ment strategies, pioneering practices with a view towards 
administrative reform and sustainable development.
The conceptual framework of the E-Government Devel-
opment Index (EGDI)2 remains unchanged since its incep-
tion in 2001. Based on a holistic view of e-government de-
velopment, the methodological framework has remained 
consistent across Survey periods, while at the same time 
its components are carefully adjusted to reflect evolving 
knowledge of best practices in e-government and chang-
es in the underlying supporting ICT infrastructure, human 
capacity development and online service advancement, 
among other factors. The EGDI is a composite measure 
of three important dimensions of e-government, name-
ly: provision of online services, telecommunication con-
nectivity and human capacity, as illustrated in Figure 1.1. 
Each one of these sets of indices is in itself a composite 
measure that can be extracted and analyzed indepen-
dently (see section on Survey Methodology). The global 
e-government ranking, as derived from the EGDI, is not 
designed to capture e-government development in an 
absolute sense; rather, it aims to give a performance rat-
ing of national governments relative to one another.
 14 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Chapter 1 presents an overview and broad analysis of the 2014 United Nations 
E-Government Survey data. It presents e-government development at the global 
and regional levels. It also analyzes the relationships of the EGDI in the Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS), the Landlocked Developing States (LLDS) and the Least 
Developed Countries (LDC) and explores the correlation of e-government with 
other indicators like national income.
1.2. Progress at a glance
The e-government story may not be new but it is entering a new episode. Lower-
ing costs is still an important consideration in service delivery, but adding public 
value is gradually taking over as the primary goal of e-government. The view 
of an “e-government maturity model” no longer holds as e-government goals 
are constantly evolving to meet emerging challenges and increase public value. 
Emphasis is now being placed on deploying a portfolio of e-services that spans 
functions, business units and geographies, at varying local or municipal levels, 
thus increasing the value of service offerings to citizens by effectively adopting 
disruptive technologies in an adaptive and scalable manner.
In many countries, a new governance contract is emerging to support and man-
age the service delivery model. Collaborative service delivery is now pervasive, 
where governments, citizens, civil society and the private sector often work to-
gether to innovate processes and leverage new technologies. In meeting mul-
ti-faceted sustainability challenges, governments are, for example, increasingly 
using open data and data analytics to improve accuracy in forecasting citizens’ 
demand of public utilities or to screen for irregularities in public procurement to 
lower its risks. Predictive analysis is also used to identify issues before problem-
atic scenarios develop, and sentiment analysis is deployed in engaging citizens 
in public consultation and decision-making processes. This shift is observed in 
both developed and developing countries, with the focus on adding public value 
to people’s lives in an inclusive manner.
Figure 1.1. The three components of the E-Government Development Index (EGDI)
OSI
1/3
TII
1/3
HCI
1/3
EGDI
OSI—Online Service Index
TII—Telecommunication
Infrastructure Index
HCI—Human Capital Index
   15 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.2.1. Highlights of 2014 e-government rankings
Twenty-five countries have a “very high EGDI” with index values in the range of 
0.75 to 1.00 (see Table 1.1). Following trends from past Surveys, 20 out of these 
25 countries were also ranked among the top 25 in the 2012 Survey. In addition, 
the regional representation mirrors those of past Surveys, with a majority of 64 
per cent (16 countries) from Europe, 20 per cent (5 countries) from Asia, 8 per 
cent (2 countries) from Americas and 8 per cent (2 countries) from Oceania. All 
top 25 are high-income nations, as defined by the 2012 World Bank Country 
Classifiaction (see section on Survey Methodology).
The Republic of Korea has retained the top spot in 2014 with its continued lead-
ership and focus on e-government innovation. Australia (2nd) and Singapore (3rd) 
have both improved their rankings considerably over their 2012 performance.
Table 1.1. World e-government leaders (Very High EGDI) in 2014
Country Region
2014 
EGDI
2014 
Rank
2012 
Rank
Change in Rank 
(2012–2014)
Republic of Korea Asia 0.9462 1 1 -
Australia Oceania 0.9103 2 12 	10
Singapore Asia 0.9076 3 10 	 7
France Europe 0.8938 4 6 	 2
Netherlands Europe 0.8897 5 2 	 3
Japan Asia 0.8874 6 18 	12
United States of America Americas 0.8748 7 5 	 2
United Kingdom Europe 0.8695 8 3 	 5
New Zealand Oceania 0.8644 9 13 	 4
Finland Europe 0.8449 10 9 	 1
Canada Americas 0.8418 11 11 -
Spain Europe 0.8410 12 23 	11
Norway Europe 0.8357 13 8 	 5
Sweden Europe 0.8225 14 7 	 7
Estonia Europe 0.8180 15 20 	 5
Denmark Europe 0.8162 16 4 	12
Israel Asia 0.8162 17 16 	 1
Bahrain Asia 0.8089 18 36 	18
Iceland Europe 0.7970 19 22 	 3
Austria Europe 0.7912 20 21 	 1
Germany Europe 0.7864 21 17 	 4
Ireland Europe 0.7810 22 34 	12
Italy Europe 0.7593 23 32 	 9
Luxembourg Europe 0.7591 24 19 	 5
Belgium Europe 0.7564 25 24 	 1
Very High EGDI Average 0.8368
world Average 0.4712
 16 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
With an average of 0.8368, the top 25 countries are far ahead of the rest of the 
world (world average of 0.4721). One of the primary factors contributing to a high 
level of e-government development is concurrent past and present investment in 
telecommunication, human capital and provision of online services.
Figure 1.2. Percentage of countries grouped by EGDI
Figure 1.2 shows the breakdown of countries grouped by EGDI. While there are 
only 25 countries (13 per cent) ranked as very-high-EGDI (more than 0.75), the ma-
jority falls in the middle range, with 62 countries (32 per cent) ranked as high-EGDI 
(between 0.5 and 0.75) and 74 countries (38 per cent) ranked as middle-EGDI 
(between 0.25 and 0.5). The lowest performing group, ranked as low-EGDI (less 
than 0.25), consists of 32 countries (17 per cent). Table 1.2 shows the breakdown 
of each EGDI group. Some observations are:
 • There is a considerable opportunity for countries with high-EGDI and middle-
EGDI to continue to advance their e-government development. With clear 
strategies, smart investment in ICT infrastructure, continued investment in pri-
mary, secondary and tertiary education, as well as through radical transforma-
tion in offering online public services, governments can achieve more to follow 
the upward trend.
 • Among middle-EGDI countries, e-government services are increasingly deliv-
ered through mobile devices.
 • Limitations in ICT infrastructure and human capacity pose the greatest chal-
lenge, particularly in low-EGDI countries with constraints of public resources. 
In low-EGDI countries, there is a shift towards intermediary channels, such as 
kiosks and postal offices, having bigger roles in facilitating access and driving 
usage of e-government services to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.
 • Low adult literacy rates in some middle-EGDI and low-EGDI countries, cou-
pled with little education or low average years of schooling, pose a challenge 
that will prevent these countries from making significant advancements in e-
government development.
Very high EGDI (> 0.75)
17%
13%
32%
38%
High EGDI (0.5–0.75)
Middle EGDI (0.25–0.5)
Low EGDI (< 0.25)
   17 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 1.2. Countries grouped by EGDI in alphabetical order
Very High EGDI 
(More than 0.75)
High EGDI 
(Between 0.50 and 0.75)
Middle EGDI 
(Between 0.25 and 0.50)
Low EGDI 
(Less than 0.25)
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Republic of Korea
Singapore
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States 
of America
Albania
Andorra
Antigua and 
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Barbados
Belarus
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Fiji
Georgia
Greece
Grenada
Hungary
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritius
Mexico
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Oman
Panama
Peru
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Moldova
Romania
Russian 
Federation
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Seychelles
Slovakia
Slovenia
Sri Lanka
Switzerland
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Arab 
Emirates
Uruguay
Venezuela
Algeria
Angola
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Belize
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Her-
zegovina
Botswana
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Congo
Cuba
DPR of Korea
Dominica
Dominican Re-
public
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Libya
Madagascar
Maldives
Marshall 
Islands
Micronesia
Namibia
Nauru
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Pakistan
Palau
Paraguay
Philippines
Rwanda
Saint Kitts 
and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St Vincent and 
the Grenadines
Samoa
Senegal
South Africa
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
TFYR 
of Macedonia
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Trinidad  
and Tobago
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Tanzania
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zimbabwe
Afghanistan
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African 
Republic
Chad
Comoros
Côte d'Ivoire
Congo
Djibouti
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Niger
Papua New Guinea
Sao Tome and 
Principe
Sierra Leone
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Sudan
Togo
Zambia
 18 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Despite global trends towards increased ICT connectivity and the increasing fo-
cus on deploying e-services for national development purposes, there remains 
a disparate distribution of e-government development among the 193 Member 
States. As illustrated in the histogram in Figure 1.3, among the countries with 
EGDI values lower than 0.5, the statistical distribution displays that the highest 
number of countries (33) fall between 0.21 and 0.30 EGDI. 
The disparities in the levels of EGDI among countries not only reflect the low levels 
of online services, infrastructure and human capital resources in several regions 
and countries of the world; they also highlight the magnitude of the existing gaps. 
Taking a closer look at the three components of EGDI, human capital scores are 
higher compared to the other two components, as shown in Figure 1.4. The lowest 
performing component is the Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (TII) which 
drags down the overall EGDI; while the Online Service Index (OSI) also trails in 
performance compared to the average value. One observation is that countries, 
in general, are putting more investment in human capital as compared to ICT in-
frastructure, perhaps because the former is also featured as a dominant factor in 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals and alleviating poverty.
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
2
0
1
4
 I
n
d
e
xe
s
Countries sorted by EGDI in ascending order
OSI 2014
TII 2014
HCI 2014
EGDI 2014
Linear (OSI 2014)
Linear (TII 2014)
Linear (HCI 2014)
Linear (EGDI 2014)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2014 Indices
D
en
si
ty
2014 EGDI
2014 OSI
2014 TII
2014 HCI
Figure 1.4. Distribution of EGDI and its three components, 2014
Figure 1.3. Distribution of countries by EGDI, 2014
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0.91–1.000.81–0.900.71–0.800.61–0.700.51–0.600.41–0.500.31–0.400.21–0.300.11–0.200–0.10
4
18
33
23
28
30
23
16 15
3
EGDI
   19 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.2.2. National income and e-government development
The income level of a country is a general indicator of economic capacity and 
progress, and thus has a strong influence on national e-government develop-
ment. Access to ICT infrastructure and the provision of education, including ICT 
literacy, are highly related to the income level of a nation. The lack of these 
enabling factors places strong constraints on implementing e-government initia-
tives, even if sound policies and national strategies are in place. As a result, and 
despite efforts in some countries to offer online services, the full potential of e-
government is far from being fully realized, particularly among the lower-middle 
income and low income countries, as evidenced by their poor EGDI performance.
However, it is clear that national income certainly does not, by itself, constitute or 
guarantee advanced e-government development, as evidenced by many outli-
ers highlighted in Figure 1.5 and Figure 1.6. Some countries have significantly 
advanced their e-government development ranking despite their relatively low 
national income, just as there are many countries which are lagging despite their 
relatively high income and thereby have good opportunities for future improve-
ment. The main enabler of good e-government progress is often putting in place 
an effective governance framework to support and manage a citizen-centric ser-
vice delivery model, including a national ICT policy and e-government strategy, 
as well as strengthening institutions and building the capacities of public servants.
These trends reveal opportunities for countries that have not reached the level of 
e-government development, as have other countries in the same income group. 
For instance, among the lower-middle income countries, there is potential for 
quick advancement of countries like Cape Verde, Guatemala, Guyana, Microne-
sia, Paraguay, Samoa and Indonesia, as highlighted in Figure 1.6. At the same 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
20,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
G
ro
ss
 N
at
io
na
l I
nc
o
m
e 
(G
N
I p
er
 c
ap
it
a)
, U
SD
EGDI of 193 countries, order by increasing index
30,000
10,000
R²=0.5834
Figure 1.5. Relation between EGDI and national income (GNI per capita)
 20 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
time, some countries have clearly advanced their e-government despite their 
relatively lower national income. These countries include Bolivia, Ghana, Hon-
duras, India, Philippines, Vietnam and Uzbekistan. Chapter 2 also looks at the 
relationship between income and online service delivery.
1.3. Regional development
Figure 1.7 illustrates the regional averages as compared to the world median 
of 0.4712 in 2014. In 2014, Europe (0.6936) continues to lead with the highest 
regional EGDI, followed by the Americas (0.5074), Asia (0.4951), Oceania (0.4086) 
and finally Africa (0.2661). Examining previous trends, there has been no change 
in regional positions since 2003.3
Figure 1.6.  Relation between EGDI and national income (GNI per capita), lower-
middle income countries
0.2661
0.4086
0.4951 0.5074
0.6936
0
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Africa Oceania Asia Americas Europe
20
14
 E
G
D
I
Regions
0.3
0.8
0.4712
World average
Figure 1.7. 2014 regional averages of e-government development
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
2014 EGDI
G
ro
ss
 N
at
io
na
l i
nc
om
e 
(G
N
I p
er
 c
ap
ita
)
Georgia
Armenia
Mongolia
Moldova
Sri Lanka
Egypt
Morocco
Ukraine
El Salvador
Philippines
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
Bolivia
Indonesia
Samoa
Honduras
India
Paraguay
Ghana
Guyana
Cape Verde
Micronesia
Guatemala
Kiribati
Syria
Swaziland
Nigeria
Bhutan
Cameroon
Nicaragua
Yemen
Senegal
Laos
Lesotho
Sudan
Pakistan
Vanuatu
Congo
Timor-Leste
Zambia
Sao Tome
and Principe
Solomon
Islands
Côte d’Ivoire
Mauritania
Djibouti
Papua New Guinea
R²=0.3309
   21 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.3.1. Africa
Progress in Africa remains relatively slow and uneven. The regional EGDI average 
in Africa is 0.2661. Six countries (Tunisia, Mauritius, Egypt, Seychelles, Morocco 
and South Africa) have EGDI values above the world average of 0.4712, placing 
them among the top 50 per cent of the world. On the other hand, about 30 per 
cent (16 countries) of the 54 African countries are at the bottom 10 per cent of 
the world ranking. 
To reverse this trend, countries in the region need to focus on building human 
capital, including ICT literacy and on bridging infrastructure gaps to provide an 
enabling environment for e-government development. Visionary strategies and 
practical implementation plans should follow for effective deployment of sustain-
able online services.
Tunisia and Mauritus are the two highest-ranked countries in Africa, with Egypt, 
Seychelles, Morocco and South Africa following closely behind and showing pro-
gress as compared with the 2012 Survey. However, Africa as a whole exhibits a 
regional digital divide with most Internet activity and infrastructure concentrated 
in South Africa, Morocco, Egypt, Mauritius and Seychelles.
Table 1.3 shows the top 20 countries in the African region based on e-government 
development. Tunisia climbed 28 places to the 75th global position. Mauritius 
and Seychelles remain in the regional top 5, improving their world rankings from 
93rd in 2012 to 76th in 2014 and from 84th to 81st respectively. Egypt improved 
its ranking significantly and is now ranked third in the region and 80th globally. 
Morocco improved its rank by 38 places, which is clearly the biggest jump in the 
region; it has emerged as a trailblazer in certain areas with particularly impressive 
mobile broadband take-up. Morocco was one of the first countries in the Middle 
East and North Africa to institutionalize a regulatory environment for promoting 
competition in the telecommunications sector; and as such, made great strides 
in levelling the playing field for private operators to enter and succeed in the 
market. As early as 1999, a national strategy was developed to lay out the coun-
try’s ICT vision which later became the foundation for subsequent plans such as 
e-Morocco and now Digital Morocco (see Boxes 1.1 and 1.2 for case studies on 
Morocco and Mauritius).
The telecommunication sector has been an important driver of Africa’s econom-
ic growth in recent years. ICT revenues have increased at a compound annual 
growth rate of 40 per cent in Africa and the number of mobile subscribers ex-
ceeded 400 million in 2011. To meet the increased demand, investment in tele-
communication infrastructure—about $15 billion a year—has also grown consid-
erably, with a 33 per cent compound annual growth rate from 2003 to 2008.4 The 
increase in revenue generation in Africa has mostly been due to the exponential 
usage increase of mobile technologies and related services. Africa’s average an-
nual growth rate in mobile subscriptions was estimated in 2012 at 65 per cent 
or higher, making it the highest in the world.5 Mobile value-added services have 
also been launched by both public and private sectors throughout the continent 
to enable and support a broad range of sectors, including food security, agricul-
ture, banking, a broad range of education and healthcare, among others. 
 22 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Despite this phenomenal growth, there are challenges for strategic e-government 
development. Governments may need to play a greater role in navigating effec-
tive policies to reduce access costs for mobile broadband; support private col-
laboration; encourage innovative business models that drive employment such 
as micro-work and outsourcing; and support ICT entrepreneurship. Connectivity 
and digital divide issues should also be given more attention in the region, given 
the fact that in rural locations, where 65 to 70 per cent of Sub-Saharan Africa’s 
population currently resides, connectivity is still nearly non-existent.6 Regional 
cooperation mechanisms could be strengthened to facilitate national develop-
ment goals, particularly among those countries with no direct sea access (see 
section on Landlocked Developing Countries).
While the general e-government trends in Africa seem to be inclined toward 
mobile government initiatives and social media strategies, it is also advisable 
for policymakers to explore e-government on a more fundamental level through 
adjusting legislation and policies to encompass technology in national develop-
ment strategies and welcoming new ideas and ways of connecting with citizens.
Table 1.3. Top 20 countries in Africa
Country Level of Income EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank
Change 
in Rank
High EGDI
Tunisia Upper Middle 0.5390 75 103 	28
Mauritius Upper Middle 0.5338 76 93 	17
Egypt Lower Middle 0.5129 80 107 	27
Seychelles Upper Middle 0.5113 81 84 	 3
Morocco Lower Middle 0.5060 82 120 	38
Middle EGDI
South Africa Upper Middle 0.4869 93 101 	 8
Botswana Upper Middle 0.4198 112 121 	 9
Namibia Upper Middle 0.3880 117 123 	 6
Kenya Low 0.3805 119 119 -
Libya Upper Middle 0.3753 121 191 	70
Ghana Lower Middle 0.3735 123 145 	22
Rwanda Low 0.3589 125 140 	15
Zimbabwe Low 0.3585 126 133 	 7
Cape Verde Lower Middle 0.3551 127 118 	 9
Gabon Upper Middle 0.3294 131 129 	 2
Algeria Upper Middle 0.3106 136 132 	 4
Swaziland Lower Middle 0.3056 138 144 	 6
Angola Upper Middle 0.2970 140 142 	 2
Nigeria Lower Middle 0.2929 141 162 	21
Cameroon Lower Middle 0.2782 144 147 	 3
Regional Average 0.2661
world Average 0.4712
   23 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.3.2. Americas
The top performing countries in the Americas region are the United States and 
Canada, both of which are also among the world leaders. Table 1.4 displays the 
top 20 countries in the Americas region. As in the recent past, the regional EGDI 
for the Americas is above the world average score, with most of its countries 
concentrated in the first 100 positions of the ranking. Central American and Car-
ibbean countries are still located in the lower half of the ranking, however, reflect-
ing the clear divide between these subregions and the rest of the Americas (see 
also Box 1.8 in the Small Island Developing States section.)
Since 2012, the United States of America has taken important steps to drive tech-
nology towards sustainable growth and quality jobs through policies that support 
box 1.1. case study on citizen consultation in Morocco
Morocco’s regional leadership can be attributed to its comprehensive gov-
ernment portal. As part of the government’s effort to bring state of the art 
e-services to its citizens and include them in the decision making process, the 
government developed an e-consultation platform through the website of the 
Secrétariat Général du Gouvernement, where citizens can access legislative 
texts online, read and download them and post their comments and concerns. 
In this way, the government presents to its citizens a transparent, inclusive and 
easy channel through which they can share their concerns and make their voic-
es heard; hence enriching democratic governance processes in the country.
The government also presents its responses to citizens’ comments and pro-
vides feedback; showing that they track the concerns and remarks of citizens, 
take them into consideration and deliver a response.
Source: http://www.sgg.
gov.ma
box 1.2.  case study on the Small Island Developing State of Mauritius
The government of Mauritius has put effort into developing their online portal 
and their telecommunication infrastructure. Their website www.gov.mu offers 
citizens an exhaustive list of e-services segmented by target persons (139 ser-
vices), by domain (59 services), by ministry (53 services), by department (13 
services) and parastatally (14 services).
Even though Mauritius is one of the Small Island Developing States with a small 
land area and population, its economy has developed since independence 
from a small-scale focus based on agriculture, to a diversified middle-income 
economy. This increased the government’s potential to invest in infrastructure, 
communications and education, which raised the Human Capital Index of Mau-
ritius and in turn raised its ranking in the regional EGDI.
The government portal also offers citizens a platform for e-participation 
through chat rooms, a media library, blogs and discussion forums.
Sources: http://www.gov.
mu/English/Pages/Media.
aspx, https://www.gov.mu/
English/E-Services/Pages/
default.aspx
 24 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
innovation and education. It has also customized its digital agenda to fit the new 
tendencies and needs of its citizens, such as cloud computing, smart mobile de-
vices, tablets and high speed networks. Uruguay, widely recognized as the country 
in the South with the largest per capita export of software,7 has demonstrated 
great progress in EGDI and its components between 2012 and 2014, with online 
services increasing by 55 per cent and telecommunication infrastructure improv-
ing by 27 per cent. Even though the country is recognized by the high quality of 
its tertiary education system in the areas of technology and computing, its Human 
Capital Index has decreased by 10 per cent. Haiti is still at the bottom of the rank-
ing, but is demonstrating some improvements. In 2012, the EGDI was 0.337 points 
lower than the world average, whilst in 2014 the country has slightly reduced the 
gap with a difference of 0.2903. Haiti has faced major difficulties in the past which 
hinder its development, including the major earthquake in 2010.
Table 1.4. Top 20 countries in the Americas
Country Level of Income EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank
Change 
in Rank
Very High EGDI
United States of America High 0.8748 7 5 	 2
Canada High 0.8418 11 11 -
High EGDI
Uruguay High 0.7420 26 50 	24
Chile High 0.7122 33 39 	 6
Argentina Upper Middle 0.6306 46 56 	10
Colombia Upper Middle 0.6173 50 43 	 7
Costa Rica Upper Middle 0.6061 54 77 	23
Brazil Upper Middle 0.6008 57 59 	 2
Barbados High 0.5933 59 44 	15
Antigua and Barbuda High 0.5927 60 49 	11
Mexico Upper Middle 0.5733 63 55 	 8
Venezuela (Bolivarian 
Republic of)
Upper Middle 0.5564 67 71 	 4
Peru Upper Middle 0.5435 72 82 	10
Panama Upper Middle 0.5242 77 66 	11
Grenada Upper Middle 0.5220 78 75 	 3
Ecuador Upper Middle 0.5053 83 102 	19
Middle EGDI
El Salvador Lower Middle 0.4989 88 74 	14
Saint Kitts and Nevis High 0.4980 90 81 	 9
Trinidad and Tobago High 0.4932 91 67 	24
Bahamas High 0.4900 92 65 	27
Regional Average 0.5074
world Average 0.4712
   25 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Despite rapid improvement, South America, Central America and the Carib-
bean face some challenges regarding their online service delivery. Firstly, the 
infrastructure gap and broadband quality at the national level constrain access 
to online service. Countries like Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras and Belize 
have their Telecom Infrastructure Index pulling down their overall EGDI values. 
Mexico’s TII is very low relative to its other components, a decrease which might 
be partially explained by the new subcomponent (wireless broadband) added to 
the index. In Mexico only 9.83 inhabitants out of 100 have wireless broadband 
subscriptions, compared to the world average of 23.57 subscriptions per 100 in-
habitants. Second, a gap in complementary assets, like IT education or computer 
literacy, creates deficits in human resources, business management and research 
and development for the telecommunications sector. The Human Capital Index 
for North America is much higher than the HCI for all the other sub regions: 
Canada and the United States of America have an average Human Capital Index 
of 0.9170 while in the rest of the continent this index oscillates around 0.70.
In general, institutional weaknesses in the design of policies, the organization 
of programs and stakeholder coordination jeopardize the long term develop-
ment of e-government practices. The countries with higher rankings have al-
ready overcome the process of providing clarity about the institutional setting 
for e-Government. The Online Service Index of Central America (0.4006) is 
lower than the rest of the region, however, it is still higher than the world OSI 
average (0.3919).
Furthermore, the region, especially South America and the Caribbean, has shown 
vast improvement in most economic and social indicators since the debt crisis of 
the early 1980s. This progress echoed a significant improvement in the living 
conditions of the population. However, the region now faces uncertainties of 
sustainable growth while overcoming constraints that characterize its produc-
tive structure.8 ICT, like other general purpose technologies before it, can help 
modernize and revitalize traditional productive activities. Thus, governments in 
the region are now paying greater attention to the concept of e-government and 
its benefits for national sustainable development.
New ICT networks and platforms being developed by both public and private 
sectors are dramatically changing business models and public service delivery. 
Countries in the region can now take advantage of the new and growing de-
mand for ICT goods and services in the public and private sectors to leverage 
the consolidation and emergence of better governance. In South America and 
the Caribbean the total ICT goods imported during the period of 2010 to 2012 
grew by 3 per cent, whilst these imports grew only by 1.9 per cent for the entire 
world.9 Faced with sustainability issues and fast growing markets, the region may 
leverage the ICT sectors to provide better solutions and efficient services. The 
government of Trinidad and Tobago, for instance, has introduced a new online 
portal to facilitate business and trade, transforming national industries, business-
es dynamism and competitiveness.10
The e-government development in the region has also benefited from Small and 
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) that represent the majority of private enterprises, ac-
counting for 99 per cent of businesses and employing 67 per cent of employees 
 26 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
box 1.3. The potential of e-Government development in latin America
a) center for Innovation on e-Government Development in colombia 
The Centre for Innovation on e-Government Development was established by 
the Government of Colombia together with UNDESA and UNDP in 2013. The 
Center promotes an e-government implementation framework that goes well 
beyond technology. It aims at the creation of a knowledge base, identification 
of trends and best practices in e-government to improve the performance of 
public institutions at international, regional, national and local levels. The pro-
ject also aims at the development and promotion of a sustainable model to be 
extended to broad audiences, including innovation services not only as part of 
an institution, but also on the web through the virtual innovation centre.
b) Agency for e-Government development in Uruguay
The Agency for e-Government development of Uruguay promotes wide ac-
cess to ICT; the acquisition of skills and knowledge to achieve greater social 
integration and better-equipped young people for the future; provides inno-
vative solutions to improve services and quality of care that is given to soci-
ety, simplifies procedures and processes; and provides user support regarding 
consultations and initiatives related to the areas of competence of the Agency. 
It also strengthens links with academia, civil society and international organiza-
tions with similar purposes; issues and proposes policies, rules and standards; 
enhances the synergy between state and businesses; and promotes the devel-
opment of national software.
The Uruguayan E-Government Platform has the general goal of enabling and 
promoting the development of e-government services in Uruguay. The plat-
form, which follows a two-pronged approach, consists of an Interoperability 
Platform and a set of Crosscutting Services. It implements a service-oriented 
architecture, leveraging the Web Services technology, to expose, use and com-
bine government functionality implemented by public agencies. The platform 
is a key enabler for developing a joined-up e-government approach in Uruguay.
Source: DPADM, http://
www.unpan.org/
Source: http://
www.agesic.gub.uy/
innovaportal/v/1454/1/
agesic/guia_de_uso_de_
la_plataforma_de_ge_
del_estado_uruguayo.
html; http://agesic.gub.
uy/innovaportal/v/387/1/
agesic/areas_de_la_agen-
cia.html
in 2013.11 E-procurement opens up new opportunities for micro and small busi-
nesses, and provision of open government data can greatly facilitate urban ser-
vices, as the Americas region has a fast growing population with large concentra-
tions in urban areas. For example, Rio de Janeiro is developing an e-government 
and open data project to forecast natural disasters in the city and undertake 
surveillance in preparation for global events such as FIFA World Cup and Olym-
pic Games.
Collectively as a region, benefits can be reaped through e-government to en-
hance inclusion, transparency, accountability and cross-jurisdictional efficiency 
and contribute to its sustainable development (see Box 1.3).
   27 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.3.3. Asia
Comprising 30 per cent of the world’s land area, with approximately 4.3 billion 
people, Asia is the largest continent and the most populous. With such diversity, 
the countries in Asia also exhibit varying levels of online presence and develop-
ment; with the Republic of Korea leading the world ranking at number one in the 
2014 Survey, and other countries like Afghanistan, Myanmar, Timor-Leste and 
Pakistan trailing among the bottom 30 countries globally.
As illustrated in Table 1.5, the Republic of Korea, with its developed telecom-
munications infrastructure, strong national education policy and high GDP per 
capita of $22,590 US dollars in 2012,12 took the lead globally in e-government 
ranking for the first time in 2010 and is again the top performer in 2014 ahead 
of many other developed nations. The government started implementing its Ad-
vancement of e-Government Strategy in 2007, reaching a fully digitized public 
administration with advanced Government-to-Citizen (G2C) and Government-to-
Business (G2B) service delivery and multi-channel communication and transac-
tions. By having an adequate and necessary infrastructure for IT development 
and sustainability, the Republic of Korea established a world-class transparent 
and efficient online presence and an equally impressive e-mobile presence, both 
of which serve to maintain its vanguard position and help develop more citizen-
centric strategies and projects in e-governance in the future.
Singapore, which ranked second in Asia, has shown significant improvement over 
the last two years, jumping from 10th place globally to 3rd, followed by Japan with 
improvement from 18th to 6th ranking globally. Bahrain, Kazakhstan, Saudi Arabia 
and Oman improved in the global rankings with 18th, 28th, 36th and 48th places re-
spectively. Six out of the top 10 countries in the Asian region itself are in Western 
Asia where most of the improvements have been witnessed; two of the top 10 
countries are in Eastern Asia, one in South-Eastern Asia and one in Central Asia 
as Kazakhstan remained that sub-region’s leader in e-government.
Countries in Eastern Asia in general rank higher than the world average for 
various reasons such as e-government leadership, inclusive e-participation poli-
cies, broad-ranging e-services and extensive open government data portals. 
The Republic of Korea and Japan have exhibited an upward trend in e-govern-
ment, enabled primarily by their developed infrastructure, their high literacy 
rates—especially IT literacy—and their developed economies. The Government 
of Japan established the New IT Reform Strategy with the goal of reducing 
the percentage of national and local government paperwork, such as applica-
tions and form submissions performed online, to at least 50 per cent by 2010. 
Thus, this initiative allowed almost all applications and other forms used by the 
national government to be submitted online, accompanied by a dissemination 
strategy to inform the public about such e-services. The Japanese government 
also expanded this strategy to include transactions between the local and na-
tional governments and businesses.13
Ranked 6th in Asia in general and first in Central Asia, Kazakhstan is the only 
country in Central Asia to show improvements between 2012 and 2014; jumping 
from a global ranking of 38th in 2012, to 28th in 2014. Uzbekistan came in second 
 28 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
place but dropped from 91st place to 100th globally. This decline in ranking in all 
Central Asian countries, with the exception of Kazakhstan, has been a trend in 
the sub-region since 2008; it could be attributed to insufficient development of 
telecommunication infrastructure and online presence.
Sri Lanka ranks first in Southern Asia, with the Maldives ranking in second posi-
tion. The Sri Lankan government has made a substantial effort to develop its 
online portal which now ranks 74th in the world. The online portal offers A-Z 
government web indexes, 108 e-services for citizens, 51 e-services for businesses 
and 10 non-residence related e-services. The portal also offers extensive mobile 
and SMS services, an e-participation portal, government forms easily accessible 
online, a developed open data portal with data available in various formats, as 
well as a whole-of-government strategy (see Box 1.4).
Table 1.5. Top 20 countries in Asia
Country Level of Income EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank
Change 
in Rank
Very High EGDI
Republic of Korea High 0.9462 1 1 -
Singapore High 0.9076 3 10 	 7
Japan High 0.8874 6 18 	12
Israel High 0.8162 17 16 	 1
Bahrain High 0.8089 18 36 	18
High EGDI
Kazakhstan Upper Middle 0.7283 28 38 	10
United Arab Emirates High 0.7136 32 28 	 4
Saudi Arabia High 0.6900 36 41 	 5
Qatar High 0.6362 44 48 	 4
Oman High 0.6273 48 64 	16
Kuwait High 0.6268 49 63 	14
Malaysia Upper Middle 0.6115 52 40 	12
Georgia Lower Middle 0.6047 56 72 	16
Cyprus High 0.5958 58 45 	13
Armenia Lower Middle 0.5897 61 94 	33
Mongolia Lower Middle 0.5581 65 76 	11
Azerbaijan Upper Middle 0.5472 68 96 	28
China Upper Middle 0.5450 70 78 	 8
Turkey Upper Middle 0.5443 71 80 	 9
Sri Lanka Lower Middle 0.5418 74 115 	41
Regional Average 0.4951
world Average 0.4712
   29 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The e-government leader in South-Eastern Asia remains Singapore. Singapore’s 
small population and land area, accompanied by a very high HDI of 0.89514 and 
high GNI per capita (U.S. $47,210)15—allow the government sufficient resources to 
develop its online portal and offer its citizens, businesses and visitors, advanced 
e-services and extensive information; thus creating a one-stop-shop service de-
livery portal. Additionally, the high mobile and smartphone penetration rate in 
Singapore enables the government to provide e-access to citizens through a 
seamless “mGovernment” application, allowing faster, easier and more conveni-
ent use of available online resources; especially accessing forms and conducting 
G2C and G2B transactions.
Singapore has also developed a multi-agency programme led by the Ministry 
of Finance called ACE (Alliance for Corporate Excellence), grouping together 
systems and operation environments for human resources, finance and procure-
ment into a common shared system. This enables government entities to share 
knowledge, data and best practices in a more straightforward and timely way, 
thus creating a cost-efficient G2G interactive flow that produces economic ben-
efits. The financial and human cost savings of the ACE programme will not only 
benefit the government, but also citizens, by providing time-efficient and cost-
saving services that are only possible with appropriate IT development.
Israel ranks 17th globally and 1st in Western Asia. The Israeli government portal 
offers services geared towards citizens, the private sector and tourists wishing to 
visit the country, as well as students and members of the Jewish Diaspora. The 
portal also offers online forms and a forum for G2C and C2G interaction and dis-
cussions; many online payments can be made through the portal and a section 
teaching simple Hebrew phrases can be found on the main page.
box 1.4. Sri lanka’s One for All
Sri Lanka’s e-government policies have been geared towards including all seg-
ments of the population and offering services to everyone, regardless of their 
IT literacy levels or access to the internet. With mobile usage rates in the coun-
try exceeding 100 per cent and even the poorest people today having cell 
phones, albeit basic, Sri Lanka offers many m-government services.
The Government Information Center (GIC) is now providing more than 65 on-
line services through basic phones calls, such as train schedules, job oppor-
tunities abroad, flight schedules, exam results, economic indicators, medical 
services and contact details.
Even though the IT literacy rates jumped from 9.7 per cent in 2004 to 40 per 
cent in 2012, the numbers are still not high enough to allow maximum utiliza-
tion of the e-services the government provides. With the GIC, all-inclusive e-
services can be delivered to the rich and poor alike and hence everyone can 
become a beneficiary of the digital advancement in government.
This new policy of inclusiveness and outreach towards the general population 
helped Sri Lanka improve in e-government service delivery and to jump from 
115th rank in EGDI in 2012 to 74th in 2014.
Source: http://www.gic.gov.
lk/
 30 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Within the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, Bahrain ranks 18th glob-
ally, followed by the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Oman. 
Bahrain has set-up a Supreme Committee for Information and Communication 
Technology (SCICT) and the e-Government Authority was established to pro-
vide direction in developing and implementing a comprehensive e-Govern-
ment strategy.16 The country also held the Bahrain International e-Government 
Forum in Manama in April 2013, dealing with innovation and open data, mobile 
trends, cloud computing and shared services, social networks and e-Govern-
ment.17
All six GCC countries rank within the top 10 in Western Asia, due to their high 
GDP, high literacy rates, small populations and a keen desire by their respective 
governments to invest in and develop their online national portals, and subse-
quently offer their citizens advanced e-services and information accessible in an 
effortless way. All members of the GCC have their online portals linked to one 
another, allowing their citizens easier navigation and access. This new initiative 
will stimulate the public sector to deliver more transparent and high-efficiency 
services, hence adopting a citizen-centric approach with the needs of the citizen, 
as a client, in the forefront.
The six GCC countries have established a GCC e-Government committee and 
organized the GCC e-Government Conference, providing a platform for the 
leaders to discuss the various aspects of the e-Government programmes in their 
countries, to share and benefit from each other’s experience and enhance their 
respective e-Transformation processes. Their common goal is to enhance their 
e-Services, increase the productivity and efficiency of government and improve 
their ranking in the global e-Government Surveys18 (see Table 1.6).
Table 1.6.  E-government development of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Country Name Organization EGDI 2014
2014 
Rank
2012 
Rank
Change 
in Rank
Very High EGDI
Bahrain GCC Member 0.8089 18 36 	18
High EGDI
United Arab Emirates GCC Member 0.7136 32 28 	 4
Saudi Arabia GCC Member 0.6900 36 41 	 5
Qatar GCC Member 0.6362 44 48 	 4
Oman GCC Member 0.6273 48 64 	16
Kuwait GCC Member 0.6268 49 63 	14
Regional Average 0.6838
world Average 0.4712
   31 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
1.3.4. Europe
Europe continues to be the global leader in e-government development. How-
ever, in the previous ranking seven out of top ten countries were European, this 
time four European countries are in the top ten (see Table 1.7). Nevertheless, 11 
out of the top 20 countries and 26 out of the top 40 countries are European. The 
on-going financial crisis, low growth, unemployment and aging population has 
led Europe to actively seek innovative solutions in order to remain competitive, 
restore growth and to be able to continue to offer a wide-range of public services 
to citizens. Despite the challenging times, the majority of the governments in the 
region report that the crisis has not had an impact on their level of e-government 
spending with some like Estonia, Germany, the Netherlands, Slovakia, Slovenia 
and Switzerland having even increased their e-government investments. This can 
be attributed to their support for e-government implementation as a key strate-
gic tool to achieve wider public governance goals that support economic recov-
ery and serve citizens.
Table 1.7. Top 20 countries in Europe
Country Level of Income EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank
Change 
in Rank
Very High EGDI
France High 0.8938 4 6 	 2
Netherlands High 0.8897 5 2 	 3
United Kingdom High 0.8695 8 3 	 5
Finland High 0.8449 10 9 	 1
Spain High 0.8410 12 23 	11
Norway High 0.8357 13 8 	 5
Sweden High 0.8225 14 7 	 7
Estonia High 0.8180 15 20 	 5
Denmark High 0.8162 16 4 	12
Iceland High 0.7970 19 22 	 3
Austria High 0.7912 20 21 	 1
Germany High 0.7864 21 17 	 4
Ireland High 0.7810 22 34 	12
Italy High 0.7593 23 32 	 9
Luxembourg High 0.7591 24 19 	 5
Belgium High 0.7564 25 24 	 1
High EGDI
Russian Federation High 0.7296 27 27 -
Lithuania High 0.7271 29 29 -
Switzerland High 0.7267 30 15 	15
Latvia High 0.7178 31 42 	11
Regional Average 0.6936
world Average 0.4712
 32 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
E-government and online service delivery are increasingly seen in the region as 
a means to reduce costs while providing better and more user-friendly services 
to citizens and businesses, as well as being a part of the governments’ efforts 
to go green. There is a renewed focus on the impact and cost-effectiveness of 
e-government in the region with countries such as the United Kingdom, the 
Netherlands and Denmark having implemented ambitious e-government ef-
ficiency and effectiveness programmes. The United Kingdom has embarked 
on a number of high profile initiatives to reduce the upfront expenditure on e-
government whilst increasing its impact. The country makes ‘digital efficiency’ 
calculations and has established a Government Digital Service, a new team 
within the Cabinet Office tasked with transforming government digital services 
through an investment of US $113 million per year to be offset by multiple sav-
ings, such as saving US $5.9 billion by cutting the costs of paying work and 
pension benefits online. The Netherlands has already met the ambitious goal it 
set in 2004 to reduce the country’s overall administrative costs by 25 per cent 
and is aiming for a further overall government saving of US $1.8 billion by 2018 
through an e-government enabled whole-of-government approach. An impor-
tant element of the e-government programme of the Netherlands is the Digital 
by Default strategy designed to move as many services to citizens and busi-
nesses as possible online. The Digital by Default approach was also adopted 
by the United Kingdom in its Government Digital Strategy 2012 and is guided 
by the principle of redesigning online services to make them more direct and 
convenient for all citizens.19
At the regional level, Europe focuses its e-government efforts to tackle the finan-
cial crisis through the European Commission’s Digital Agenda for Europe (DAE) 
and the eGovernment Action Plan 2015. The e-government strategies of the 28 
European Union (EU) Member States, as well as to some extent those of non-
Member States in the region, are influenced by the DAE pillars of the digital 
single market, interoperability and standards, trust and security, fast and ultra-
fast Internet access, research and innovation, enhancing digital literacy, skills and 
inclusion and ICT-enabled benefits for EU society, as well as seven additional key 
areas unveiled at the end of 2012. The success of the DAE and the Action Plan 
(see Box 1.5) can be attributed to a long-term approach to e-government devel-
opment, embedding it into wider socio-economic development frameworks and 
not seeing e-government as a stand-alone nor primarily technical activity. Also 
important is the voluntary commitment of the EU countries to work together in 
a mutually supportive form of cooperative competition in moving towards com-
mon goals through the Open Method of Coordination approach. With their fo-
cused e-government efforts through the DAE and the Action Plan, the EU coun-
tries rank high in the e-Government Development Index with 15 countries out of 
the 28 EU countries being in the global top 30 (see Table 1.8).
As a pioneer of e-government, the usage of online services in the EU is relatively 
high. The target for the EU as set out in the DAE is that 50 per cent of the adult 
population will be using e-government services by 2015. This goal is well on its 
way to being achieved with 46 per cent of EU citizens reporting their use of on-
line public services, citing flexibility, saving time and money and simplification as 
the main benefits. 
   33 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The concerted and holistic efforts of Europe at both regional and national levels 
have helped to consolidate the position of Europe as the global leader in e-
government. While there is some shifting in the ranking within the region, North-
ern and Western Europe continue to take the lead with seven countries out of 
the global top 20 being from Northern Europe and two out of the global top 
five being from Western Europe, while countries in other sub-regions have also 
made significant improvements. All the five Nordic countries (Finland, Sweden, 
Norway, Denmark and Iceland) are in the global top 20 and seven out of the top 
ten regional performers are from Northern Europe. Spain has made significant 
gains, improving its position from 23rd to 12th in the global ranking and from 
15th to 5th in the European ranking. This improvement is the result of long-term 
e-government planning. In 2005, the country unveiled the Plan Avanza, its first 
information society strategy and in 2010 Plan Avanza 2 was launched aimed at 
positioning Spain as a leader in the use of advanced ICT products and services.20 
Other countries that made significant progress include Ireland that went up from 
34th to 22nd in the global ranking, Italy from 32nd to 23rd (see Box 1.6), Latvia from 
42nd to 31st, Montenegro from 57th to 45th and Belarus from 61st to 55th.
box 1.5.  Digital Agenda for Europe and the European e-Government 
Action Plan
In 2010 the two main pillars of Europe’s e-government strategy were launched 
with the Digital Agenda for Europe (DAE) and the 2011–2015 eGovernment 
Action Plan. The DAE is an integral part of the Europe 2020 Strategy to 
achieve smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. The aim of the DAE is to 
help reboot Europe’s economy and to ensure that citizens and businesses 
get the most out of digital technologies. One of the priority areas of the DAE 
is ICT-enabled benefits for society including e-government. The DAE also 
provides a Digital Agenda Scoreboard for progress assessment at EU and 
national levels in achieving the 78 Digital Agenda actions set for the Euro-
pean Commission and 23 actions for the countries. The closely linked eGov-
ernment Action Plan identifies four priorities that e-government should sup-
port, namely empowerment of citizens and businesses, further construction 
of Europe’s digital single market, efficiency and effectiveness of government 
and implementation of the above through key enablers and the necessary le-
gal and technical preconditions including interoperability. The impact of the 
DAE and the Action Plan has been significant with the majority of the over 
thirty countries participating -EU Member States as well as other European 
countries—having achieved success in meeting the requirements and goals 
and with strong support for the overall process. It is estimated that the full 
implementation of the DAE would increase GDP in Europe by 5 per cent, or 
by 1500€ per person over the next eight years by increasing investment in 
ICT, improving eSkills levels of the labour force, enabling public sector inno-
vation and by reforming the framework conditions for the internet economy. 
In terms of jobs, up to one million digital jobs risk going unfilled by 2015 
without pan-European action while 1.2 million jobs could be created through 
infrastructure construction.
Source: European Com-
mission, Digital Agenda for 
Europe 
http://ec.europa.eu/digital-
agenda/
 34 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Ireland launched its Public Service Reform Plan in 2011. The Plan highlights the 
role of ICT as a key enabler in delivering better public services and with a strong 
e-government element. Its eGovernment 2012–2015 policy document sets out a 
vision that places the user at the centre of eGovernment policy and introduces a 
new approach to transform how citizens and businesses engage with the state and 
reduces the costs of public service delivery.21 As with many other countries in the 
region that have improved their ranking significantly, Montenegro has also directed 
its efforts to e-government. At the end of 2011, the country launched its Strategy 
for the Development of the Information Society 2012–2016 and has inaugurated 
several e-government initiatives, including a business licensing e-registry portal.
Table 1.8. E-government development in the European Union (EU) Member States
Country Sub-Region EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank Change in Rank
Very High EGDI
France Western Europe 0.8938 4 6 	 2
Netherlands Western Europe 0.8897 5 2 	 3
United Kingdom Northern Europe 0.8695 8 3 	 5
Finland Northern Europe 0.8449 10 9 	 1
Spain Southern Europe 0.8410 12 23 	11
Sweden Northern Europe 0.8225 14 7 	 7
Estonia Northern Europe 0.8180 15 20 	 5
Denmark Northern Europe 0.8162 16 4 	12
Austria Western Europe 0.7912 20 21 	 1
Germany Western Europe 0.7864 21 17 	 4
Ireland Northern Europe 0.7810 22 34 	12
Italy Southern Europe 0.7593 23 32 	 9
Luxembourg Western Europe 0.7591 24 19 	 5
Belgium Western Europe 0.7564 25 24 	 1
High EGDI
Lithuania Northern Europe 0.7271 29 29 -
Latvia Northern Europe 0.7178 31 42 	11
Greece Southern Europe 0.7118 34 37 	 3
Portugal Southern Europe 0.6900 37 33 	 4
Hungary Eastern Europe 0.6637 39 31 	 8
Malta Southern Europe 0.6518 40 35 	 5
Slovenia Southern Europe 0.6506 41 25 	16
Poland Eastern Europe 0.6482 42 47 	 5
Croatia Southern Europe 0.6282 47 30 	17
Slovakia Eastern Europe 0.6148 51 53 	 2
Czech Republic Eastern Europe 0.6070 53 46 	 7
Cyprus Western Asia 0.5958 58 45 	13
Romania Eastern Europe 0.5632 64 62 	 2
Bulgaria Eastern Europe 0.5421 73 60 	13
EU Average 0.7300
Regional Average 0.6936
world Average 0.4712
   35 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A typical feature of European e-government strategies is to provide distinct por-
tals on government information and on online services for citizens. Increasingly, 
countries in the region are also providing portals on open government data and 
e-participation as well as for businesses. This increases the number of ‘core’ e-
government websites per country to a handful, moving beyond the idea of single 
‘one-stop-shop’ portals. This approach helps to provide more targeted, while 
connected and user-friendly portals to different users, with the amount of infor-
mation and services made available by governments increasing continuously.
Europe should continue its efforts to make online services ever more user-centric, 
while ensuring that those who cannot use online services are not excluded and 
also fully embrace the opportunities of e-participation. The experience of some 
of the top performing countries in the region, as well as the countries that have 
improved their ranking significantly, shows that long-term and holistic strategic 
planning in e-government brings about tangible results. The lesson that can be 
learnt from the region as a whole is that embedding e-government in wider so-
cio-economic development frameworks is crucial to successful e-government.
1.3.5. Oceania
Australia and New Zealand still lead the region with high EGDI scores of 0.9103 
and 0.8644 respectively. Australia and New Zealand also are more economically 
advanced as developed countries; whereas the rest of the islands in the region 
have smaller economies, populations and land mass; and thus have fewer re-
sources. The majority of the other countries in the region, with the exception of 
Fiji and Tonga, are in the range of 108th (Palau) to 188th (Papua New Guinea) in 
global ranking. Australia and New Zealand also scored very high on the TII and 
HCI, both approaching the maximum normalized score of 1 (see Table 1.9).
box 1.6. Italy: compass of Transparency
The demand for transparency in public administration has been growing expo-
nentially in Italy. Under new laws introduced since 2009, the website of every 
public administration is now the main vehicle of transparency. To date there are 
42 typologies of different information and data that should be present by law 
on public administration websites (e.g. balance sheets, consultants, data about 
executives, performance plans, complete information about the organizational 
structure and the services provided to citizens). The ‘Compass of Transparency’ 
(La Bussola della Trasparenza), launched in 2012, is an online portal that gives 
the citizens the possibility to automatically analyze and monitor, in real time, 
the implementation of all the data and information requirements imposed by 
Italian law on the websites of public administrations. The core of the system is 
an engine that, through many software sensors and mathematic algorithms, au-
tomatically analyzes the websites in real-time or periodically. The engine verifies 
the presence of the contents that must be legally published on the homepage 
and on the internal pages of more than 10,000 administration websites.
Source: Government of Ita-
ly, Ministry of Public Admin-
istration and Simplification, 
http://www.magellanopa.it/
bussola/page/overview.html
 36 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The Australian e-government portal offers an extensive A to Z list of e-services 
and forms, both at the federal and local levels, as well as connections to national, 
local and regional government websites. The portal also offers a section for start-
ing a career or looking for a job online; as well as information on starting a busi-
ness in Australia.
The portal of New Zealand is a one-stop-shop offering the same connected ser-
vices as Australia, as well as an up to date e-participation section where citizens 
can send inquiries, issues of concern, or a submission on a bill to the government. 
Additionally, the portal offers citizens an e-consultation page on issues such as 
transport planning and development, workplace safety, educational matters, the 
environment, health and business.
1.4. Country groups
Least Developed Countries (LDCs), Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and 
Land Locked Developing Countries (LLDCs) face many common economic, social 
and environmental challenges, including special vulnerability to economic crisis 
and natural disasters. E-government can help to address many of these chal-
lenges, including providing greater access to public services, especially for the 
most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, by enhancing disaster risk reduction 
Table 1.9. Countries in Oceania sorted by EGDI ranking
Country Level of Income EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank
Change 
in Rank
Very High EGDI
Australia High 0.9103 2 12 	10
New Zealand High 0.8644 9 13 	 4
High EGDI
Fiji Upper Middle 0.5044 85 105 	20
Middle EGDI
Tonga Upper Middle 0.4706 98 111 	13
Palau Upper Middle 0.4415 108 113 	 5
Samoa Upper Middle 0.4204 111 114 	 3
Micronesia 
(Federated States of)
Upper Middle 0.3337 130 127 	 3
Kiribati Upper Middle 0.3201 132 149 	17
Tuvalu Upper Middle 0.3059 137 134 	 3
Marshall Islands Upper Middle 0.2851 142 146 	 4
Nauru Upper Middle 0.2776 145 141 	 4
Vanuatu Lower Middle 0.2571 159 135 	24
Low EGDI
Solomon Islands Lower Middle 0.2087 170 168 	 2
Papua New Guinea Lower Middle 0.1203 188 177 	11
Regional Average 0.4086
world Average 0.4712
   37 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
and enabling greater government efficiency and transparency to ensure more ef-
fective use of limited resources.
In general, the countries in these groups are among the lowest in the global 
e-government ranking, with each group’s average falling far below the global 
EGDI average of 0.4712. Out of the total of 92 countries in the three groups, 
16 countries are both Least Developed and Land-Locked Developing Countries, 
and 9 are both Least Developed and Small Island Developing States. Mostly, 
SIDS rank highest within the three groups, with the average EGDI score of SIDS 
being 0.4069 compared to 0.3368 for LLDCs and just 0.2139 for LDCs.
The countries of these three groups stand to benefit from the good practices and 
lessons learnt from other more established e-government practices, with the pos-
sibility to avoid possible costly pitfalls and to leap frog in e-government develop-
ment. In order to ensure the full benefits of e-government in these three groups of 
countries it is essential to work towards enhanced literacy skills, a comprehensive 
government online presence and—most importantly—improved access, espe-
cially to broadband, through both national efforts and international cooperation. 
1.4.1. Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
There are 38 Small Island Developing States (SIDS) among United Nations Member 
States,22 in Asia, the Caribbean and Oceania. The SIDS face several unique eco-
nomic, social and environmental challenges due to their small size and economy, 
isolation and high cost of providing goods, services and infrastructure—including 
telecommunications—associated with small populations and geographic disper-
sion. Small island states are typically comprised of several islands scattered over a 
wide geographic area (for example the Federal States of Micronesia are comprised 
of 607 islands and the Seychelles of 115 islands) which poses unique challenges for 
governments in coordinating and delivering services. In addition, SIDS are espe-
cially vulnerable to economic crisis because of their narrow resource and export 
base and dependence on unreliable sectors such as tourism. They are also more 
exposed to the effects of climate change, such as sea-level rise and natural dis-
asters.23 The challenges faced by SIDS have intensified with the natural disasters 
associated with climate change and the lasting negative impacts of the global fi-
nancial crisis. This highlights the structural nature of the constraints of the SIDS and 
the lack of effective national and international response mechanisms. Several of 
these difficulties are amplified by the SIDS limited access to modern technologies.
As a group, the SIDS rank low in the global EGDI. Only 13 out of the 38 SIDS rank 
in the global top 100. The biggest improvers in this group are Fiji (from 105th to 
85th), Kiribati (from 149th to 132nd), Bahrain (from 36th to 18th) and Mauritius (from 
93rd to 76th). None of the ten Least Developed Countries among the SIDS rank in 
the top 10 of this group (see Table 1.10).
E-government holds the potential to address several of the issues faced by 
SIDS, for example in relation to Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) and improved 
data availability. E-government—taking advantage of mobile technology, Inter-
net, social media and space-based technologies such as Geographic Informa-
tion Systems (GIS)—can be used effectively especially in the preparedness and 
 38 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
response phases24 of DRR.25 The use of e-government and ICT-tools for DRR 
can be divided into two broad categories. The first category (phase), deals with 
forecasting, mapping and minimization of risks during a disaster, by raising 
awareness and giving access to information beforehand. The second category 
(phase), tackles risk and disaster management, during and after the emergen-
cy, by coordinating the response and rescue operations26 as was the case in 
Haiti after the 2010 earthquake (see Box 1.7). Through the use of satellite com-
munications, e-government can play an important role for those who are not 
reached by more traditional disaster preparedness programmes, such as older 
persons, people living in poverty and rural populations, which is especially im-
portant in SIDS where populations are widely dispersed.
Furthermore, mobile phones have proven to be effective for early warning sys-
tems in SIDS due to portability, high penetration and relatively low-cost. Mobile 
apps can provide critical information on natural disasters quickly to first respond-
ers, disaster victims and the population at large through text messages and al-
low citizens to submit reports of natural hazards online.27 In addition to mobile 
phones, it is important to employ other means such as libraries and kiosks with 
internet connections to reach remote islands and rural populations.
E-government is of special importance in SIDS also in relation to citizen engage-
ment and improving the livelihood of people. With e-participation, citizens in 
even the most remote and far-scattered islands can be connected to their gov-
ernment and be consulted in decision-making processes. In commerce and im-
proving the livelihood of people, ICT enabled tools such as mobile apps for fish-
ers play an important role in reducing poverty (see Box 1.8). Governments should 
ensure that authorities and agencies at all levels have adequate knowledge and 
skills to support small-scale fisheries and other trades in order to guarantee suc-
cessful co-management arrangements.
Table 1.10. Top 10 Small Island Developing States
Country Sub-Region 2014 EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank Change in Rank
Very High EGDI
Singapore South-Eastern Asia 0.9076 3 10 	 7
Bahrain Western Asia 0.8089 18 36 	18
High EGDI
Barbados Caribbean 0.5933 59 44 	15
Antigua and Barbuda Caribbean 0.5927 60 49 	11
Mauritius Eastern Africa 0.5338 76 93 	17
Grenada Caribbean 0.5220 78 75 	 3
Seychelles Eastern Africa 0.5113 81 84 	 3
Fiji Oceania 0.5044 85 105 	20
Middle EGDI
Saint Kitts and Nevis Caribbean 0.4980 90 81 	 9
Trinidad and Tobago Caribbean 0.4932 91 67 	24
SIDS Average 0.4069
world Average 0.4712
   39 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
box 1.7.  Haiti: Response and recovery with Sahana  
free and open disaster management system
The Sahana Disaster Management System, which provides modular, web-
based disaster management applications, was developed by the open source 
community in the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami in Sri Lanka. Since then, Sa-
hana has been deployed in several natural disasters around the world, includ-
ing the Haiti earthquake in 2010. The Sahana volunteer community responded 
immediately to the earthquake and set up the Sahana Haiti 2010 Earthquake 
Disaster Response Portal to provide and share information needed for the re-
lief operation. These included an organization registry to track the agencies’ 
relief efforts and to avoid duplication; a request management system where 
requests such as ‘bring water’ were made visible to the relief organizations 
and contained ticketing and tracking systems; an SMS service through which 
citizens could request assistance and information developed in partnership 
with the US State Department; a hospital management system; a food request 
portal developed in response to a request from the World Food Programme; 
a disaster victim identification registry; a shelter registry; a translation service; 
and situation mapping as well as missing persons and victim identification reg-
istries developed in partnership with Google and Yahoo. The quick response 
and collaboration between the Sahana volunteer community, governments, 
international organizations, civil society and the private sector, is a good prac-
tice of different actors coming together swiftly to help those in urgent need, 
and where the national government structures and capacities to respond to 
the disaster, were badly damaged.28
Source: http://wiki.sahana-
foundation.org/_media/
iscram_2010_sahana_haiti.
pdf
box 1.8. Trinidad and Tobago: m-fisheries
The fishery sector is vital to the economy of SIDS such as Trinidad and To-
bago, both in providing employment, particularly in rural communities and in 
enhancing the local food supply. The government of Trinidad and Tobago has 
prioritized development of the fishing industry due to its economic and social 
importance for the country with the target of making it not only competitive, 
profitable and sustainable but also equitable, inclusive and supportive of the 
local fishing communities. Barriers to fishing industry development include 
lack of training in natural resources management and in sea safety. Due to high 
mobile phone penetration in the country (86 per cent among the poor), the use 
of mobiles is identified as a highly effective tool to address the problems espe-
cially in the small scale fishing industry. Through the mFISHERIES mobile app 
users can see ‘Got Fish’ posts by local fishermen, make a request via the ‘Need 
Fish’, get quick access to wholesale market prices, access a compass and GPS 
enabled location, improve their safety through the ‘Info Zone’ with sea safety 
information and a SOS button for emergencies that automatically alerts the 
coast guard about one’s position when help is needed.
Source: mFISHERIES http://
cirp.org.tt/mfisheries/ 
 40 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Due to the coastal zone concentration in a limited land area in some of the most 
vulnerable regions of the world, the effects of climate change and sea-level ris-
ing, put the economic, social and environmental development efforts of SIDS at 
risk. The long-term effects of climate change can even threaten the existence of 
some SIDS.29 A comprehensive approach is needed to address the challenges, 
and e-government can play a key role. A holistic e-government strategy with 
strong DRR, e-participation and e-service components, such as e-health, e-edu-
cation and e-commerce can enable the governments in SIDS to work and deliver 
as one and to advance sustainable development in all its dimensions.
1.4.2. Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs)
A landlocked country is one that is entirely enclosed by land, or whose only coast-
line lies on a closed sea. There are 48 landlocked countries among the United Na-
tions Member States, 31 of which are Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs).30 
They are widely dispersed around the globe: 15 are located in Africa, 12 in Asia, 
2 in Europe and 2 in South America. The LLDCs are among the most disadvan-
taged developing countries, and 16 out of the 31 LLDCs are also Least Developed 
Countries. The economic performance of LLDCs reflects the disadvantages of 
their geography with lack of access to major shipping routes, fisheries and other 
marine resources. The LLDCs are generally the poorest countries in their region, 
with the weakest growth rates and are the most dependent on export earnings.
Generally, the LLDCS are positioned low in the global ranking with only seven 
LLDCs in the global top 100. The Asian countries dominate the list of top per-
formers within the group, with Kazakhstan taking the top position and Armenia, 
Mongolia and Azerbaijan all being in the LLDC top five (see Table 1.11). None of 
the 16 Least Developed Countries among the LLDCs are in the group top ten, 
with Rwanda ranking 12th in the group and all the others ranking in the bottom 
15 of the group. The biggest improvers among the LLDCs are Armenia (from 94th 
to 61st), Azerbaijan (from 96th to 68th), Ethiopia (from 172th to 157th) and Rwanda 
(from 140th to 125th). LLDCs have on average considerably lower e-government 
development rankings than Small Island Developing States, with EGDI averages 
of 0.3368 and 0.4069 respectively for these two groups, but higher than the Least 
Developed Countries which average at 0.2164.
Limited access to world markets is one of the most pressing constraints faced by LL-
DCs with high transport costs and dependence on passage through sovereign tran-
sit countries hampering their competitiveness. LLDCs also often rely on their neigh-
bours’ telecommunication networks as accessing the international submarine fibre 
networks would incur high administrative and infrastructure costs. Telecommunica-
tion networks are especially underdeveloped in rural areas, creating an additional 
barrier to the promotion of inclusive ICT strategies. Thus, it is not surprising that the 
Telecommunication Infrastructure Index is the weakest out of the three components 
of the E-Government Development Index for the majority of LLDCs. There are how-
ever some encouraging examples, such as Bolivia which has been successful in de-
touring its neighbours’ transit networks by building a fibre optic network across the 
country. Today Bolivia is able to take advantage of its central geographic location 
in South America and will be one of the co-owners of the fibre optic infrastructure 
mega project of the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR).
   41 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional infrastructure strategies for integration and administrative coordination 
are needed to expand LLDCs access to ICT infrastructure. Support is also required 
to develop large scale public-private, public-public and South-South partnerships 
to implement strategies for ICT development and to enhance cooperation. Even 
though infrastructure is the biggest bottleneck for e-government development in 
LLDCs, governments should not lose sight of the importance of investing in peo-
ple through education and ICT-literacy programmes, as well as enhancing their 
online presence by providing improved online services.
Table 1.11. Top 10 Landlocked Developing Countries
Country Sub-Region 2014 EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank Change in Rank
High EGDI
Kazakhstan Central Asia 0.7283 28 38 	10
Armenia Western Asia 0.5897 61 94 	33
Mongolia Eastern Asia 0.5581 65 76 	11
Republic of Moldova Eastern Europe 0.5571 66 69 	 3
Azerbaijan Western Asia 0.5472 68 96 	28
Middle EGDI
FYR Macedonia Southern Europe 0.4720 96 70 	26
Uzbekistan Central Asia 0.4695 100 91 	 9
Kyrgyzstan Central Asia 0.4657 101 99 	 2
Bolivia South America 0.4562 103 106 	 3
Botswana Southern Africa 0.4198 112 121 	 9
llDcS Average 0.3368
world Average 0.4712
box 1.9. Nepal: On the Road to the knowledge based Society
Nepal is a mountainous LLDC which suffered from a long civil war that de-
stroyed the country’s telecommunication infrastructure. The country’s ranking 
has plummeted since the first Survey from 130th in 2003 to 165th in 2014. The 
government of Nepal has been working towards a holistic e-government trans-
formation to provide better services to citizens, improve transparency and to 
work towards the knowledge based society. Eight projects were selected as 
priority for the e-government transformation: government portal, national ID, 
e-Education, infrastructure, enterprise architecture, Public Key Infrastructure, 
Integrated Data and Training Center and groupware. The country’s 2006 IT 
Policy provides a broad framework for e-government transformation with the 
aim to transform Nepal into a knowledge society that can fully harness the 
benefits of e-governance to promote good governance and advance socio-
economic development and reduce poverty by 2015. The policy is divided into 
regulatory framework, infrastructure, e-government content and applications, 
private sector participation, human resource development and organization.
Source: United Nations 
University, International 
Institute for Software 
Technology, Center for Elec-
tronic Governance, 2011, e-
Government Strategy Draft 
for Afghanistan,  
www.egov.iist.unu.edu
 42 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
In LLDCs, e-government plays an instrumental role in facilitating progress in sec-
tors such as trade and entrepreneurship through e-services, for example simpli-
fying business licensing applications and enhancing services in education and 
health, as well as promoting socially inclusive growth for all.
1.4.3. Least Developed Countries (LDCs)
There are 48 Least Developed Countries (LDCs) among United Nations Member 
States31 of which 34 are in Africa, 9 in Asia, 4 in Oceania and 1 in the Caribbean. 
This group of countries comprises more than 880 million people or about 12 per 
cent of the world population, but accounts for less than 2 per cent of the world 
GDP and about 1 per cent of global trade in goods.32 The lack of ICT infrastruc-
ture and access to modern technologies are among the major challenges facing 
the LDCs. However significant progress has been made, especially with regard to 
mobile technology in the LDCs with almost 42 per cent of people having access to 
a mobile phone in 2011, up from 33 per cent in 2010. In stark contrast, only six out 
of 100 had access to the Internet in 2011, whilst 79 per cent did not have access 
to electricity.33 Due to the much higher access to mobile phones than computers, 
m-government services such as information and notifications by SMS, m-banking 
and m-health services are of special importance in the LDCs.
E-government development remains very low in the LDCs, with the LDC EGDI 
average being 0.2121 compared to the world average of 0.4712 and with no 
countries in the top 100 of the global ranking. Rwanda is the highest ranking 
in this group at 125th, followed by Kiribati at 132nd (see Table 1.12). The biggest 
improvers among the group are Kiribati, Cambodia and Yemen (see Box 1.10), 
improving their respective rankings from 149th to 132nd, from 155th to 139th and 
from 167th to 150th in the global ranking. Another significant improver is Rwanda 
going from 140th to 125th which is in line with the overall positive development 
trend in the country.
Table 1.12. Top Least Developed Countries
Country Sub-Region SIDS LLDC EGDI 2014 Rank 2012 Rank Change in Rank
Middle EGDI
Rwanda Eastern Africa x 0.3589 125 140 	15
Kiribati Micronesia x 0.3201 132 149 	17
Tuvalu Polynesia x 0.3059 137 134 	 3
Cambodia South-Eastern Asia 0.2999 139 155 	16
Angola Middle Africa 0.2970 140 142 	 2
Bhutan Southern Asia x 0.2829 143 152 	 9
Tanzania Eastern Africa 0.2764 146 139 	 7
Bangladesh Southern Asia 0.2757 148 150 	 2
Yemen Western Asia 0.2720 150 167 	17
llDcS Average 0.2121
world Average 0.4712
   43 
C
hap
ter 1
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The challenge for e-government development in this group is the lack of tele-
communication infrastructure. The LDC Telecommunication Infrastructure Index 
average is 0.0929 compared with the world average of 0.3650. This hampers the 
ability of governments to implement e-government programmes and e-services 
as well as the adoption of any online services by citizens, even if available.35 While 
much remains to be done both in terms of e-government implementation and 
adoption among the LDCs, it is noteworthy that all the 49 countries have an on-
line presence, whereas in the previous Survey two LDCs, Central African Republic 
and Guinea, had none.
Even though LDCs have improved their basic, or emerging, online presence—
in most cases restricted to providing a limited amount of information and links 
online—they are making little or no progress in moving to the more advanced 
stages of e-government development, including the provision of e-services, 
e-participation and open government data. Without significant changes in the 
LDC’s e-government development, the distance of e-government development 
between the group and the rest of the world will increase further. The LDCs 
continue to face multiple severe socio-economic challenges and e-government 
does not top the list of the national development agenda of many of the LDCs. 
However, with insufficient investment in infrastructure and the lack of long-term 
e-government planning, these countries will lose out on the crucial benefits of 
e-government in making public administrations more cost-effective, efficient, 
citizen-centric, transparent and accountable, which play a key role in poverty 
elimination and promoting sustainable development. The governments in these 
countries should consider the benefits of e-government and online service de-
livery, especially in relation to mobile services and take necessary measures to 
box 1.10. Yemen: Reaping the benefits of long-term planning
In 2002, Yemen launched a 10-year e-government programme with a budget 
of USD 50 to 60 million which aimed to provide better access to services to 
disadvantaged groups, increasing access to telephone services and moving 
to electronic financial transactions. The Internet was introduced in Yemen in 
1996 and its usage increased gradually between 2000 and 2010, with a big 
jump in the number of Internet users from 420,000 in 2010 to 3,691,000 in 2012 
representing 14.9 per cent of the total population. Despite big improvement 
in Yemen’s e-services, the awareness and usage among the population is still 
relatively low. According to a 2013 study, 29.4 per cent of the citizens were not 
aware of e-government services, 47.6 per cent were aware but not using them 
and only 22.3 per cent reported using the services. Awareness and usage is 
also much higher among men than women. Countries such as Yemen that have 
recently made a significant investment in e-government, also need to focus 
on providing ICT-literacy training, as well as to raise awareness of the benefits 
of e-services, including through social media, to ensure high adoption and 
maximum benefits of e-governments services. As a result of ongoing improve-
ments, Yemen’s rank increased from 167 to 150 in the global ranking, between 
2012 and 2014.34
 44 
C
ha
p
te
r 
1
CHAPTER 1 • WORLD E-GOVERNMENT RANKINGS UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
establish mid and long-term e-government strategies and to improve their infra-
structure. These countries should also have the full support of the international 
community through partnerships and knowledge sharing.
In conclusion, it is even more critical for the LDCs that face multiple challenges 
with limited resources, to consider smart investments in ICT infrastructure and e-
government services which can bring about substantial returns on investment. This 
in turn will deliver multiple benefits such as better access to essential services, 
including to the most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and create savings by 
streamlining and simplifying government processes as well as enhancing account-
ability and transparency.
1.5. Conclusion
Public administration, being the cornerstone of governments’ work is essential 
for improving peoples’ lives. As illustrated in this chapter, amidst the economic, 
social and environmental challenges, e-government has continued to play an 
important role in enabling the delivery of quality public services that meet citizen 
needs and goals by transforming how the public sector works.
Considering that the EGDI is a broad relative index, caution should be taken 
against interpreting positional changes in rankings across similarly ranked coun-
tries. ‘Higher’ rankings do not necessarily mean ‘better’ or “desirable” outcomes. 
As such countries must decide the level and extent of their e- government initia-
tives based on their specific national development context.
Regardless of the complexity and diversity of countries in the world, some gen-
eral conclusions at the global and regional levels can be made. In addition to 
effective planning and deployment of e-services, governments may consider en-
hancing their ICT infrastructure and raise the level of human capital, including im-
provement of the ICT literacy of citizens, to make use of the new technologies so 
as to realize the full benefits of online and mobile services. This should go hand 
in hand with capacity development of leadership in e-government and public 
servants as facilitators of online public services.
To further increase the scope and extend the use of online services, governments 
could provide even more citizen-centric and user-friendly services putting the 
needs of citizens at the core of planning and implementation of online services 
by engaging them (citizens) in consultative processes. Furthermore, countries 
may explore avenues to strengthen regional and global cooperation mechanisms 
with a view to facilitate national development goals, thus encouraging coherence 
and coordination among countries.
Nevertheless, in all regions there are outstanding stories which show countries 
overcoming obstacles and resource constraints to achieve improvements in lev-
eraging e-government to achieve national development objectives.
In this chapter:
Chapter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
2.1. Introduction 45
2.1.1. How online services are measured 45
2.1.2. What’s new in 2014? 46
2.2. Global analysis 46
2.2.1. Overall results 46
2.3. Leading countries by income group 53
2.4. Conclusion 58
Progress in online 
service delivery
2.1. Introduction
Continuing the presentation and analysis of the world e-
government rankings, this chapter reports on global pro-
gress in online service delivery as evidenced by the 2014 
United Nations E-Government Survey data and considers 
factors that may be helping or hindering the roll-out of 
e-services at the national level. The analysis attempts to 
shed light on the meaning behind the numbers by high-
lighting successful strategies and discussing some com-
mon challenges and barriers to achieving an efficient and 
effective public administration as a condition of good 
governance.
2.1.1. How online services are measured
The online services component of the E-Government De-
velopment Index (EGDI) is a composite indicator meas-
uring the use of ICT by governments to deliver public 
services at national level. It is based on a comprehensive 
Survey of the online presence of all 193 United Nations 
Member States. The Survey assesses the technical fea-
tures of national websites as well as e-government poli-
cies and strategies applied in general and by specific sec-
tors for delivery of services.
The results are tabulated and presented as a set of stand-
ardized index values on a scale from zero to one, one cor-
responding to the highest rated online services and zero 
to the lowest. As with the EGDI itself described in chapter 
1, the index values are not intended as absolute meas-
urements. Rather, they capture the online performance 
of countries relative to one another at a particular point 
in time. Because the index is a comparative tool, a high 
score is an indication of best current practice rather than 
perfection. Similarly a very low score, or a score that has 
not changed since the last edition in 2012, does not mean 
there has been no progress in e-government develop-
ment. The distance between scores conveys the gap in 
online service delivery.
 46 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
As outlined in Chapter 1, the Survey instrument assumes a general four-stage 
model of online service development where stage 1 corresponds to emerging in-
formation services, stage 2 to enhanced information services, stage 3 to transac-
tional services and stage 4 to connected services. Each stage demands a higher 
level of sophistication and, often, increased commitment of resources. In assess-
ing progress, a rough balance of basic and advanced website features is sought 
as well as evidence of the institutional and strategic foundations of a national e-
government programme. A detailed description of the methodology, as well as a 
country-by-country assessment for each stage of online service development, is 
provided in the accompanying statistical annex. 
2.1.2. What’s new in 2014?
While the basic model has remained consistent since the Survey was first intro-
duced, the precise components of the OSI have evolved as our understanding 
of e-government changes and the underlying technology evolves. In 2014, data 
was collected on the provision of basic e-services, attention to e-participation, 
multichannel service delivery, expanding usage, adoption of open data initia-
tives, whole-of-government and bridging digital divides that may exist within and 
between countries. 
Of particular note in this Survey round was an increased emphasis on e-partici-
pation features and evidence of open data initiatives on national websites given 
evolving expectations about transparency and participation in public affairs. The 
provision of environmental e-information was also added to the basket of ba-
sic online services assessed—alongside education, health, finance, labour and 
social welfare functions—given current attention to questions of environmental 
stewardship in the global picture of the future we want. As technology evolves 
and countries make progress, goals are also set higher and the Survey is adjusted 
accordingly.
2.2. Global analysis
2.2.1. Overall results
France ranks first in online service delivery in 2014, followed closely by Singapore 
and the Republic of Korea. These countries stand out, among other things, for 
their integration of e-services, expanded roll-out of mobile applications and pro-
vision of opportunities for e-participation. Spain (tied at 4th), Uruguay (14th), New 
Zealand (15th) and Chile (16th) have all made their way into the top twenty of 2014, 
pushing ahead of former 2012 leaders Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Malaysia.
As in 2012, the 2014 results show the reappearance of Bahrain (7th), the United 
Arab Emirates (12th) and Saudi Arabia (tied at 18th) among the frontrunners. All 
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, these countries have managed to re-
main in step with counterparts in other regions, typically OECD member coun-
tries, through high-level attention to e-government development and the benefits 
of the wider Information Society. A full list of the top twenty countries in online 
service delivery together with Online Service Index values is given in Table 2.1.
   47 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 2.1. Top 20 countries in online service delivery
Country Online Service Index
France 1.0000
Singapore 0.9921
Republic of Korea 0.9764
Japan 0.9449
Spain 0.9449
United States 0.9449
Bahrain 0.9370
Australia 0.9291
Netherlands 0.9291
Canada 0.9134
United Kingdom 0.8976
United Arab Emirates 0.8819
Israel 0.8740
Uruguay 0.8504
New Zealand 0.8425
Chile 0.8189
Colombia 0.7874
Estonia 0.7717
Finland 0.7717
Saudi Arabia 0.7717
box 2.1.  france public service—commitment to continuous improvement
Taking the top place in the 2014 Online Service Index, France scores well across 
all practice areas and stages of online service development due to ongoing ac-
tion to improve the quality of public services, integrate governmental websites 
and encourage consultation with citizens on both public policy and service 
delivery methods. The official website of the national administration (service-
public.fr) directs individuals, businesses and associations to relevant services 
by event as well as by subject, invites ideas about administrative simplification, 
connects citizens with current debates and consultations and facilitates inter-
action with government through single sign-on.
A leader in the field, France has also committed to further expanding online 
public service delivery while containing costs by reviewing free alternatives to 
commercial ICT infrastructure and applications in a systematic fashion and ex-
panding the use of open source software. The new policy, introduced in 2012, 
aims to lower ICT expenditures and improve agility while encouraging innova-
tion and engagement of other actors, such as local authorities and developer 
communities, in e-service co-production.1
Source: http://circu-
laire.legifrance.gouv.fr/
pdf/2012/09/cir_35837.pdf. 
Accessed 29 October 2013.
 48 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Continuing the trend towards greater levels of online connectivity since 2003, 
all 193 Member States now have websites as shown in Figure 2.1. This includes 
the Central African Republic, Guinea and Libya, which had no national website in 
2012 and is a reflection both of evolving expectations on the part of increasingly 
connected citizens and the enhanced capacity of governments to utilize ICT in 
addressing public service needs.
Figure 2.2 shows a large number of countries at lower levels of online service 
development, highlighting the relative difficulty in supplying transactional and 
connected services—as described by the Survey’s four-stage model. The world 
mean Online Service Index value is 0.3919, far below what might be considered 
indicative of global convergence with the leading countries in this field.
Similarly, the small proportion of high scores in the Online Service Index, for 
example in the range of 0.7 and above, suggests that some governments with 
access to more advanced telecommunication infrastructures may be able to 
Figure 2.1.  Percentage of United Nations Member States with no online presence, 
2003–2014
Figure 2.2. Distribution of Online Service Index values
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%Percentage
of countries
2003 2004 2005 2008 2010 2012 2014
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2014201220102008200520042003
91%
9%
93%
7%
94%
6%
100%98% 98% 98%
2% 2% 2% 0%
Countries
with no online presence
Countries
with online presence
0
5
10
15
20
0.
05 0.
1
0.
15 0.
2
0.
25 0.
3
0.
35 0.
4
0.
45 0.
5
0.
55 0.
6
0.
65 0.
7
0.
75 0.
8
0.
85 0.
9
0.
95
1
N
um
b
er
 o
f c
ou
nt
rie
s
Online Service Index
   49 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
leverage existing technology more fully in public service delivery, especially in 
cases where human capital is high. To illustrate, consider on the one hand the 
case of Croatia that is well advanced in human capital and telecommunication 
infrastructure, but has an Online Service Index that is less than 0.5. On the oth-
er hand, consider Uruguay which has the same size and similar income levels to 
those of Croatia, as well as similar HCI and TII, but has invested more in online 
services, which is reflected in its OSI (0.8504) as shown in Figure 2.3. This shows 
that Croatia has great potential to improve its online services.
Progress can be attributed to differences in national conditions and policies. 
While the Survey, in general terms, embodies a model of progressive develop-
ment, in fact ICT take-up in government does not necessarily follow a straight 
path. Countries may invest in any or all stages of e-government development to 
varying degrees. For example, the Netherlands (tied at 8th place in online ser-
vices), scores 100 per cent in stage 1, 75 per cent in stage 2, 70 per cent in stage 
3, then rises again to 88 per cent in stage 4 with an overall score of 82 per cent. 
Japan on the other hand (tied at 4th place in online services) scores 97 per cent in 
stage 1, 73 per cent in stage 2, rises to 79 per cent in stage 3 and then to 88 per 
cent in stage 4 with an overall score of 83 per cent (see Table 2.2).
Only a few countries have developed a high number of transactional services 
online. Whereas globally the mean scores in stages 1, 2 and 4 are 64 per cent, 
40 per cent and 27 per cent respectively, in stage 3 the mean score is 22 per 
cent (see Annexes—Table 10. Online Service Index and its components). This 
gap may be due to the inherent challenges of ensuring robust online security, 
identity management, payment systems and channel coordination. Citizens may 
also simply prefer face-to-face or assisted interaction when applying for ben-
efits, permits or otherwise engaging with institutions on personal matters. Such 
constraints and preferences would normally be considered in service design by 
line ministries resulting in a greater emphasis on the information-sharing, inquiry 
and consultation features more indicative of stages 1, 2 and 4 (see Figure A.4 in 
Survey Methodology). A country that has made an exemplary commitment to 
provision of transactional services is New Zealand (see Box 2.2).
Figure 2.3. Croatia and Uruguay in comparison
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
OSI
TCIHCI 
Croatia
Uruguay
 50 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Turning to availability of basic usability features as summarized in Table 2.3, a 
large majority of countries—87 per cent or 168 out of 193 countries—provide 
users with a search tool to locate content while only 77 per cent of national 
governments (148 countries) had updated their home page in the past three 
Table 2.2. Extent of e-service delivery stages in selected countries
Country
Stage 1 
Emerging 
presence
Stage 2 
Enhanced 
presence
Stage 3 
Transactional 
presence
Stage 4 
Networked 
presence Total
67%–100%
Japan 97 73 79 88 83
Netherlands 100 75 70 88 82
New Zealand 97 66 84 53 75
Estonia 100 66 56 59 69
Saudi Arabia 94 68 63 53 69
34%–66%
Russian Federation 91 77 51 35 63
Costa Rica 94 55 37 44 56
Jordan 91 41 21 50 48
South Africa 75 43 12 24 37
Indonesia 69 34 9 35 35
0%–33%
Senegal 78 32 5 15 30
Kyrgyzstan 81 27 2 9 27
Saint Lucia 44 32 14 12 25
Zambia 47 16 0 9 16
Vanuatu 34 5 5 6 11
box 2.2.  New Zealand—online transactional services at the forefront 
of government transformation
New Zealand’s public service has committed to offering easy access to govern-
ment services in an online environment. The Government aims to have all new 
services offered online by 2017. At the same time, it continues to recognize the 
importance of face-to-face interaction for those without Internet access.
Measures to protect personal information such as the establishment of system 
architectures that incorporate security and privacy principles, security and pri-
vacy awareness-raising with clear accountabilities through to executive levels 
and regular audit of government information systems are central components 
to the Government ICT Strategy and Action Plan to 2017 and recognized as 
paramount in building public trust in public services. Collaboration among de-
partments, supported by strong leadership in the form of a Government Chief 
Information Officer, is seen as crucial to moving transactional services online 
and has been a central plank in the national plan to transform public sector ICT.
Source: http://ict.govt.nz/
assets/Uploads/Govern-
ment-ICT-Strategy-and-
Action-Plan-to-2017.pdf
   51 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
months. Ease of use was further supported by access to content in more than 
one language in 74 per cent of cases (142 countries), availability of a site map or 
index 68 per cent of the time (131 countries) and the online publication of a help 
or frequently asked questions document in 46 per cent of cases (89 countries).
The Survey shows continued effort of most countries in building and maintaining 
site-specific tools, notwithstanding the ubiquity and convenience of commercial 
search engines. There is also a growing recognition of the importance of provid-
ing content in different languages. In 2012, just over half of all countries had mul-
tilingual sites whereas according to the 2014 assessment almost three quarters 
had expanded language options in some form.
Enhanced (Stage 2) features are less common as Table 2.4 suggests. Roughly 
half of the United Nations Member States maintain an advanced search engine 
or publish a statement setting out a privacy policy in connection with the use of 
the government website. User opinion features such as tag clouds and ‘hot top-
ics’ lists could be found on only 41 per cent of websites. Less than one third of 
national portals surveyed showed availability of a secure connection.
Table 2.3. Availability of selected basic features
Number 
of countries
Per centage 
of countries
Find website using search tools 168 87%
Site updated within past three months 148 77%
Access in more than one language 142 74%
Availability of map/index 131 68%
Help/FAQ feature 89 46%
Table 2.4. Availability of selected enhanced features
Number 
of countries
Per centage 
of countries
Advanced search option 101 52%
Privacy statement 97 50%
Tag cloud or 'hot topics' 80 41%
Secure website 53 27%
Figure 2.4 provides a breakdown of typical transactional services and the num-
ber of countries for which these services could be readily identified through the 
national website. Of the transactional services included in the Survey instrument, 
the most commonly found were setting up of personal online accounts (101 coun-
tries), income tax filing (73 countries) and business registration (60 countries). An 
open-ended ‘other’ category also scored well (76 countries) reflecting a diversity 
of priorities in building and expanding online services at national level.
 52 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Insufficient Internet security may pose a barrier to the establishment of transac-
tional services (Stage 3) in some countries. This shortcoming, coupled in some 
instances with limited financial services, may be behind the fact that a majority 
of governments still do not offer services such as accepting utility payments or 
applying for permits online.
Figure 2.4. Transactional services online
Figure 2.5. Types of services online, by sector
Other online services
29Apply for a drivers license
Apply for marriage certificate
41Pay for utilities
44Apply for a birth certificate
Register a business
Create a personal account
0 20 40 60 80 100
Number of countries
76
27
33
39
40
42
46
60
73
101
Submit income taxes
Apply for environmental permits
Pay fines
Apply for social security benefits
Register a motor vehicle
Apply for a personal identity card
10 30 50 70 90 110
122
13
151
104
9
159
127
74
11
123
99
70
8
132
111
72
8
96
67
3
163
136
111
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
146
Education
85
71Health
Finance
Social Welfare
Labour
130
Environment
Other sectors
17
Number of countries
Archived information
Downloadable forms
Updates via email, RSS
Updates via SMS
   53 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
When considering e-government development in different government sectors, 
there is additional evidence of the validity of the general four-stage model of pro-
gress as shown in Figure 2.5. In all sectors reviewed—education, health, finance, 
social welfare, labour and environment—as well as in an open-ended ‘other’ cat-
egory, archived information was more readily evident than downloadable forms, 
which were more often seen than email or Really Simple Syndication (RSS) update 
features. As in 2012, there appears to be substantial underutilized potential of text-
based Short Message Service (SMS) across a range of government functions.
2.3. Leading countries by income group
Given the overall results, the question arises as to what factors might account 
for differences in levels of online service delivery. Comparing the Online Ser-
vice Index values to an array of other factors reveals that Gross National Income 
(GNI) and general investment in telecommunication infrastructure are key driv-
ers of progress in e-services.2 This is a similar result as for the EGDI as a whole 
described in Chapter 1 and is a reflection both of resources available to pursue 
e-government programmes and the effect of demand for ICT-enabled services 
from increasingly connected people and business.
Table 2.5 highlights the top countries in online service delivery, by income group. 
The leading countries in the high-income category were France (ranked 1st glob-
ally), Singapore (2nd) and the Republic of Korea (3rd). Indeed, 19 of the top 20 
countries in online service delivery can be counted among the world’s wealthi-
est economies. Within the middle-income group, Colombia comes out ahead in 
online service delivery (17th globally), followed by Kazakhstan (23rd) and Morocco 
(30th). Rwanda was found to be the leader in the low-income category in 2014 
(ranked 63rd globally), followed by Ethiopia (72nd) and Kenya (79th).
The distribution of Online Service Index values in 2014 is also indicative of differ-
ent patterns of e-government development in different economic situations. The 
current state of online service delivery among low-income countries tends to be 
rudimentary with most countries below 0.2, as seen in Figure 2.6a. Online service 
delivery in upper middle income countries follows more of a mixed pattern, peak-
ing near the 0.4 mark and tapering off strongly after 0.8, as seen in Figure 2.6c. 
High income countries are clustered at the high end of the scale with a substantial 
number scoring above 0.9 in the 2014 Online Service Index, as seen in Figure 2.6d.
Low-income countries tend to focus on information services at the emerging and 
enhanced stages of e-government development while high-income countries are 
able to add interactive features and features requiring cooperation among min-
istries, at the transactional and connected stages.
Although income is important so too are other factors. These include high-level 
political support, e-government leadership within the national administration, 
ICT infrastructure and education, as well as institutional capacity for online ser-
vice development, public accountability and citizen engagement. As Table 2.6 il-
lustrates, Rwanda, Colombia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan and Morocco, among others, 
appear to be performing well. Initiatives undertaken by these high performers, 
highlighted in the accompanying boxes, may provide valuable insights for coun-
tries at a similar income level.
 54 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 2.5. Top countries in online service delivery, by income group
Global rank
Rank within 
income group Country Online service index
High income
1 1 France 1.0000
2 2 Singapore 0.9921
3 3 Republic of Korea 0.9764
4 4 Japan 0.9449
4 4 Spain 0.9449
4 4 United States 0.9449
7 7 Bahrain 0.9370
8 8 Australia 0.9291
8 8 Netherlands 0.9291
10 10 Canada 0.9134
Middle income
17 1 Colombia 0.7874
23 2 Kazakhstan 0.7480
30 3 Morocco 0.6929
31 4 Malaysia 0.6772
35 5 Mexico 0.6614
37 6 Sri Lanka 0.6535
39 7 Tunisia 0.6378
41 8 Peru 0.6299
43 9 Armenia 0.6142
43 9 Costa Rica 0.6142
43 9 Mongolia 0.6142
Low income
63 1 Rwanda 0.5118
72 2 Ethiopia 0.4567
79 3 Kenya 0.4252
98 4 Bangladesh 0.3465
107 5 Mozambique 0.3150
110 6 Zimbabwe 0.3071
115 7 Burkina Faso 0.2992
115 7 United Republic of Tanzania 0.2992
123 9 Madagascar 0.2441
135 10 Gambia 0.2047
   55 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Figures 2.6 a–d. Distribution of Online Service Index values, by income group
a. Low income countries
b. Lower middle income countries
c. Upper middle income countries 
d. High income countries 
10
15
0.
05 0.
1
0.
15 0.
2
0.
25 0.
3
0.
35 0.
4
0.
45 0.
5
0.
55 0.
6
0.
65 0.
7
0.
75 0.
8
0.
85 0.
9
0.
95
1
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0
Online service index, 2014
5
Online service index, 2014
0.
5
10
0.
05 0.
1
0.
15 0.
2
0.
25 0.
3
0.
35 0.
4
0.
45
0.
55 0.
6
0.
65 0.
7
0.
75 0.
8
0.
85 0.
9
0.
95
1
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0
5
Online service index, 2014
0.
5
10
0.
05 0.
1
0.
15 0.
2
0.
25 0.
3
0.
35 0.
4
0.
45
0.
55 0.
6
0.
65 0.
7
0.
75 0.
8
0.
85 0.
9
0.
95
1
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0
5
Online service index, 2014
10
0.
05 0.
1
0.
15 0.
2
0.
25 0.
3
0.
35 0.
4
0.
45 0.
5
0.
55 0.
6
0.
65 0.
7
0.
75 0.
8
0.
85 0.
9
0.
95
1
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0
5
 56 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 2.6. High online service performance relative to income
Country Online Service Index Income group
Rwanda 0.5118 Low
Colombia 0.7874 Upper Middle
Ethiopia 0.4567 Low
Kazakhstan 0.7480 Upper Middle
Morocco 0.6929 Lower Middle
Kenya 0.4252 Low
Sri Lanka 0.6535 Lower Middle
Malaysia 0.6772 Upper Middle
Tunisia 0.6378 Upper Middle
Mongolia 0.6142 Lower Middle
Table 2.7. Low online service performance relative to income
Country Online Service Index Income group
Equatorial Guinea 0.0315 High
Monaco 0.2205 High
Libya 0.0157 Upper Middle
Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.1339 High
San Marino 0.2756 High
Tuvalu 0.0394 Upper Middle
Barbados 0.2205 High
Algeria 0.0787 Upper Middle
Sao Tome and Principe 0.0079 Lower Middle
Ultimately, the measure of online service utility is its impact on development ei-
ther directly in provision of services to citizens or indirectly, for example through 
investment linked to apparent ease of doing business. Low- and middle- income 
countries with relatively low levels of Internet use such as Ethiopia (1.48 per cent 
of the population are Internet users), Rwanda (8.02 per cent of the population are 
Internet users) and Sri Lanka (18.29 per cent of the population are Internet users), 
and relatively high online service scores may need to invest more in securing tel-
ecommunication infrastructure to fully optimize the benefit of e-services.
The converse also applies to high income countries with widespread telecommuni-
cation infrastructure and low online service scores such as Monaco (87.00 per cent 
of the population are Internet users), Saint Kitts and Nevis (79.35 per cent of the 
population are Internet users) and Barbados (73.33 per cent of the population are 
Internet users). These are all small countries, and it may be the case that a larger 
critical mass of Internet users, or potential users, makes it more worthwhile for 
a country to invest in resource intensive forms of online service delivery such as 
remote health care, smart energy grids and real-time environmental monitoring. 
The Survey does not, however, require such technological advancement for high 
scores reflecting the view that even relatively simple information sharing and in-
teraction can produce important benefits when the primary needs and attributes 
of population segments are reflected in online service design.
   57 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
box 2.3. Rwanda—“Our Environment Our future”
Rwanda has made development of its ICT sector a national priority as a key el-
ement of its Vision 2020 and seeks to foster economic growth while combating 
challenges of environmental degradation attributed to a growing population. 
The government maintains that ICT applications and services are essential for 
ensuring sustainable economic development and that good governance in-
cludes efficiency in deploying scarce resources and empowering communities 
through improved access to information and services.
To this end, the country has developed a land administration information sys-
tem as part of its National ICT Policy and Action Plan 2011–2015. The aim of 
the project is to substantially reduce cases of competing property ownership 
claims, the cost of land registration and time taken to produce title deeds. A 
mining portal has also been implemented and the country is embarking on a 
number of “Green ICT” initiatives to reduce electronic waste and enable ef-
ficient energy generation, consumption and distribution. Public awareness of 
the importance of environmental protection and sustainable development are 
promoted through the website of the government’s environmental manage-
ment authority and other media.3
Source: http://www.rdb.rw/
uploads/tx_sbdownloader/
NICI_III.pdf
box 2.4. colombia—fishbowl government
Colombia uses its national portal to engage stakeholders in decision-making 
as part of its "fishbowl government" policy to practice transparency at all lev-
els. The fishbowl approach embodies efforts to enhance access to information, 
provide services online, encourage citizen participation in policy-making and 
pursue anti-corruption strategies, all in the name of good government.
An online public consultation site—known as the “urna de cristal”—combined 
with ongoing coverage of current affairs, use of social media and publication 
of open data across ministries make the Colombian transparency initiative a 
standout in the region. The fishbowl policy is an integral part of the National 
Development Plan 2010–2014, intended to promote prosperity for all through 
the eight pillars of economic growth, regional development, equal opportu-
nity, innovation, peace consolidation, environmental sustainability, good gov-
ernment and international relevance.
Source: http://www.irc.gov.
co/irc/en/fiscalinformation/
National%20Develop-
ment%20Plan%202011-
2014.pdf.
box 2.5. Ethiopia—investing in the future
At 72nd place globally, Ethiopia is one of the best performing LDCs in on-
line service delivery, ahead of many wealthier countries, including a number 
of European nations. The country’s success can be traced in part to high-level 
recognition of the need to coordinate online services at national level, provide 
 58 
C
ha
p
te
r 
2
CHAPTER 2 • PROGRESS IN ONlINE SERVIcE DElIVERY UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
2.4. Conclusion
On the whole, there is a substantial variability in the scope of online service de-
livery. Differences between the highest and lowest online service scores and be-
tween the four stages of e-service development are considerable, despite pro-
gress in a number of areas. A large number of countries fall in the bottom third 
of the OSI. Improved access to telecommunication infrastructure has facilitated 
e-government development in some cases, but in general the most advanced 
countries have continued to outpace the less developed in online service delivery.
Progress in online service delivery is related to income but other factors also 
play a role. Although each country faces particular conditions and challenges, 
a strong association with GNI can be discerned in the extent of online service 
delivery as well as the type of services provided. This finding reaffirms the need 
for a close connection between online service strategies, telecommunication in-
frastructure, human capacity and other social and economic factors.
Additional investment in telecommunication infrastructure and human capacity 
may have the largest proportionate impact and presents the greatest challenge, 
at low-income levels where the scarcity of both is most pronounced. Given low 
Internet penetration rates and the continuing high cost of access, national coor-
dinating authorities in low-income countries can play a valuable role in promot-
ing efforts to establish national and regional Internet exchange points, expand 
community-level access facilities and introduce forward-looking universal service 
policies tailored to background conditions. Top political commitment to online 
service delivery as part of a national ICT strategy can be very helpful in this re-
spect, alongside consideration of public-private partnerships and other develop-
ment financing modalities.
Successful middle-income countries, while continuing to enhance leadership and 
infrastructure, have also been able to draw on investments in tertiary education 
and a strengthened ICT sector. Ready access to ICT skills can make a difference in 
online service performance at the transactional and connected stages in particu-
lar, where a range of advanced managerial and technical knowledge is needed to 
a strategic direction for e-government development in the country and allo-
cate sufficient resources. The national strategy includes provisions for citizen-
centric mechanisms for stakeholder involvement, implementation of 219 on-
line services over a five-year period from 2011–2015, tracking of indicators of 
achievement and establishment of a national e-government leadership council.
The strategy is linked to the country’s national development strategy that en-
visages a transformation from a primarily agricultural to an ICT-based econo-
my. Despite the country’s status as a low-income, landlocked, conflict-affected 
country, Ethiopia’s achievements demonstrate that a vibrant online public ad-
ministration can emerge from a combination of high-level political commit-
ment, engagement of stakeholders and a specific plan of action linking e-gov-
ernment to national sustainable development priorities.4
Source: http://www.
mcit.gov.et/documents/ 
1268465/1282796/e-G 
overnment+Strategy+Final/
ebedc221-0ec2-420d-
bd90-dfe362956751? 
version=1.0documents/ 
12684 65/1282796/e-Gov 
ernment+Strategy+Final/
ebedc221-0ec2-420d-bd90-
dfe362956751?version=1.0
   59 
C
hap
ter 2
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
oversee service integration across functions and levels of government. Partner-
ships between academic institutions in different countries in the field of e-govern-
ment, supported by government, civil society organizations and the private sec-
tor, are one way that middle-income countries may begin to reduce the skills gap.
Where high-income countries are concerned, the Survey finds an apparent trend 
towards convergence in online features with increasing commitment to expand-
ing e-participation opportunities and promoting open government data. All 
countries, including those with lower incomes, can improve online services by en-
suring high-level political support and administrative leadership and by strength-
ening institutional capacity and public accountability. Cooperative arrangements 
such as international benchmarks appear both to guide progress and hasten 
activity in priority practice areas such as those covered by the Survey.
National capacity for innovation is generally conducive to online service devel-
opment. Specifically, higher online service scores are associated with increased 
levels of online creativity in the broader economy as evidenced by WIPO’s global 
innovation index.5 Countries that have a more vibrant information society are 
better able to leverage talent and ICT services for improved e-government per-
formance. This positive connection underscores the fact that ICT policy encom-
passing telecommunication strategy, Internet governance and tertiary education 
in science, mathematics, engineering and technology can be a key driver of on-
line service expansion in public administration.

Chapter 3
In this chapter:
3.1. Introduction 61
3.1.1.
International development 
agenda and the World 
Information Society
62
3.2. Assessing e-participation: what is included in the 2014 Survey? 63
3.3. Global and regional ranking 64
3.4. Trends by levels and sectors of e-participation 66
3.4.1. E-information 67
3.4.2. E-consultation 68
3.4.3. E-decision-making 72
3.5.
The potential of e-participation 
for sustainable development: 
opportunities and challenges
72
3.5.1. Enabling environment for e-participation 72
3.5.2. Readiness for e-participation 73
3.6. Conclusion 73
E-participation
3.1.  Introduction
Governments have a duty to uphold the peoples’ right 
to participate in public governance. At the national level, 
the right to political and civic participation is often guar-
anteed in the constitution. The United Nations Public Ad-
ministration Country Studies, including a Survey of the 
constitutions of all United Nations Member States, found 
that more than 150 countries enshrine the right of citizens 
to participate in one form or another.1 
Governments also stand to benefit from engaging citi-
zens and non-state actors in public policy decision-mak-
ing and public service delivery. Given the increasingly 
interconnected systems of agricultural production and 
distribution, energy use, water and sanitation manage-
ment, financial transactions, transportation infrastructure 
and communications networks, to mention a few, govern-
ments cannot afford—financially nor technically—to find 
solutions to complex problems on their own. As issues 
overlap across national and subnational jurisdictions, ge-
opolitical and social boundaries and public and private 
institutions, governments are leveraging resources in the 
private sector and civil society to share responsibilities 
and accountabilities.
Governments are aided by modern ICTs that are trans-
forming their interface and relations with citizens. ICTs 
are enabling governments to increase their outreach to 
citizens and communities for determining their needs and 
preferences in public policies and services. Conversely, 
ICTs are empowering citizens to access public institutions 
and have their voices heard. E-participation, then, is the 
process of engaging citizens through ICTs in policy and 
decision-making in order to make public administration 
participatory, inclusive, collaborative and deliberative for 
intrinsic and instrumental ends.
E-participation expands a government’s toolbox for 
reaching out to and engaging with its people. It does not 
replace traditional forms of public participation, whether 
 62 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
through face-to-face meetings, paper-based communications, telephone calls, 
physical bulletin boards, among other offline modalities. Rather, governments 
should consider how best to reach the various social groups among its popula-
tion by deploying the optimal mix of online and offline modalities within their 
jurisdictions. This outreach should be differentiated from efforts by people to par-
ticipate in civic life, often through grassroots movements. Governments ought to 
recognize and encourage peaceful and constructive social engagement without 
attempting to take it over. In a similar vein, governments can learn to use social 
media as a tool to collect and take into account people’s views and feedback.
3.1.1.  International development agenda 
and the World Information Society
Recently, the international community has reaffirmed the value of wider public 
participation through various expressions of consensus on development. For 
instance, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration (2000), paragraph V(25), 
the General Assembly resolved to “work collectively for more inclusive political 
processes, allowing genuine participation by all citizens in all our countries,” 
among other measures. At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable De-
velopment or Rio +20, Member States declared in General Assembly Resolu-
tion 288 of 2012 entitled The Future We Want, paragraph 13: “We recognize 
that opportunities for people to influence their lives and future, participate in 
decision-making and voice their concerns are fundamental for sustainable de-
velopment.” Participation and citizen engagement are very much seen as a vital 
part of sustainable development.
At the same time, the international community also considered the potential of 
the digital revolution for bettering lives and societies at the World Summit on 
Information Society, held in 2003 and 2005. In the ensuing Tunis Agenda for 
the Information Society, United Nations Member States acknowledged in para-
graph 83 that: “Building an inclusive development-oriented Information Society 
will require unremitting multi-stakeholder effort. …” Moreover, in paragraph 30, 
they “acknowledge(d) that the Internet, a central element of the infrastructure of 
the Information Society, has evolved from a research and academic facility into a 
global facility available to the public.”
Thus the purpose and means of e-participation were defined. At the core of 
the vision of the international community, both for the Future We Want and the 
World Information Society, lies empowerment of people. The United Nations 
Commission on Social Development at its 51st Session (2013) concluded, that: 
“The empowerment and participation of all members of society in social, eco-
nomic and political life is critical to achieving sustainable development.” (para-
graph 19, E/CN.5/2013/3). The challenge of e-participation, then, is how best to 
employ ICTs to create an enabling environment for individuals and groups to be 
empowered to participate meaningfully and effectively in governance, policy, 
service development and delivery processes.
   63 
C
hap
ter 3
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
3.2.  Assessing e-participation: what is included 
in the 2014 Survey?
Although civic participation is often equated with voting in elections, public 
participation and citizen engagement extends to shaping public policies and 
determining public service delivery. Governments' efforts to promote participa-
tion can benefit from considering the various models of public participation that 
have been developed.2 These models can also serve as the basis of e-participa-
tion models.
The United Nations e-Government Survey uses a three-level model of e-par-
ticipation that moves from more “passive” to “active” engagement with peo-
ple. The model includes: 1) e-information that enables participation by provid-
ing citizens with public information and access to information upon demand, 2) 
e-consultation by engaging people in deeper contributions to and deliberation 
on public policies and services and 3) e-decision-making by empowering people 
through co-design of policy options and co-production of service components 
and delivery modalities. This model of e-participation is based on the assump-
tion that a shift from more “passive” to “active” engagement brings about true 
people empowerment, a necessary condition for sustainable development.
This model of e-participation also gives tacit acknowledgement to two trends. 
First, there is a shift in view of people from passive receivers of services to co-
creators of public value and contributors to community resilience. Second, the 
daunting challenges of sustainable development—inclusive economic growth 
that promotes full and productive employment for all while safeguarding the 
fragile biosphere and mitigating the effects of climate change—require the con-
certed action of all governance partners to produce desired outcomes.
For the 2014 Survey, the United Nations expanded the assessment of e-partic-
ipation by reviewing the quality and usefulness of e-government programs for 
the purpose of engaging people in public policy-making and implementation. In 
general, the UN E-Government Survey deals with the facilities for the three levels 
of e-participation (e-information/e-consultation/e-decision-making) rather than 
actually measuring usage.
The 2014 Survey introduced updates to the 2012 Survey questions on e-par-
ticipation as well as introduced new questions. The updates ensured that in-
formation on whether up-to-date web tools were made available or not during 
e-consultation and e-decision-making activities by government agencies could 
be assessed. New questions addressed data publishing and sharing3 by gov-
ernment agencies. Other new features and updates included the availability of 
information on the citizens’ rights to access government information, providing 
outcome on feedback received from citizens concerning the improvement of its 
online services, providing the tools in order to obtain public opinion for public 
policy deliberation through social media, online polls, petition tools, voting tools, 
online-bulletin boards and online discussion forums.
As in the past, the Survey started its assessment with the basic premise that gov-
ernments should provide archived information (e.g. policies, budget, legal docu-
 64 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
ments, etc.) on its activities. As mentioned, the Survey researchers also focused 
on the availability of government data at this stage. In later stages, the research-
ers focused on the presence of e-consultation and e-decision-making features 
regarding education, health, finance, social welfare, labour information and en-
vironment. Table 3.1 summarizes the main features assessed for e-participation.
Table 3.1. Summary of features assessed related to e-participation
 • Existence of archived information (policies, budget, legal documents etc.) 
related to education, health, finance, social welfare, labour information and 
environment
 • Existence of datasets on education, health, finance such as government 
spending, social welfare, labour information and environment
 • Access to government website in more than one official national language
 • Availability of social networking features
 • Presence of e-consultation mechanisms for the six sectors: education, health, 
finance, social welfare, labour information and environment
 • Availability of tools in order to obtain raw (non-deliberative) public opinion 
for public policy deliberation such as online forums, media tools, polls, vot-
ing tolls and petition tools
 • Presence of e-decision-making tools for the six sectors: education, health, 
finance, social welfare, labour information and environment
3.3. Global and regional ranking
Based on an assessment of these e-participation features in national portals and 
social networking sites, a global ranking of government provisions was estab-
lished. Table 3.2 presents the top 50 performers (see Annexes, Table 13).
As in 2012, the Netherlands and the Republic of Korea topped the list of perform-
ers in e-participation. Uruguay came in third place, followed by France, Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Australia, Chile, the United States of America and Singapore. 
Figure 3.1 illustrates the regional representation of the top 50 countries on e-par-
ticipation. There are 21 countries from Europe, 14 from Asia, 10 from Americas, 3 
from Africa and 2 from Oceania. Morocco, Kenya and Tunisia are the African coun-
tries in the top 50. If comparing only the top 20 ranking (involving 21 countries 
in 2014 with some with the same ranking), the most represented regions are tied 
among the Americas, Asia and Europe with six countries each. 
Figure 3.2 shows the distribution of the top 50 countries according to income 
level. As seen, 56 per cent (or 28 countries accordingly) of the top 50 countries 
are high income and 28 per cent (14 countries) are upper middle income. There 
are seven lower middle income countries in the top 50, which are Morocco, Mon-
golia, Sri Lanka, India, Republic of Moldova, El Salvador and Georgia and one low 
income country (Kenya).
   65 
C
hap
ter 3
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 3.2. Top 50 performers on e-participation
Netherlands Colombia Spain Norway Belgium
 Republic  
of Korea
Israel Estonia
Russian 
Federation
India
Uruguay
United Arab 
Emirates
Kazakhstan China
Republic  
of Moldova
France Bahrain Brazil Ireland Slovakia
Japan Canada Finland Kenya El Salvador
United 
Kingdom
Costa Rica Germany Lithuania Mexico
Australia Greece Latvia Portugal Qatar
Chile Morocco Oman Sri Lanka Sweden
United States 
of America
Italy Peru Tunisia Georgia
Singapore New Zealand Mongolia Austria Montenegro
Figure 3.1. Top 50 countries on e-participation, by region
Figure 3.2. Top 50 countries on e-participation, by income level
Low income
Lower middle income
Upper middle income
High income
56%28%
14%
2%
Oceania
Africa
Asia
Europe
Americas
42%
28%
20%
6%
4%
 66 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 3.3 lists the countries that score more than 66.6 per cent in all three stag-
es of e-participation. These are all high income countries except for Colombia, 
which is an upper middle income country. The table shows that income level is 
important for e-participation, and it also implies that there are not many coun-
tries in the world which can achieve this. The top two countries, the Netherlands 
and the Republic of Korea, tied with an average total score of 90 per cent provi-
sion of all the services assessed.
Equally noteworthy are those countries that offered the greatest number of e-
decision-making services. They represent features that allow for the most active 
participation by citizens in influencing decision-making about public policies and 
services. Three countries, the Republic of Korea, Japan and Colombia, offered the 
greatest number of e-decision-making features at 89 per cent each.
3.4. Trends by levels and sectors of e-participation
When government portals provide facilities for e-decision-making—such as a 
stated online e-participation policy; an online calendar of participatory events; 
online procurement announcements; online citizens’ right to government infor-
mation; and outcome of participation in a new policy, service or decision-mak-
ing—they are beginning to empower citizens to meaningfully and effectively en-
gage in public policies and co-produce public services.
The 2014 Survey looked at all three levels of e-participation (e-information shar-
ing, e-consultation, e-participation) in sectors chosen on the basis of their rel-
evance to the three pillars of sustainable development: economic, social and en-
vironmental. They include six sectors: education, health, finance, social welfare, 
labour and environment.
Table 3.3.  Countries that score more than 66.6 per cent in all three stages of e-participation
Country
E-information 
(%)
E-consultation 
(%)
E-decision 
making (%) Total (%) Income level Region
Netherlands 96.30 86.36 77.78 89.66 High Europe
Republic of Korea 96.30 81.82 88.89 89.66 High Asia
Uruguay 88.89 95.45 66.67 87.93 High Americas
France 96.30 77.27 77.78 86.21 High Europe
Japan 85.19 86.36 88.89 86.21 High Asia
United Kingdom 96.30 77.27 77.78 86.21 High Europe
Australia 92.59 77.27 77.78 84.48 High Oceania
Colombia 74.07 81.82 88.89 79.31 Upper middle Americas
   67 
C
hap
ter 3
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
3.4.1. E-Information
The number of countries providing archived information of the six chosen sec-
tors is as follows: education (146), health (151), finance (159), social welfare (123), 
labour (132) and environment (130). 104 countries provide archived information 
about the six distinctive sectors, 22 countries do not share any information about 
the six sectors. Finally, there are five countries which share information in every 
sector except in the environment sector.4 As seen in Figure 3.3, more countries 
provided links to sources of archived information such as policies, budgets, legal 
documents, etc. on the financial sector than the other five sectors. Increasing 
transparency of spending priorities and resource allocation can empower citizens 
to demand accountability, in a more informed way, for public expenditure.5
An increasing sector of concern for governments and citizens alike—given threats 
to biodiversity, depletion of fossil fuels and other minerals and climate change 
fallouts—is the environment sector. Figure 3.4 illustrates that the majority of the 
countries that deliver e-information on environmental issues are in Europe (42 
countries). There is almost an equal number of countries from Africa and Americas 
(23 and 24 respectively) that also provide e-information on environmental issues.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Social welfare
Environment
Labour
Education
Health
Finance 159
151
146
132
130
123
Number of countries
Figure 3.3. Archived information, by sector
Figure 3.4. Countries delivering environment information, by region
Oceania
Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
42
37
24
23
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
OceaniaAfricaAmericasAsiaEurope
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
C
o
un
tr
ie
s
37
42
24 23
4
 68 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Furthermore, Figure 3.5 shows that the provision of this information is concentrat-
ed in the high and upper middle income countries (50 and 39 respectively). Giv-
en that the countries most susceptible to the negative impacts of environmental 
degradation generally tend to be low income countries, the provision of environ-
mental e-information to the public in these countries is of increasing importance.6
A successful example of e-information is highlighted in the Uganda case study 
(see Box 3.1).
3.4.2. E-Consultation
A key factor that determines the design, deployment and use of particular citizen 
engagement technologies is the availability of adequate capacities, on both the 
side of the government and that of citizens. Figure 3.6 provides a comparison of 
tools used by governments for e-consultation. 95 countries, or 49 per cent, of the 
193 United Nations Member States provide a facility on their national portals for 
box 3.1. Ureport of Uganda: Mobile Participation
Ureport is a free, SMS-based system that allows young Ugandans to speak out 
on what is happening in communities across the country and work together 
with other community leaders for positive change. The mission of Ureport is to 
inspire action to unite and share the responsibility of creating a better environ-
ment for the society. It aims to inspire action from leaders and inform them 
about what is going on and what action the community prefers. Ureport in-
cludes but is not limited to:
 • Weekly SMS messages and polls to and from a growing community of 
Ureporters
 • Regular radio programmes that will broadcast stories gathered by Ureport
 • Newspaper articles that will publish stories from the Ureport community.
Source: Ureport: http://ure-
port.ug/
0
10
20
30
40
50
Low incomeLower middle incomeUpper middle incomeHigh income
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
C
o
un
tr
ie
s
50
39
30
13
Figure 3.5. Delivery of environment information, by income level
   69 
C
hap
ter 3
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
citizen feedback concerning the improvement of their online services. 71 coun-
tries provide raw or non deliberative public opinion on public policies through 
social media, 51 through online forums, 39 through online polls, 18 through on-
line voting and 18 through online petitions. Fewer governments use tools for 
e-consultation than for the provision of e-information.
It is noteworthy that governments tend to use social media tools in a more 
extensive way than online forums. To give one example, the Government of 
Slovenia uses an online tool predlagam.vladi.si to interact with its citizens (see 
Box 3.2).
Figure 3.6. Tools used by governments for e-consultation
Through petition tools
Through voting tools
Through online polls
Through online forums
Through social media tools
0 20 40 60 80
71
51
39
18
18
Number of countries
box 3.2. Slovenia “I suggest to the government”
The online tool predlagam.vladi.si is managed by the Government Communica-
tion Office of Slovenia. Public officials from various government ministries are 
ready to respond to citizens’ initiatives and evaluate their proposals. If they 
have any problems, questions or constructive suggestions for improving the 
functionality of online tools, citizens can e-mail and call the Government Com-
munication Office. Online tools available for citizens include:
 • facilitating publication of new proposals;
 • informing the competent authority that the predlagam.vladi.si will open a 
debate on a proposal and ask the relevant party to take an active part in 
it; making sure that all comments are published according to the rules of 
predlagam.vladi.si;
 • hiding inappropriate comments and in their place publishing the reasons;
 • judging the adequacy of the response of the competent authority;
 • publishing responses to the competent authorities.
Source: ht tp://predlagam.
vladi.si/
 70 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Governments tend to use social media for several reasons. First, the public is 
already very present and familiar with social media platforms such as Facebook 
and Twitter. These platforms provide an opportunity for governments to “leap-
frog”, bypassing having to set up their own platforms. Second, these are cost-
efficient as social media initiatives do not require high investment costs, as they 
typically ride on commercial and non-governmental platforms.
Once these tools are in place, governments can also consult on sectoral issues that 
affect the quality of life of their people. This is a step beyond the simple provision 
of information, described above. The 2014 Survey assessed whether governments 
had e-consulted people on issues related to education, health, finance, social wel-
fare, labour or the environment in the previous 12 months. More governments 
e-consulted on educational issues, with just over 16 per cent, followed by envi-
ronmental issues, at over 14 per cent than the other four sectors (see Figure 3.7).7
To keep up the momentum of citizen engagement, the responsiveness of public 
officials and administrators to e-participation is important. When people take the 
time from their busy lives to give feedback on or provide input into government 
decision-making, they should be acknowledged. However, given demographic 
differences between those public officials in decision-making positions and youth, 
it is important to build capacities in governments to bridge this gap. Otherwise, 
there is a danger that governments can be sidelined in online citizen-to-citizen 
dialogues and discussions.
The national portals were assessed for features that seek and use citizens’ com-
ments to improve online services. Table 3.4 illustrates that 68 out of the 193 
United Nations Member States provided such features and 20 provided informa-
tion about the outcome of citizens’ feedback through statements explaining that 
the site had been upgraded based on the feedback received. Such features of 
e-decision-making can show elements of responsive improvements.8
Table 3.4. Consultation with citizens on improving e-government services
Seek and use citizens’ comments 
to improve its online services
Provide outcome on feedback concerning 
improvement of its online services
Number of countries 68 20
Figure 3.7. E-consultation in the past 12 months, by sector
0 10 20 30 40
Labour
Social welfare
Finance
Health
Environment
Education 31
28
26
26
26
24
Number of countries
   71 
C
hap
ter 3
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
3.4.3. E-decision-making
Figure 3.8 provides a comparison of tools used by governments for e-decision-
making on issues in sectors assessed in the past 12 months. Among the e-deci-
sion-making facilities, financial issues were provided by the largest numbers (14 
countries or 7 per cent). However labour and health sectors were used by the 
smallest number of countries (5.2 per cent).
Figure 3.9 shows the extent of government’s commitment to e-participation as 
indicated by an online e-participation policy, an online calendar of participatory 
events, online procurement announcements, online citizens’ right to government 
information and outcome of participation in a new policy, service or decision-
making. The greatest number of countries (76) allow for participation online 
in procurement announcements, followed by (75) placing their e-participation 
policy online. This trend demonstrates a steady progress in making available e-
decision-making features.9
Figure 3.8. E-decision making features in the past 12 months, by sector
0 3 6 9 12 15
Labour
Health
Education
Environment
Social welfare
Finance 14
12
12
11
10
10
Number of countries
Figure 3.9. Countries with online e-participation policies
Provide outcome in
a new policy/service/
decision-making
Calendar available online
Citizens' right
to government information
available online
Policy available online
Procurement announcements
available online
37
22
75
56
76
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Provide outcome
in new policy/
service/
decision-making
Calendar available 
online
Citizens' right to
government
information
available online
Policy available onlineProcurement
announcements
available online
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
76 75
56
37
22
 72 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Even though governments may rank high on E-Government Development Index, 
they need to look separately at improving e-participation features if they wish 
to lay the foundation for soliciting active public participation. Although there 
is a high correlation between e-participation and other e-government features, 
other variables may be involved, such as income level and thus influence high e-
government and e-participation scores.
3.5.  The potential of e-participation for sustainable 
development: opportunities and challenges
3.5.1. Enabling environment for e-participation
Careful strategies are needed to create an enabling environment for e-participa-
tion. These strategies include legal and institutional frameworks by governments, 
capacity-development for digital media literacy for citizens and a seamless integra-
tion of online and offline features for enabling public participation. Successful strat-
egies also address both formal and informal approaches to citizen engagement.
Governments may designate independent offices or create independent func-
tions to introduce or improve freedom of information legislation, privacy and 
data protection legislation.
In doing so, it is helpful to build and capitalize on existing e-government initia-
tives—infrastructure and related e-services while undertaking new e-participa-
tion initiatives. Governments may be pressured to make budgetary cuts for their 
support to e-participation features during times of fiscal austerity. However, with-
out proper consultations with people or managing societal expectations, public 
trust in e-participation services may be undermined.
Digital media literacy can facilitate e-participation by increasing the capacity of 
people. In order to be an effective e-participant, the inclusion of digital media 
literacy and lifelong learning efforts should become a social norm. Such literacy 
also includes the formation of relevant attitudes, development of skills and trans-
fer of knowledge.
Social media initiatives around the world are good examples of how digital me-
dia can be used for the advancement of e-participation, creatively and attrac-
tively. Social media brings opportunities for cost-effective ways for governments 
to engage with citizens in e-decision-making and co-creation of services, espe-
cially since many citizens are already on popular sites. They provide platforms 
that enable citizens to become content creators for public policies (one good 
illustration is crowdsourcing) and services that governments can tap, providing 
a wealth of information.
Governments can develop a strategy for utilizing citizen-generated content for 
policy-making and service enhancement processes. However, it is not only social 
media and web sites that matter for successful e-participation. Traditional com-
munications means and tools—such as radio, television, seminars, workshops, 
schools, universities, talk shows, face-to-face debates—combined with digital 
means, can help make public engagement more productive.
   73 
C
hap
ter 3
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The use of all kinds of public media, including traditional offline channels, can be 
integrated into e-participation initiatives for further advancement. In this respect, 
the use and creative adaptation of existing local traditions of face-to-face pub-
lic deliberations may be encouraged and “digitized” as part of e-participation 
measures. In addition, public media can be utilized in raising public awareness 
and direct education of both citizens and government officials.
Together with more traditional technologies—e.g. dedicated web-sites, univer-
sal One Stop Shop portals or Internet discussion forums based on Web 2.0 func-
tionalities—they form a pool of public engagement technologies, old and new.
As the technology becomes more complex and sophisticated, it will bring to life 
business networks as third-party intermediaries to support new business models. 
The network of goods and services will be based on business partnerships and 
become increasingly data-driven, personalized and web-oriented. The engage-
ment of business support services will be inevitable. Such new technological and 
business opportunities will be invaluable to the empowerment of disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups through a new generation of online services driven by da-
ta-based architecture.
3.5.2. Readiness for e-participation
One key to a government’s success in e-participation is to self-assess its readi-
ness to undertake such initiatives. A possible assessment framework could de-
fine what is measured and consider political/ administrative, social and technical 
perspectives. The administrative side may be represented by legal/organisa-
tional frameworks, modalities/channels and outreach plans. The social dimension 
should consider e-participation levels such as e-information, e-consultation and 
e-decision-making. The technical perspective of e-participation considers spe-
cific citizen engagement technologies present in the field of open government/
data, social media, mobile/wireless communications and dedicated web sites/
portals. The assessment should include how e-participation provisions link with 
traditional offline channels, both complementing these and extending their over-
all reach and impact.
Periodic assessment would allow governments to not only monitor progress 
against the framework but also open up the possibility to compare themselves 
to others that also use the framework. More importantly, as difficult as it is to 
measure, the assessment should not only look at “readiness” but also examine 
the actual impact on governance and sustainable development.
3.6. Conclusion
Formal and informal institutions for e-participation must work effectively to reach 
out to all. Constitutions, national bills of rights and other legislation may need 
to be updated to cover the digital arena for the right for access to information, 
the right to petition, the right to take part in referenda, among other rights to 
participate in public affairs. Enabling legislation that provides freedom of infor-
mation or protects the privacy of individuals can also include online protections. 
 74 
C
ha
p
te
r 
3
CHAPTER 3 • E-PARTICIPATION UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
However, without designated public institutions to implement the measures and 
procedures to guide citizens, these rights would remain only as legal protec-
tions and not be translated into civic realities. Informal institutions such as social 
networks and allied e-business interests, among others, are also important for 
promoting e-inclusion.
To increase the chance of success for their e-participation strategy, governments 
can benefit from those platforms and channels that are being used by citizens 
rather than creating new ones. Promoting a clear idea and understanding of e-
participation will help those groups that are difficult to reach. They should en-
courage issues-related participation and provide consistent feedback on consul-
tations to the public.
Through e-participation, ICTs can help governments become better listeners 
and more agile partners in sustainable development efforts. Participatory budg-
eting, data mining and interaction on social media allow public managers and 
policy-makers to take the pulse of a constituency and shape public services to 
more closely address the needs and aspirations of people. Newer methods of 
outreach, such as crowdsourcing, can be effective methods of communication at 
the local level.10
Given these conclusions, the following recommendations will contribute to an 
environment for successful e-participation for sustainable development:
 • Setup legal and institutional frameworks to enable freedom of information, 
privacy and data protection in order to secure a safe environment for e-par-
ticipation
 • Empower people through capacity development for digital media literacy to 
educate citizens and foster the development of skills, transfer of knowledge 
and outreach initiated by the public
 • Build on existing e-government initiatives, platforms and channels already 
used by citizens to create visibility, a stronger relationship and trust with the 
public at low cost
 • Promote the use of ICTs, digital and social media tools to enhance the spread 
of information and citizen engagement
 • Ensure the integration of offline and online communication tools for an inclu-
sive policy-making and service enhancements.
In this chapter:
Chapter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4.1. Introduction 75
4.2.
The critical role of whole of 
government to promote holistic 
and integrated approaches 
to sustainable development
76
4.3.
Opportunities and challenges 
of designing and implementing a 
whole-of-government approach 
to service delivery
77
4.4.
Transforming government 
through a whole-of-government 
approach: enabling factors
79
4.4.1.
Critical role of collaborative 
leadership and a shared 
organizational culture
80
4.4.2.
Institutional frameworks 
for effective coordination, 
cooperation and accountability
81
4.4.3.
Innovative coordination 
processes and mechanisms 
for service delivery and citizen 
engagement and empowerment
84
4.4.4.
Collaborative mechanisms 
to engage citizens in service 
delivery and decision-making 
processes: the critical role 
of decentralized governance
88
4.4.5. IT management strategies for enhanced collaboration 90
4.5. Conclusion 92
Whole of government 
and collaborative 
governance
4.1. Introduction
The growing complexity and interconnectedness of pre-
sent sustainable development challenges require holistic 
responses that are based on coherent policies and collab-
orative decision-making processes, which in turn call for a 
transformation of public administration through the adop-
tion of whole-of-government approaches and collabora-
tive governance. Whole-of-government can be defined as 
“agencies working across portfolio boundaries to jointly 
achieve integrated responses to the issues of policy devel-
opment, program management and service delivery” (Ojo 
et al., page 234, 2011) whereas collaborative governance 
refers to a process of governing based on collaboration 
between government and non-government stakeholders. 
This chapter analyzes why whole-of-government ap-
proaches and collaborative governance can play an im-
portant role in promoting integrated approaches to sus-
tainable development. It also highlights opportunities and 
challenges, as well as enabling factors and strategies of 
effective whole-of-government approaches and collabo-
rative governance. While technology is a critical enabler 
for greater vertical and horizontal coordination and col-
laboration among government agencies and governance 
actors, the chapter underscores that transforming govern-
ment entails collaborative leadership at all levels; a govern-
ment-wide shared vision and strategy to promote sustain-
able development; capacities and mind-sets that promote 
an inclusive organizational culture; innovative institutional 
frameworks and processes for collaboration and effective 
integrated information management systems.
 76 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4.2.  The critical role of whole of government 
to promote holistic and integrated approaches 
to sustainable development
While social, economic and environmental challenges have significantly changed 
over the past decades and are becoming increasingly interdependent, govern-
ment institutions and their functioning in many countries are still greatly shaped 
by early 20th century models of public administration whereby ministries work 
in “silos” and issues are tackled through a sectoral perspective. As outlined in 
the United Nations General Assembly resolution 66/288, it is critical to enhance 
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development, i.e. economic, 
social and environmental, in a holistic and cross-sectorial manner at all levels. 
Effective collaboration among agencies across government (national and sub-
national) and with non-governmental actors is essential to good governance for 
a number of reasons.
First, present development challenges, such as poverty eradication, environ-
mental sustainability, disaster prevention and crisis management, call for holistic 
responses and investments in cross-cutting areas. No single ministry or govern-
ment department can effectively deal with issues, such as poverty eradication, 
that are multi-faceted and have multiple root causes. Collaboration is therefore 
required to effectively address issues that go beyond the capability of any single 
agency or level of government.
Second, an increase in citizens’ expectations for effective, equitable and citizen-
centric services demands a shift from inward, disjointed and process oriented 
organizational structures to highly collaborative frameworks for seamless deliv-
ery of services and enhanced development impact. Governments can no longer 
provide services unilaterally and disregard citizens’ demands for a more efficient 
and accountable use of public funds, which can result from service integration. 
In fact, the need to find ways that more effectively create public value, in an en-
vironment of constant change, has become an ongoing endeavour of all govern-
ments around the world.
Third, increased citizen demands for meaningful participation in public affairs 
and decision-making processes call for innovative governance and collaborative 
mechanisms that allow people to actively take part in decisions that affect their 
lives. Citizens (and other non-governmental actors) can be involved in the co-
creation of services, including their design and delivery, as well as in finding solu-
tions to societal challenges (see Chapter 3).
Fourth, government systems, institutions and processes need to adapt to a rap-
idly evolving information age by promoting effective knowledge management at 
all levels and by leveraging the potential of ICT for development, which also calls 
for enhanced cross-sectoral cooperation and collaboration at all levels of govern-
ment both national and local.
Fifth, a number of international issues, including globalization, global warming, 
as well as maintaining peace and security, require holistic responses and inter-
governmental cooperation at the national and global levels because of their 
   77 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
complex and inter-dependent nature. Also, even where issues/challenges are not 
in essence cross-border, most countries have very similar problems and interna-
tional learning is essential, not to replicate solutions from elsewhere but to adapt 
to local circumstances, become inspired and learn together.
Governments are faced with 3 main domestic challenges
 • More inclusive and higher quality services with less resources and increased holistic 
government capacities
 • More open, transparent, accountable and effective public governance
 • Responsive to increased citizen demand for enhanced participation building greater 
trust in government
This kind of change requires a transformation of the government as a whole, 
which calls for a holistic vision of development, new government institutional 
arrangements, leadership and human resources’ capacities and mechanisms for 
greater collaboration among government agencies and departments and with 
other governance actors through a whole-of-government approach and collabo-
rative governance. A new vision and model of collaboration among governance 
actors, in turn, calls for a paradigm shift in the role of the public sector whereby 
governments:
 • Become catalysts for change instead of mere service providers;
 • Facilitate networked co-responsibility by empowering communities to take 
part in the solution of their own problems;
 • Become entrepreneurial in generating revenues and promoting partnerships;
 • Operate in an integrated and collaborative manner across departments and 
agencies;
 • Become pro-active instead of reactive anticipating problems;
 • Make full use of opportunities afforded by the application of ICT in Govern-
ment in order to bridge the digital divide;
 • Transform mind-sets and build a culture of collaboration, transparency and 
accountability.
4.3.  Opportunities and challenges of designing and 
implementing a whole-of-government approach 
to service delivery
Several governments across the world are adopting whole-of-government and 
collaborative approaches through the promotion of horizontal and/or vertical ini-
tiatives, greatly aided by modern technologies, which provide useful tools to en-
able collaboration across agencies. 
 78 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Whole-of-government and collaborative governance presents multiple opportu-
nities, including:
 • Increased effectiveness of government’s responses—more effective and coor-
dinated policy responses to complex issues;
 • Enhanced efficiency by reducing duplications of processes and procedures in 
programme management and service delivery;
 • Better service delivery by integrating services and thereby saving time and 
resources and increasing citizens’ trust in government. Governments can also 
take a more positive stance towards citizens and trust that citizens can be valu-
able partners in co-creating public value, including service delivery;
 • Increased public value by promoting collaboration and coordination with pri-
vate sector and civil society in the delivery of services and wealth creation 
through social innovation.
Greater communication and coordination among policy areas and agencies at all 
levels, are helping governments deliver “as one” in pursuit of increased quality 
of and inclusive access to services to the benefit of its citizens. While the oppor-
tunities to develop and implement whole-of-government are many, so are the 
challenges as this kind of government transformation is usually associated with 
the most advanced stages of e-government development. 
First, it is important to bear in mind that whole-of-government is not an end in 
itself but rather a means to achieve goals in a collaborative manner. In the case 
of service delivery, there are four main principles that can guide efforts in service 
delivery integration as follows:
 • High quality—High quality service delivery may be manifested in—but is not 
limited to—the availability of government services at times and in ways that are 
more convenient to the public, speedy processing of applications or claims, re-
duction in the amount of paperwork and other activities citizens must perform 
in order to demonstrate compliance of clearly written government regulations
 • Easy Access—such as the expansion of the coverage or enhancement of qual-
ity service delivery to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups is critical to inclu-
sive social development
 • cost-effective—Utilizing the most economic models for delivering quality ser-
vices to the citizens and ensuring effective delivery is essential, particularly in 
times of financial crisis
 • citizen-centric—Utilizing mechanisms that have proven to collect feed-back 
from citizens and that succeed in engaging them in the delivery of services.
Second, it is equally important to underscore that collaboration across govern-
ment departments and agencies, as well as integration of services is not always 
the right solution. Collaboration can be time-consuming and can lead to counter-
productive results if leaders are not able to appropriately direct collaborative ef-
forts and ineffective mechanisms are in place. Moreover, integrating services may 
not always be the right solution in a specific area and for a specific target group. 
Therefore, it is always important to assess each situation and analyze whether col-
laboration is needed and integrated services provide enhanced benefits to citi-
   79 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
zens. It is crucial to keep in mind the end result, viability, sustainability and impact 
of integrating services. Integration of services should be seen as a means and not 
as an end in itself. For example, according to the World Health Organization:1
Integrated health service delivery is “the organization and management of health 
services so that people get the care they need, when they need it, in ways that 
are user-friendly, achieve the desired results and provide value for money.”
Integration may not always bring about quality of services and major factors need 
to be assessed before proceeding in this respect.
Third, it is well known that collaboration among agencies and government levels 
is not always a simple task. The greatest challenge to the adoption of whole-of-
government, which fundamentally rests on increased collaboration, is resistance 
to change among government actors. Scepticism about integration of informa-
tion and data privacy; lack of trust among agencies; non alignment of motivations 
among agencies or worst competition among ministries and agencies; different 
vision, priorities and goals among government agencies are all factors that can 
greatly inhibit the success of a whole-of-government strategy. While technol-
ogy has increased the opportunities for connectivity and enabling new forms of 
teamwork, collaboration across departments and agencies can be very limited in 
scope without the right kind of leadership. As governments are steadily moving 
away from inter-organizational work modalities and moving towards intra-organ-
izational processes, it is important to be aware of the difficulties that are intrinsic 
in this transition. 
In sum, there are a number of political, organizational and technical challenges, 
which may hinder a more collaborative approach in government and with outside 
actors:
 • Lack of a coherent vision and commitment to address sustainable develop-
ment issues;
 • Weak collaborative leadership and “silos” like mentality;
 • Entrenched power structures;
 • Vertical and horizontal organizational fragmentation;
 • Inadequate accountability mechanisms for cross-agency collaboration and 
where appropriate, minimum or “appropriate” quality standards;
 • Mistrust among ministries/agencies;
 • Lack of confidence in the IT infrastructure, data privacy and security.
4.4.  Transforming government through a whole-of-
government approach: enabling factors
In order to deliver services in an integrated and seamless way and foster an 
innovative approach to complex problem solving, government agencies need 
to define clear shared outcomes, design agreed upon strategies, clearly define 
agency roles and responsibilities, compatible policies and procedures across 
agencies and ensure effective monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. This, in 
 80 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
turn, requires that four major and inter-twined dimensions of the public sector 
be strengthened, namely (1) collaborative leadership and human resources ca-
pacities; (2) institutional frameworks for effective coordination, cooperation and 
accountability; (3) innovative integrated processes and mechanisms for service 
delivery and citizen engagement and empowerment; as well as (4) IT manage-
ment strategies for enhanced collaboration.
4.4.1.  Critical role of collaborative leadership and a shared 
organizational culture
Strengthening collaborative leadership capacities at both national and local lev-
els is a prerequisite for creating an environment where collaboration thrives and 
government officials learn to work and think in collaborative ways. Improvements 
are made and innovation spurs when leaders are able to mobilize stakeholders 
towards a common shared goal. Collaborative leadership may be defined as the 
capacity of leaders to work across organizational boundaries to inspire, engage 
and motivate people and teams to work together in pursuit of common goals.
Collaborative leaders require strong skills in setting an example and modelling 
collaboration through their own behaviour; acting as mediators and connecting 
citizens’ aspirations and vision with organizational structures and capacities to 
produce public value; attracting diverse talents and ensuring that accountability 
lines are clear and respected. Leaders must also work together to align services 
in a coherent manner.
In addition, it is important that government officials, particularly at the local level, 
have the appropriate attitudes, skills and expertise to harness ideas from diverse 
communities and to engage citizens through new collaborative channels and mo-
dalities. This is so because local governments are at the contact point between 
government and the people. This type of interaction between public officials and 
citizens requires new skills, attitudes and knowledge, as well as the capacity to 
utilize effectively social media, mobile and other ICT tools.
Shaping or re-shaping values, attitudes and behaviours in the public sector 
through mission statements and codes of conduct containing guiding principles 
can be an important step forward coupled with capacity-building activities that 
focus on collaborative governance. Public officials at different levels ought to 
take part in the redefinition of their mission statements and codes of conduct to 
enhance ownership as well as alignment of behaviours and values to a holistic 
view of government. In promoting human resources development in an innova-
tive public sector, particular attention should be given to:
 • Managing and working in increasingly hybrid organizations with overlapping 
teams;
 • Building partnerships and negotiation skills;
 • Designing IT strategies for collaboration and coordination.
Knowledge, skills, values and attitudes of staff at all levels need to be re-adjusted 
to match the functions, responsibilities and tasks as well as the new collabora-
tive work methods. Continuous learning and adaptive leadership skills are also 
   81 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
required when governing under uncertainty and complexity. Greater empower-
ment of public officials and a more conscious and professional risk management 
are essential to foster innovative collaborative approaches (see Innovations in 
Governance and Public Administration: Replicating What Works, United Nations, 
2006). While great attention is focused on changing the visible collective struc-
tures of governance institutions, attention ought also be given to how to re-align 
and leverage the internal/non visible side of governance institutions. Values, atti-
tudes and mind-sets have a direct impact on behavior, relationships and partner-
ships, affecting institutions, organizations, policies and infrastructure. 
Public managers can create value by strategically thinking about how to solve 
complex issues and by focusing on the impact of government’s actions rather 
than focusing on internal processes. A new mind-set or organizational culture, 
which places emphasis on thinking beyond organizational boundaries rather than 
along departmental lines in tackling specific problems, is essential to improve 
service delivery. A culture of collaboration through knowledge management and 
sharing, increased transparency and accountability lies at the heart of promoting 
innovative and integrated services.
Transforming mind-sets and encouraging a collaborative organizational culture 
is, however, not simple per se and requires a coordinated strategy, buy-in from 
top leadership and time to change individual beliefs, attitudes and behaviour. 
Particular attention should therefore be placed on devising a set of incentives 
that can reward collaborative efforts and discourage working in silos. Besides on-
going learning and training in the above mentioned areas, stakeholders, within 
and outside of government, can be empowered and involved in defining the 
vision and overall benefits of specific collaborative efforts. An incentive system 
can include a number of elements, such as public recognition, rewards to teams 
rather than individuals for effectively meeting a common goal.
4.4.2.  Institutional frameworks for effective coordination, 
cooperation and accountability
It is well known that collaboration and coordination among agencies cannot be 
developed in the absence of a supportive institutional infrastructure. Integrat-
ing services requires a re-organization of institutional frameworks, back office 
processes, accountability mechanisms and work modalities through whole-of-
government approaches, which allow for integration. New organizational efforts 
ought to be aimed at developing processes and mechanisms that enable people 
to work together; define and build together a shared purpose; and promote a 
system of incentives and rewards that values collaboration.
While each agency continues to be accountable for its defined and focused role, 
cross-agency issues are addressed in a coordinated manner through new institu-
tional and accountability frameworks and mechanisms. A coordinating authority 
in government that can facilitate and mobilize governance stakeholders towards 
designing and adopting whole-of-government approaches has emerged as an im-
portant catalyst for increased coordination.
 82 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The United Nations E-Government Survey has focused on Chief Information Of-
ficers (CIOs). The institutional level of CIOs as well as the office’s functions, roles 
and responsibilities seems to have an important impact on the overall sustain-
ability of whole-of-government approaches and collaborative governance. The 
importance of the CIO or its equivalent is to create a unified and centralized 
agency responsible for designing, implementing and disseminating e-govern-
ment throughout the entire public administration in a seamless way. 
CIOs that are integrated into the President’s Office or Prime Minister’s Office 
have a better opportunity to leverage knowledge, resources and above all com-
mitment at all levels. It is also very important that CIOs do not work in isola-
tion vis-a-vis other government institutions because e-government and whole of 
government is first and above all about transforming government and not solely 
about the application of technology. In some countries, there is a tendency to 
separate information management and issues related to the application of ICTs 
from the mainstream of public administration transformation, and this can only 
cause conflict and inefficiencies. It is therefore very important to devise organi-
zational set ups that allow for collaboration among ministries and CIOs in their 
efforts to promote whole-of-government approaches.
The 2014 Survey questionnaire includes a set of questions to assess the level of 
whole-of-government in Member States. All sources of data used in this chapter 
come from this questionnaire, unless otherwise stated. According to this data, 
countries that scored more than 66.6 per cent in whole-of-government are mostly 
European, followed closely by Asia (see Table 4.1, Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2). This 
analysis also falls in line with the data analysis of countries with a CIO or equiva-
lent; proving that a unified, consistent and identifiable authority managing e-gov-
ernment can have a positive impact on a country’s performance and the quality 
of their e-service delivery. 
Table 4.1. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in whole of government
Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bahrain Belgium 
Brunei 
Darussalam 
Canada Chile Denmark Egypt Estonia
Ethiopia Finland France Ireland Israel Italy
Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kuwait Latvia Liechtenstein
Lithuania Malaysia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway
Portugal Republic 
of Korea
Saudi Arabia Seychelles Singapore Spain
Sri Lanka Sudan Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab 
Republic
Tunisia
Turkey United Arab 
Emirates 
United 
Kingdom of 
Great Britain 
and Northern 
Ireland
United States 
of America 
   83 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Based on the data collected for the 2014 Survey, between the years 2008 and 
2014, the number of countries publicizing information about a CIO has more 
than doubled. Hence, 42 per cent of United Nations Member States today pro-
vide information about their CIO for e-government (see Figure 4.3 and Table 
4.2). This leadership role altogether is providing guidance and continuity for 
the development of e-services and for reaching a connected stage in online 
governance.
In terms of regional distribution, Europe is the leader with 56 per cent of Euro-
pean countries publicizing information about a CIO; followed closely by Asia at 
51 per cent. 14 out of 35 United Nations Member States in the Americas have 
online information about an e-government CIO or equivalent, compared to 4 
out of 14 Member States in Oceania. Africa lags behind the rest of the world in 
creating an entity responsible for its e-government strategy and designating a 
CIO, where only 16 out of 54 African countries have done so, or 30 per cent of 
the continent. The African region still faces many challenges in catching up with 
the rest of the world in online presence and connectivity, due to many socioeco-
nomic and political factors.
Figure 4.1.  Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in whole 
of government, by region
Asia Eur pe Americas Oceania
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
Africa
Oceania
Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
41%
35%
4%
7%
13%
Figure 4.2.  Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in whole 
of government, by income group
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
82
60
32
29
2014
2012
2010
2008
Low income
Lower middle income
Upper middle income
High income
65%
18%
15%
2%
Number of countries
 84 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4.4.3.  Innovative coordination processes and mechanisms 
for service delivery and citizen engagement 
and empowerment
Process innovation focuses on the improvement of quality of public service de-
livery and entails new ways of designing processes by integrating services and 
ensuring that they are inclusive and accessible by all groups in society, including 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.
The United Nations E-Government Survey 2012 chapter on “Taking a whole-
of-government approach” referred to the concept of “one-stop government” 
defining it as the movement from isolated silos in public administration to formal 
and informal networks to respond to growing complexity of problems through 
collaborative responses. It touched upon the concept of e-government harmo-
nization in practice by briefly making reference to the role of national coordi-
nating authorities, particularly CIOs. It highlighted “the need for public sector 
interoperability, i.e. that systems deployed throughout the government are able 
to communicate with one another through interoperable technologies in order 
to share and integrate information by using common standards” (United Nations 
E-Government Survey 2012). In addition, it drew attention to the importance of 
online service integration through portals that aggregate large amounts of infor-
Table 4.2. Countries publicizing a CIO or equivalent by region, in 2014
Countries publicizing 
a CIO or equivalent
Number of countries 
in region
% of countries per region 
publicizing a CIO or equivalent
Africa 16 54 30%
Americas 14 35 40%
Asia 24 47 51%
Europe 24 43 56%
Oceania 4 14 29%
Figure 4.3. Number of countries with online information about a CIO or equivalent
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
82
60
32
29
2014
2012
2010
2008
Low income
Lower middle income
Upper middle income
High income
65%
18%
15%
2%
Number of countries
   85 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
mation and services into a single web-site and the need for overall commitment. 
In particular, it looked at challenges and opportunities of integrated e-service 
delivery and signaled out a number of challenges and opportunities, including 
(a) revisiting institutional arrangements; (b) promoting citizen-centric designs; 
(c) standards setting and systems integration; (d) privacy and security matters; 
and (e) issues in infrastructure development.
“With public sectors offering an increased number of services, the focus is 
shifting from what kinds of services are provided to how they are provided. 
In many countries, a host of services provided, are increasingly coordinated 
and customized to better fit the needs of the citizens. In many instances, ser-
vice delivery operations are integrated early in the value chain or services are 
bundled in a single entry point for the citizens” (United Nations E-Government 
Survey 2012). There are many examples of national portal features that are 
indicative of back-end integration and transformation. At its most basic level, 
this could mean lists and links to local government websites or other agencies, 
such as is the case in Australia, or result in a combined central portal, such as 
in the United Kingdom that recently integrated its Directgov and Business Link 
portals into one.2 More advanced versions—and obvious examples of whole 
of government—come with specially designed portals that offer joint services 
through a single sign-on. For example, the Swedish business registration por-
tal where three government agencies—the Swedish Companies Registration 
Office, the Swedish Tax Agency and the Swedish Agency for Economic and 
Regional Growth, have joined forces to enable entrepreneurs to logon and 
conduct services with all three agencies in one place.3 In Denmark, the citizen 
portal offers a personalized account of information and services through a sin-
gle sign-on.4 Meanwhile, some, such as New Zealand, are moving ahead with 
an “all-of-government” approach that includes cloud computing, sometimes 
labelled the g-cloud (for government cloud).5 Such clouds can directly benefit, 
and build upon, whole-of-government initiatives, and may be the latest trend 
in this area, evident also in Singapore6 (United Nations Expert Group Meeting 
Report 2013 on Collaborative Governance).
In the Philippines, gender and development mainstreaming efforts led to the 
creation of the Davao Medical Center, which, in turn, set up the Women and 
Children Protection Unit (WCPU)—a one-stop family crisis intervention centre, 
which provides legal, psychiatric and medical services to its patients. In Brazil, the 
Bahia’s Citizen Assistance Service Centers (SAC) bring together over 500 federal, 
state, and municipal agencies in a single location, convenient to the public such 
as shopping malls and major public transportation hubs, to offer multiple govern-
ment services. There are many other good practices of client-focused one-stop 
service delivery for social services and mobile service delivery for multi-service 
clients in remote areas. The Korea’s Integrated Financial Management Informa-
tion System established by the Ministry of Strategy and Finance is another exam-
ple of whole-of-government approach (see Box 4.1).
As the national portal is considered the citizens gateway to online government, 
it is important to provide such links in a way that allows users to access websites 
of different government agencies as easy a way as possible. Citizens seeking 
 86 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
specific services or information can rapidly access the respective website with-
out having to memorize URLs or using search engines to access the ministries 
or departments’ websites. This allows for broader usage and higher satisfaction 
with the services offered. Citizens often do not spend an excessive amount of 
time or effort looking for services online. “One-click” links are the most suitable 
way to maximize efficiency in service delivery and minimize tasks that could be 
time-consuming.
box 4.2. Emirates ID Authority Smart ID cards
The deployment of the Emirates ID Authority’s Biometric Enrolment by the 
Emirates ID Authority as part of the National ID Registration Program is rec-
ognized as one of the world’s best biometric programs. Emirates ID Authority 
collects finger prints of all the citizens and legal residents above the age of 15 
in the country. It is mandatory for everyone residing in the country to be regis-
tered in the National Population Register. Considering the unique demograph-
ic composition of the country where expatriates amount to nearly 90 per cent 
of the population, the biometric enrolment is part of the mandatory health 
certification for all expatriates, making it convenient for the residents.
The current database boasts of over a 105 million prints of rolled fingerprints, 
plan and hand side prints, in addition to over 15 million facial images. The 
best two finger prints are stored in a secure, encrypted container in the Smart 
Card that is issued as the National ID Card. The Smart Card is provided with 
a Match-On-Card Applet which allows for a biometric verification and authen-
tication enabling assertion of an individual’s identity on demand. The security 
on the ID Card is ensured by the encrypted containers which is enabled only 
through the National Validation Gateway. All the biometrics, data transmission 
and protocols are as per ANSI and/or ISO Standards.
Source: http://www.id.gov.
ae/en/id-card/id-card-ben-
efits.aspx
box 4.1.  DbAS: korea’s integrated financial management information 
system (Ministry of Strategy and finance)
The Digital Budget and Accounting System (DBAS) is a good example to con-
sider as it integrates all the existing financial systems and provides transparency 
in public finance. It is an innovative tool that manages the entire fiscal process, 
ranging from budget formulation to accounting and integrates fiscal informa-
tion by linking fiscal information of all public entities. The system is also known 
as “dBrain,” because of its function as the digital brain for fiscal management. 
The most distinctive feature of the DBAS is that it allows a holistic view of public 
finance. It consolidates fiscal processes of fifty-one central government agen-
cies and links fifty-five external systems and local governments, public enti-
ties and subordinate organizations, fulfilling the requirements of the IMF’s 2001 
Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Manual. The system further reinforces risk 
managing capacity by enabling real-time information sharing in public finance, 
such as revenues, expenditures, national assets and public debts.
2013 United Nations 
Public Service Award Winner
Source: https://eng.digital-
brain.go.kr/en/view/main/
index.jsp
   87 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Based on the 2014 Survey data, it is clear from the Table 4.3 that the majority 
of the online portals of Member States provide links to the websites of various 
ministries or departments; with only 26 countries, or 13 per cent not having such 
links. 17 countries provided links to 1 to 5 ministries or departments, 12 countries 
provided links to 6 to 10 ministries or departments and the majority (138 coun-
tries), that is 72 per cent, provided links to more than 10 ministries or depart-
ments. This number is higher compared to the 2012 data where 123 countries (64 
per cent of United Nations Member States) provided more than 10 links.
Table 4.3. Countries with online portals with links to ministries 
Countries with no links 
to ministries
Countries with 
1–5 Links
Countries with 
6–10 Links
Countries with more 
than 10 inks
Africa 14 9 4 27
Asia 2 3 3 39
Europe 2 0 3 38
Americas 2 2 2 29
Oceania 6 3 0 5
In the 2012 United Nations E-Government Survey, 135 countries offered a “One-
Stop-Shop” portal. The definition of such a portal was broader in 2012 and did 
allow for more leeway in what could be accounted for as a “One-Stop-Shop” 
portal. This number represented 70 per cent of Member States.
In 2014, the definition of “One-Stop-Shop” has been revised and made more 
restrictive and narrow. Hence the number of countries that still classified as offer-
ing such portals was reduced to 71 countries, or 37 per cent of Member States. 
However, even with a more restricting definition, the global trend has been a 
shift away from “One-Stop-Shop” portals into various specialized portals.
box 4.3. National Environment Agency Singapore (NEA)
The National Environment Agency has partnered with the people, public and 
private communities to engage and promote greater environment ownership 
in Singapore. One effort is the use of smart technologies to share environmen-
tal data (e.g. air quality, public health and weather) with government agencies 
and the public. NEA contributed to the development of 86 environment data-
sets and 17 spatial datasets for the Singapore Government data hub, SG-Data/
GeoSpace, for inter-agency sharing. These datasets include weather informa-
tion such as air quality, weather forecast, heavy rain warning, climate change, 
location of recycling bins. It also contributed 75 datasets and 8 map layers 
to the Singapore Government’s one-stop portal service, www.data.gov.sg, for 
public use. Using smart phone technologies, NEA has co-created several mo-
bile applications with private sector partners through crowd sourcing ideas 
from the public to promote greater environment ownership and provide real 
time information on environmental conditions.
2013 United Nations 
Public Service Award Winner
Source: h t tp: //app2.nea.
gov.sg/
 88 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4.4.4.  Collaborative mechanisms to engage citizens 
in service delivery and decision-making processes: 
the critical role of decentralized governance
Given the opportunity to actively participate in service delivery, citizens can con-
tribute distinctive resources (time, effort, ideas and expertise) and can keep pub-
lic officials accountable. Moreover, citizens who depend on public services have 
strong motivation to contribute to their design and implementation; however, 
appropriate mechanisms are needed to adequately channel citizens’ views, opin-
ions and to involve them in the design and delivery of services and in solving the 
most pressing challenges of our times.
In other words, there is a strong paradigm shift in the role that civil society and the 
private sector can play in contributing to good governance. Whereas in the past 
citizens were seen as passive receivers of services and governments were the main 
providers of “solutions”, today in all corners of the globe we witness a shift in how 
services are being conceptualized, managed and delivered. Where citizens are in-
volved in public decision-making processes and in public service delivery, there is 
an increased sense of ownership and greater sustainability of public initiatives, as 
well as more creative ideas on how to do “more with less” and with greater equity.
Countries which have given priority to the involvement of civil society in identify-
ing the social needs of local communities and citizens and in the implementation 
of social programmes and services, including education, health and sanitation, 
have made important strides. It is crucial to recognize that leadership is not con-
fined to the government level. In fact, there are many examples of public leaders 
who operate within civil society and the private sector and work with govern-
ments to find suitable solutions to their problems. Experience has shown that 
box 4.4.  france: Access to numerous government entities through 
a single national page
In addition to the national portal, the Government has also developed an of-
ficial website for the French civil service, www.service-public.fr, available to 
private citizens, businesses and professionals. All administrative information is 
presented clearly and simply in three sections: First, citizen’s rights and pro-
cedures. There are about 200 folders, 2,500 data sheets and answers to FAQs 
and several thousand links to useful resources, including forms, online proce-
dures, reference texts, public websites, etc. Second, practical services to help 
with administrative procedures, such as online services, calculation modules, 
downloadable forms, standard letters, call and contact centres and a mes-
sage service; third, a civil service directory including 11,000 national services, 
70,000 local civil services and accesses to the main portals of the States in the 
European Union, European institutions and international organisations. The 
official civil service website facilitates and simplifies access to administrative 
information by selecting the various resources available on the public network 
and organizing them to meet citizens’ needs. For each topic, service-public.fr 
collects all the relevant information and makes it instantly available.
Source: http://service-pub-
lic.fr/
   89 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
governments that have made progress in providing equitable and effective ser-
vice delivery have developed innovative ideas and practices, making use, when-
ever possible, of information and communication technology, including social 
media and relying on strategic partnerships. Participatory leadership and innova-
tion in addressing problems of public concern are increasingly emerging as the 
key factors in creating a better life for all.
One of the most effective institutional arrangements to allow citizens to effectively 
take part in decision-making processes as well as in the design, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of service delivery is through decentralized governance. 
Devolution and decentralization allows local communities to formulate solutions 
tailored to their particular needs: citizens know best what their needs are. Through 
decentralized governance structures, communities can play an active role in de-
mocracy and setting development agendas that are responsive to their needs. 
They can shape service provision through participating and influencing decisions 
on the type, quality and mix of services they desire and can afford. As a result, clos-
er alignment is needed between national-level priorities and local action for sus-
tainable development. In this regard, the capacity of local governments is crucial.
Overall, weak decentralized governance hinders quality and access to basic ser-
vices. The increasing power of ICTs has opened up a vast window of opportunities 
for new channels and modalities of participation in government service delivery. 
Some examples include the 311 service from the city of New York, to Boston Citi-
zenConnect and many others. The use of social media, crowdsourcing and mobile 
technology, are providing powerful channels, if appropriately utilized, for citizen 
participation and empowered collaboration. Open data is also enabling more ef-
fective collaborative governance as access to information about what governments 
are doing better equips citizens to partake in public decision-making processes.
A greater focus on whole-of-government approaches and collaborative govern-
ance is also clear in the 2014 Survey data showing national portals providing links 
to local or regional government websites. From 97 countries in 2012 to 105 in 2014, 
this increase proves that a growing number of countries are adopting a strategy 
aimed at bringing government agencies closer to the people (see Figure 4.4). By 
linking the national portal to local or regional government websites, states encour-
age their citizens to use services provided both at the national and local levels.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2012 2014
97
105
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
Figure 4.4. Portals linking to local/regional government websites
 90 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4.4.5. IT management strategies for enhanced collaboration
The global spread of the Internet and the application of ICTs in government, 
as well as greater investments in telecommunication infrastructure coupled with 
capacity-building in human capital can provide opportunities to transform public 
administration into an instrument of development at the service of its citizens. 
A comprehensive IT strategy for collaboration in government and with appropri-
ate outside actors is required in order to seize these opportunities. The strategy 
needs to be closely aligned with overall vision and mission of the government so 
that it can best respond to the needs of enhanced collaboration. An IT strategy 
that is disjointed from the overall organizational missions will not deliver the ex-
pected results. In order to effectively design and implement an IT management 
strategy for collaboration the following steps need to be taken:
 • Engage main stakeholders (within and outside government) in defining an over-
all mission to be aligned with the overall vision of the public sector
 • Assess the internal capacities to utilize the available technology
 • Design a comprehensive strategy, including capacity building programmes
 • Implement the IT strategy for collaboration
 • Monitor and evaluate the strategy
A key component of whole of government is “the ability of multiple government 
and non-government organizations to share and integrate information across 
their traditional organizational boundaries”.7 One of the greatest challenges to 
promoting effective collaborative governance is that too much emphasis has 
been placed on interoperability as being merely a technical issue. While technol-
ogy certainly plays an important role, there are other important factors instru-
mental to effective collaboration and service integration.
It is also important to bear in mind that while the use of ICT has greatly improved 
service delivery and reduced the time needed for any government transaction to 
be processed, it is not without risks. As governments require personal and some-
times sensitive data to be shared electronically, such as social security numbers, 
bank accounts information for payment of fees and medical history profiles, the 
protection of such data is crucial in building trust in, and increasing the usage of, 
online services.
A key point of the back-end work is to create a seamless front-end experience 
for users. People do not have to know the agency, department or level of gov-
ernment providing the services but rather just be able to find it and use it in an 
effective manner.
Since 2012, there has been an increase in the number of online portals indicat-
ing a security feature. Europe is the leader in ICT security and protection with 21 
countries providing a security feature, as opposed to 19 in 2012. Asia is second 
with 16 countries providing a security feature, followed by the Americas with 11 
countries, Africa with three countries and Oceania with two countries. Globally, 
the total number of portals with a security feature jumped from 38 in 2012, to 53 
in 2014 (see Figure 4.5).
   91 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The electronic identity management feature in national portals is an important 
way governments can regulate, monitor and standardize access to its online ser-
vices. Citizens wishing to use e-services can access a vast range of online services 
through unique credentials that allow the system to recognize the user, tailor 
the services to his or her needs and allow easy and fast tracking of the status 
of transactions. Hence, users no longer have to memorize many credentials and 
usernames in order to access e-services. This feature is also beneficial to the 
government in that it allows all agencies, providing different services, to have 
coherent and cohesive and similar information about users. This reduces bureau-
cratic procedures, minimizes redundancies and replication within the agencies 
and maximizes the output to citizens. The number of countries offering such a 
feature has increased from 52 in 2012 to 69 in 2014, or an increase of 9 percent-
age points in 2 years (see Table 4.4). Figure 4.6 describes the number of govern-
ment agencies using this feature at national level.
Table 4.4. Use of electronic identity management feature
Electronic Identity Management
2012 2014
Number of countries 52 69
Global per centage 27% 36%
More than half of the United Nations Member States are providing links to e-pro-
curement platforms or announcements for bidding processes on their national 
portals. 63 countries provide such features, with 55 Member States providing 
information about the results of procurement/bidding processes, 33 countries 
provide information about monitoring and evaluating existing contracts, and 54 
countries provide an online tracking system for transactions and applications.
Figure 4.5. Online portals indicating security features
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Total
Oceania
Europe
Asia
Americas
Africa
2014
2012
3
1
11
4
16
12
21
19
3
2
53
38
Number of countries
 92 
C
ha
p
te
r 
4
CHAPTER 4 • WHOLE Of GOVERNMENT AND COLLAbORATIVE GOVERNANCE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The high number of portals providing e-procurement platforms is an indicator 
that governments are moving away from a one-sided interaction between the 
public and the private sectors, where governments are the sole providers of ser-
vices and information to citizens and businesses and are moving closer towards 
a 2-way interaction, where governments are also requesting services from the 
private sector through their online portal (see Table 4.5).
Table 4.5. Countries providing procurement announcements, evaluations and results
Number of 
Countries
% of total 
countries
National portal(s) providing an e-procurement platform or a link 
to e-procurement announcements for bidding processes
63 33%
National portal(s) providing information about results of procure-
ment/bidding processes
55 28%
National portal(s) providing any information about monitoring 
and evaluation of existing procurement contracts
33 17%
National portal(s) indicating an online tracking system for trans-
actions such as applying for grants, permits etc.
54 28%
4.5. Conclusion
We are living in times characterized by high levels of inter-dependence, complex-
ity and uncertainty with great challenges ahead but also many new opportuni-
ties offered by the rapid advancements in technological innovations and growing 
awareness of the potential of empowered societies and collaborative governance 
for sustainable development. To overcome the many multi-faceted challenges our 
societies face, including poverty eradication, climate change, social injustice, hu-
man rights violations, unemployment, among others, Governments are increas-
ingly addressing economic, social and environmental issues in an integrated man-
ner through a holistic transformation of government and by delivering services 
through integrated and citizen-centric whole-of-government approaches.
Figure 4.6.  Number of government agencies using the same identity management 
feature at the national level
2%
24%
10%
64%
0 Agencies
1–5 Agencies
6–10 Agencies
10 Agencies
   93 
C
hap
ter 4
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Governments in many parts of the world are becoming more collaborative, open 
and transparent, innovative and inclusive by engaging citizens, communities, 
NGOs and the private sector in devising and implementing together solutions 
to society’s challenges. Collaborative governance, which can provide a sustain-
able framework for addressing the challenges of sustainable development, is 
not easy to implement, but the lessons learned from this Chapter can be sum-
marized as follows:
 • Develop a shared and holistic vision of sustainable development at the na-
tional level;
 • Ensure political commitment;
 • Put in place collaborative leadership and capacity development;
 • Cultivate a collaborative organizational culture coupled with strong incentive 
systems;
 • Establish new coordination institutional arrangements and processes with 
clearly defined roles and responsibilities and well-defined accountability 
mechanisms;
 • Set up integrated IT management strategies;
 • Work towards achieving a balance between openness and privacy;
 • Mobilize resources.
A holistic government transformation enabled by greater levels of collaboration 
can present significant opportunities for more prosperous and empowered soci-
eties and for development that is sustainable for generations to come.

In this chapter:
Chapter 5
5.1. Introduction 95
5.2. Global trends of the delivery landscape 96
5.2.1. Web portal 97
5.2.2. Email 98
5.2.3. SMS text service 99
5.2.4. Mobile portal and mobile app 100
5.2.5. Social media 104
5.2.6. Intermediaries such as public kiosks 107
5.2.7. Intermediaries through public-private partnerships 107
5.2.8. Counter and telephone services 108
5.3. Building an inclusive multichannel e-government strategy 109
5.3.1. Service principles of a multichannel approach 110
5.3.2. Integration and optimization of channels 111
5.3.3. Framework of a multichannel approach 114
5.4. Challenges and opportunities of the emerging channels 116
5.4.1. Challenges of the multichannel approach 116
5.4.2. Opportunities of the emerging channels 117
5.4.3. Hybrid and integrated channels 118
5.5. Conclusion 120
Mobile and other 
channels for inclusive 
multichannel service 
delivery
5.1. Introduction
Eradication of poverty remains high on the global devel-
opment agenda and requires empowering people liv-
ing in poverty and other disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups1 with public information and services. Different 
modalities and channels for extending public service de-
livery to all the people and leave no one behind includ-
ing disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. The evolution 
of e-government in the next stage beyond 2015 needs 
further rethinking and transforming the way government 
institutions operate, with citizen needs and expectations 
at the core of its business re-engineering process. An in-
tegrated inclusive multichannel service delivery approach 
is, therefore, central to the successful implementation of 
the way forward.
Opportunities are available with information communica-
tion technologies (ICTs) evolving in transforming socie-
ties, cultures and economies. Over the past decade, the 
world has witnessed changes brought about by the rapid 
advancement of technologies such as the Internet and so-
cial media along with sophistication and convergence in 
hardware and software of the ICT ecosystem. Broadband 
connectivity, already pervasive in developed countries, is 
being rapidly deployed in emerging markets. Social net-
works have made profound changes and impacts on the 
ways people interact with one another and with their gov-
ernments. Open government data and cloud computing, 
coupled with consumerisation of mobile devices, have 
further enriched the ecosystem. Box 5.1 highlights some 
significant global and regional trends.
 96 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
There are, however, also increasing expectations from citizens for easier access 
to more public information and government services from anywhere, anytime 
through different channels. The public sector is under pressure to transform itself 
to respond to changes and radically explore new ways to meet citizen demands. 
Furthermore, constrained resources in many countries over the past few years 
have led to a reduction in budgets available for maintaining and developing on-
line services. This has in turn mandated a more streamlined approach focussing 
on results and impact to providing public services in many countries.
This chapter draws findings of the 2014 Survey to explore the global and regional 
trends of various channels or citizen touch-points of public service delivery. The 
2014 Survey questionnaire includes a set of questions to assess the different 
channels of service delivery in Member States. All sources of data used in this 
chapter come from this questionnaire, unless otherwise stated. It then presents a 
multichannel approach as witnessed by practical implementations of multichan-
nel service delivery among leading countries. It concludes with a few key findings 
and recommendations for consideration by policymakers in embarking on an 
inclusive multichannel e-government strategy planning, implementation, moni-
toring and evaluation.
5.2. Global trends of the delivery landscape
Multichannel service delivery is the provision of public services through various 
means in an integrated and coordinated way.9 Channels extend from traditional 
citizen touch-points like counter and voice services, to online means like Inter-
net access through personal computers (PCs), mobile phones and tablets and 
to emerging media like mobile apps and social media. Table 5.1 shows a non-
exhaustive list of channels used in public service delivery.
box 5.1. Some significant global and regional IcT trends
Almost 40 per cent of the world’s population are online by the end of 2013; but 
in Africa, only 16 per cent of people are using the Internet.2 Mobile phone sub-
scriptions exceeded 6 billion in October 2012 and the number is approaching 
global population (7 billion), with more than half in the Asia-Pacific region (3.5 
billion out of 6.8 billion total global subscriptions).3 In fact, more people have 
mobile phones than have access to flush toilets and electricity.
Smartphones4 outsold feature phones5 for the first time ever in the first quarter 
of 2013,6 with Asia as the fastest growing market with 74.1 per cent growth.7 
Rising global demand is expected to drive lower cost of smartphone chips. 
There are more than 2 billion mobile broadband subscriptions by the end of 
2013 with a growth rate of 40 per cent per annum. In Europe, there is 68 per 
cent penetration but there is only 11 per cent penetration in Africa;8 the con-
trary fact is that mobile broadband is more costly in developing countries. 
Nearly one in four people worldwide will use social networks in 2013. By 2017, 
the global social network audience will total more than 2.5 billion.Source: http://www.itu.int
   97 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A channel can change a user’s perception and confidence of a public service. For 
instance, in the context of value proposition of a public service, a channel can 
add value with a positive user experience, and in the same vein, it can subtract 
value through a negative user experience. Therefore, it is extremely important to 
select the right channel for the right service targeting the specific audience. At 
the same time, channel selection is a deciding factor to effectively reach out to 
specific groups of citizens, for example, rural population with limited ICT access.
Table 5.1. List of channels (non-exhaustive)
 1. Counter (face-to-face) service
 2. Telephone (voice) service and call centres
 3. Web portal
 4. Email
 5. SMS and other messaging services
 6. Mobile portal (mobile website)
 7. Mobile app
 8. Social media
 9. Public kiosks
10. Intermediaries through public-private partnership
Digital channels, with both their diversity and spread, are increasingly embraced 
by almost all countries, while counter (face-to-face service) and telephone (voice) 
services, have continued to serve as fundamental channels as preferred by some 
citizen groups. Through strategic and optimised mixed use of channels, govern-
ments will be able to provide ubiquitous 24 x 7 access to information and ser-
vices to different user groups.
5.2.1. Web portal
The 2014 Survey concludes that all 193 United Nations Member States have some 
form of online presence, as compared to 18 countries with no online presence in 
2003 and 3 countries in 2012 (see Figure 2.1 in Chapter 2).
Research shows that offering more online services and aiming for increased us-
age of these services improves efficiency and results in cost reduction. Accord-
ing to one research study,10 the Government of the United Kingdom could save 
between GBP 3.30 and GBP 12 per transaction by moving public services online. 
Denmark has made mandatory the use of online public services in its e-govern-
ment strategy and action plan covering the period 2011–2015.11 When fully im-
plemented, it will go “digital by default” for citizens and businesses with the aim 
of making public service delivery more cost-efficient. Similarly, the Government 
Digital Strategy12 of the United Kingdom published in November 2012, stresses 
that all services should be “digital by default”. The strategy states 11 principles 
and 14 actions to shape how central government departments and agencies will 
embrace digitalization of their services and improve usage by citizens and busi-
nesses. The Government of the United Kingdom has since committed to the 
 98 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
redesigning and rebuilding of 25 significant “exemplar” services to make them 
simpler and faster to use, as an attempt to meet the Digital by Default Standard 
by April 2014 and be completed by March 2015.
The 2014 Survey reveals other trends and insights of e-government web portal 
development among countries like improving site navigation, extension of features 
and services offered, to the use of single search interface. (see Chapters 1, 2 and 4).
5.2.2. Email
Email has been a mass channel for routine and ad-hoc communication between 
governments and their people. Other than information provision, email notification 
is often integrated to online and mobile services. For example, an incoming email 
will invoke a workflow action for issuance of a birth certificate copy. Automated 
emails informing citizens about the status of online applications also build trust 
and boost user confidence as part of the citizen relationship management process.
The 2014 Survey looks at the use of emails in national portals. As can be seen in 
Figure 5.1, emails remain a fundamental, both complementary and supplementa-
ry, channel of the web portal. It is used in all sectors including targeting disadvan-
taged and vulnerable groups. There is only a slight growth from 65.3 per cent (126 
countries) in 2012 to 68.4 per cent (132 countries) in 2014. If the trend of past and 
current Surveys were to follow, it is expected that there will be increased usage of 
the email channel for notification and information provision. A simple email link to 
government officials, at any level, may exponentially increase the ability of people 
to interact with government online; at the same time, it may also potentially in-
crease the workload of government officials and therefore, unnecessary costs may 
be incurred if not managed effectively.
Figure 5.1. Percentage of countries providing updates via email or feeds
2014
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Any sector/group
Other
Finance
Education
Health
Social
Labour
Environment
Percentage
2012
68.4%
65.3%
57.7%
65.3%
44.0%
43.5%
38.3%
44.6%
37.3%
35.2%
36.8%
36.8%
36.3%
35.8%
34.7%
35.2%
Source: UN E-Government 
Surveys 2012 and 2014
   99 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.2.3. SMS text service
SMS stands for Short Messaging Service—a service that enables users to send 
text messages to other users through mobile networks. With the proliferation 
of mobile phones in all regions around the world, countries that have embraced 
SMS text channel are, surprisingly few and far between. Figure 5.2 illustrates that 
the number of countries utilizing SMS text service increases slightly from 27 in 
2012 to 32 in 2014. More than 80 per cent of the countries have not taken up this 
mass channel for public service delivery.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2014201220102008
Pe
rc
en
ta
g
e
14
25
27
32
Figure 5.2. Slight growth of the SMS text channel from 2008 to 2014
box 5.2. Innovative applications of SMS service in Jordan
In recent years, governments have deployed various innovative applications of 
SMS text service. The local Government of Amman, the capital of Jordan, has 
launched an SMS services portal13 aimed at increasing the channels of commu-
nications between citizens and governments. It is now recognised as the most 
prevalent communication tool with all segments of the Jordanian community, 
helping in enhancing the quality and efficiency of governmental services. It 
provides citizens with two types of services: (i) push messages by governmen-
tal institutions and departments such as reminders and awareness campaigns; 
and (ii) pull messages that are sent by citizens as an SMS inquiry and are auto-
matically responded to by the relevant governmental department. In South Af-
rica, citizens are updated on the progress of application of identity books and 
identity documents through SMS service.14 In addressing social inclusion, the 
Singapore government launched an SMS text service (SMS7099915) for mem-
bers of the deaf, hard-of-hearing and speech-impaired community to reach 
emergency services.
 100 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.2.4. Mobile portal and mobile app
A recent research report16 shows that there are 1.5 billion smartphones users 
in the world or about 21 per cent penetration rate of all mobile users in 2013 
and the number is increasing exponentially in many countries. In Kenya, it is re-
ported17 that 99 per cent of Internet users access it through the mobile channel. 
Based on these facts, in their e-government strategy, policymakers should con-
sider: (i) deploying SMS services for immediate outreach to mobile users with 
feature phones; and (ii) planning for mobile web and mobile apps for the next 
wave of mobile users with smartphones and tablets.
While there is still a general concern of affordability of smartphones in devel-
oping countries, cheaper components and reference operating system designs 
from chipmakers are pushing for cheaper smartphones. In India, the price of a 
low-end Android mobile phone had halved in 2012 to about US $50 and prices 
are expected to drop further. Increased affordability and mass market trends will 
drive more ownership of smartphones and tablets. Governments must strategi-
cally plan for the effective utilisation of the mobile channel.
As we have witnessed in verticals such as retail, hospitality, entertainment and 
travel, the mobile channel is essentially a communication and marketing strategy 
that augments other channels. At the same time, it is a pervasive one that is in 
close proximity to its users and it is action-oriented, meaning that one uses the 
mobile phone to “do something”. The same applies to e-government. In addi-
tion, as compared to other channels, the mobile channel offers greater service 
effectiveness through targeting and reach, adding “where, when and who I am” 
to government services and essentially delivering a high level of personalisation.
The use of the mobile channel in e-government is also referred as mobile gov-
ernment or m-government. It should not be viewed as a replacement or a mere 
progressive stage of e-government. In most cases of mobile government im-
plementation, the back office still runs through the spectrum of e-government 
box 5.3. life-saving SMS service in Sweden
The Swedish Government has implemented a country-wide programme called 
SMSlivräddare, or SMSLifesaver, where citizen volunteers can enrol to receive 
an SMS text when there is a heart attack victim nearby, allowing trained citi-
zens to reach the victim and provide cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
Upon receiving an alert through an emergency hotline, the call centre will send 
SMSlifesavers within a quarter mile (500 meters) vicinity a text message with 
an address and map. Cardiac arrest victims are able to get quickest help pos-
sible through this automatic SMS service and it has proven to save more lives 
as compared to sole reliance of the ambulance service. The average response 
time of ambulance is eight minutes whereas SMS-livräddare-volunteers have 
proven to respond quicker and reach victims before ambulances in 54 per cent 
of cases. Stockholm County has seen a rise in survival rates after cardiac arrest 
from 3 per cent to nearly 11 per cent, over the last decade.
Source: SMSlivräddare 
http://www.smslivraddare.
se/; QUARTZ (www.qz.com)
   101 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
infrastructure for interoperability and cost effectiveness. Even though the front-
ends of the mobile channel takes on different forms and functions, policymakers 
should not consider m-government as separate or additional means, but rather, 
as an integral component of e-government. 
Figure 5.3 shows that the number of countries offering mobile apps and mobile 
portal has doubled from 2012 to 2014. For instance, 27 countries (14 per cent) 
offer mobile services in the education sector in 2014 as compared to 11 coun-
tries (5.7 per cent) in 2012 and 14 countries (7.3 per cent) offer mobile services 
in the environmental sector in 2014 as compared to seven countries (3.6 per 
cent) in 2012. The offering of mobile portal and mobile websites follows the 
same trend as seen in Figure 5.4. The number of countries with a mobile portal 
increased from 25 in 2012 to 48 in 2014. However, this trend is far from its po-
tential and possible saturation particularly in bridging the digital divide of the 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.
Among other unique features, mobile apps are context-aware and location-
aware services. Whether it is searching for government information or taking 
part in e-participation initiatives, as evidence shows, the services that citizens 
will keep using are those that cut through the increasing confusion and clutter of 
public information like those available in some scattered government websites. 
With technologies like capacitive multi-touch screens that have changed the 
very nature of human-computer interaction, many e-government development 
pipelines from both developed and developing countries have embraced the 
growing role that mobile is playing in people’s everyday lives and the potential 
of m-government to meet citizen needs to deliver information and services any-
Figure 5.3.  Percentage of countries offering mobile government services 
in 2012 and 2014
2014
0
Any sector/group
Other
Education
Social
Labour
Environment
Health
Finance 2012
68.4%
57.7%
34.7%
5 10 15 20 25 30
24.9%
20.2%
7.3%
10.9%
8.3%
14.0%
10.9%
14.0%
15.5%
5.7%
5.7%
6.7%
6.7%
5.7%
3.6%
11.9%
Percentage
 102 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
where, anytime and on any device. Some countries have clearly recognised the 
enormous potential of mobile government. In the United States of America, the 
Obama administration ordered all federal agencies to begin making at least two 
apps as part of its recently unveiled digital government plan, in which it called for 
“a 21st century platform to better serve the American people.”
Further recognizing that the transition to a mobile-led service delivery landscape 
is the future strategy, policymakers will need to consider and plan for strategic 
changes in governments’ business models and that this requires significant re-
thinking of the workflows in order to capitalise on reshaping e-government to 
deliver sustainable development objectives. It is noteworthy that in many coun-
box 5.4. Mobile government for poverty eradication and economic growth
Mobile payment is an increasing trend particularly in developing countries. 
M-Pesa is one striking example of mobile money service in Africa that boosts 
employment and fights poverty. Started in Kenya, it allows users to make de-
posits and withdrawals, transfer funds and pay bills, offering flexible financial 
services in countries where banks and road infrastructure are still developing 
and yet meeting financial rules and regulations. The rise of mobile payment is 
expected with much of the continent’s population living in rural areas, with lit-
tle access to ICT infrastructure. With both sender and receiver owning or hav-
ing access to a mobile phone, banking services are extended to all including 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. M-PESA has since expanded to include 
mobile airtime top-up, salary payments, interest-earning savings account and 
international money transfer. Mobile payment and mobile wallets will continue 
to gain traction in the next few years with technologies maturing and greater 
user confidence and acceptance.
Source: http://www.safari-
com.co.ke/
Figure 5.4.  National portals offering mobile apps versus mobile portal/websites 
in 2012 and 2014
Pe
rc
en
ta
g
e
0
10
20
30
40
50
Mobile portal/
website
Mobile AppMobile portal/
website
Mobile App
2012 2014
4849
25
29
   103 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
tries, several public sector related mobile applications are developed on the ba-
sis of open government data, among other data sources (see Chapter 8).
We are in the process of an explosion of mobile adoption but at the early stages 
of mobile government, particularly in developing countries and the least devel-
oped countries. However mobile is the new business as usual and e-government 
needs to go mobile.
box 5.5. Mobile government for gender equality and social inclusion
There is growing evidence that women’s use of Internet and mobile phones 
has a powerful impact on sustainable development, from connecting to health-
care, to tele-working and securing income for family with e-banking. Those 
countries that have adopted a multichannel approach to service delivery will 
open options for greater gender equity and closing the gender divide. This 
is one area that has seen the largest gaps and also the highest potential of 
achieving development objective through e-government initiatives.
The United Kingdom’s FixMyStreet and SeeClickFix of the United States of 
America, both are successful examples of a map-based citizen reporting plat-
form that enables the public to report and track non-emergency related is-
sues, via both web and mobile. Ushahidi, which means “testimony” in Swahili 
language, was first developed to map reports of violence in Kenya after the 
post-election fallout in 2008. The site, which now functions as a citizen report-
ing platform, has grown to become an important resource for citizen journal-
ists in time of crisis like the Haiti earthquake and the Queensland (Australia) 
floods. The Ushahidi platform provides tools for communities to crowdsource 
real-time information like using web, email, social media and SMS text service.
Source: http://www.
fixmystreet.com/; https://
en.seeclickfix.com/;  
http://www.ushahidi.com/
products/ushahidi-platform
box 5.6.  Mobile government for environmental protection 
and disaster management
Mobile government is also increasingly deployed in environmental protection 
and disaster management system, where government plays the critical coor-
dination role.
The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
(ESCAP), in the report of the Committee on Information and Communications 
Technology, reiterated the importance on the use of ICTs and mobile technol-
ogy for disaster risk reduction. Bangladesh through its Disaster Management 
Bureau (DMB) is developing an SMS-based disaster warning system. The Japa-
nese Government is leveraging on mobile technology to deliver emergency in-
formation such as evacuation instructions from local governments and reports 
from the current disaster system.
Source: UN ESCAP Com-
mittee on Information and 
Communications Tech-
nology, 2010 (E/ESCAP/
CICT(2)/L.2), Information 
and Communication Tech-
nology–Enabled Disaster 
Risk Reduction in Asia and 
the Pacific
 104 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.2.5. Social media
One research study18 predicts that by the end of 2013 more than 90 per cent of 
Fortune 500 companies will have partially or fully implemented an Enterprise 
Social Network. There is little reason why the public sector should not embrace 
this compelling trend in its service delivery.
The social media channel, which can be accessed through both desktop online 
and mobile devices, should certainly be explored further for public sector and 
communities to reach out to all their constituents particularly disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups. Compared to other channels, it may be deemed a more cost 
effective channel.
Social media channel implementation does not require high investment costs as 
it typically rides on consumerisation and non-governmental platforms. Figure 5.5 
shows the projected growth of social media through 2017 and Table 5.2 lists the 
social platforms used globally and in selected countries.
In order to realise the full potential of the social media channel in e-government, 
a business transformation is necessary. Maintaining a Facebook page or Twit-
ter account is relatively straightforward and easy, but will not in itself generate 
significant public value, cost reduction or increase in citizen trust. For example, 
e-participation through social media channel needs to be socially re-engineered, 
taking advantage of the real-time social networking attributes with human inter-
action and commitment of public servants including those at the senior levels, in 
order to fully and actively engage citizens in e-information, e-consultation and 
e-decision-making (see Chapter 3).
Social network users
Percentage of change
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
23.7%
20.4%
18.0%
13.4%
10.8% 8.9% 7.5%
1.22
1.47
1.73
1.97
2.18
2.37
2.55
b
ill
io
ns
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
p
ercent
100
50
0
75
25
Figure 5.5. Social media users worldwide (2011–2017)
Note: Internet users who 
use a social network site 
vary device at least once 
per month. 
Source: eMarketer, April 
2013.
   105 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Box 5.7.  Lungisa (“fix it”): Fixing service delivery problems using social 
media (Cape Town, South Africa)
Citizens in the Cape Town region of South Africa can report delivery problems 
with water, electricity and other public services, using the reporting platform 
called Lungisa (meaning “fix it” in isiXhosa). The problems will be reported to 
the appropriate authorities and resolved via SMS, USSD, Mxit, Web and Face-
book.
Over 1,500 reports using Lungisa have been filed and over 1,100 cases re-
solved (as of October 2013). Its partnership and collaboration with the City 
of Cape Town is reported as critical, and almost half of the reports have been 
resolved, largely by the City Council with the help of the Lungisa team follow-
up monitoring actions.
Source: http://www.lungisa.
org/
Figure 5.6 shows that the number of countries using social media has more than 
tripled from 2010 to 2012 and increased by another 50 per cent in 2014. Follow-
ing the same trend, as illustrated in Figure 5.7, 71 countries have explored the use 
of social media in e-consultation, indicating a 400 per cent increase as compared 
to 14 countries in 2012. These two significant trends are set to continue in the 
next few years. The challenge for governments is to identify the right “business 
case” for implementing a social media channel, one with a convincing argument 
and implementation plan that will enable governments to reduce cost or to pro-
vide a better service, or to deliver both of these aspects at the same time.
Table 5.2. List of social media channels (order by general popularity)
Facebook | Google+ | Youtube | Twitter | LinkedIn | Myspace | Pinterest| Tumblr (Global)
Qzone | Sina Weibo | Tencent | Youku | Tudou | RenRen (China only)
Vkontakte | Odnoklassniki (Russian Federation only)
Sonico (South American countries only)
Mig33 (Indonesia only)
Tuenti (Spain only)
Nate Connect | me2Day (Republic of Korea only)
Mxit (South Africa only)
Copains d'Avant (France only)
mixi (Japan only)
Hyves (Netherlands only)
studiVZ | meinVZ (Germany only)
 106 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Figure 5.6. Number of countries using social media for e-consultation
Figure 5.7. Number of countries using social media for e-government
Figure 5.8. Number of countries using public kiosks
2014
2012
2010
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
21
78
118
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
2014
2012
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
14
71
2014
2012
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
24
36
   107 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.2.6. Intermediaries such as public kiosks
The 2014 Survey assesses whether government portals promote the use of pub-
lic kiosks for their e-government services including those found in community 
centres, post offices and public libraries. There is an increase of the use of public 
kiosks from 24 countries (12.4 per cent) in 2012 to 36 countries (18.7 per cent) in 
2014, as seen in Figure 5.8.
Public kiosks are public-access facilities providing free access to online services 
especially in marginalised or remote areas where ICTs are not prevalent. Funded 
by governments or supported through public-private partnerships (see follow-
ing section), they normally serve several concurrent functions, including enabling 
communities and citizens to access new knowledge and information that can be 
incorporated into local knowledge and context, such as, among others, provision 
of information on employment opportunities, educational resources, agricultural 
information like planting techniques and disease prevention and other govern-
ment information and services. Public kiosks also provide the means for interme-
diaries to assist citizens in accessing public information and services.
For increased social inclusion, the Singapore Government has set up CitizenCon-
nect19 Centres in all residential estates to assist citizens, particularly older per-
sons and the illiterate to: (i) assist them to use government transactions online; 
(ii) help find information from government websites and (iii) contact government 
agencies on their behalf.
5.2.7. Intermediaries through public-private partnerships
E-government and ICT projects are natural candidates for public-private partner-
ships.20 Not only is there the potential for the private sector to finance the capital 
investment, thereby, freeing up public sector resources for other projects that 
have higher social returns, the private sector will also be able to lend its high 
expertise and operate the project possibly in a manner more efficient than the 
government itself.
Through public-private partnerships and crowdsourcing, the government can also 
reach out to a wider group of citizens including disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups, such as those located in rural areas. According to the 2014 Survey, 45 de-
ployed e-services through or in partnership with third parties such as civil society 
or the private sector including any Public-Private Partnership (PPP), as shown in 
Figure 5.9.
The Philippines Government has set up an online portal on public-private partner-
ship21 to attract private partners to invest not only in traditional infrastructure pro-
jects, such as power, transportation and water sectors, but also in non-traditional 
infrastructure and development sectors, such as ICTs and e-government itself.
Open government data and open standards have also changed the public deliv-
ery landscape, offering more opportunities for governments to collaborate with 
civil society and citizens for co-creation with the private sector or self-developed 
public service initiated by concerned citizens. Box 5.7 is one example on how the 
United States of America is embracing this channel.
 108 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.2.8. Counter and telephone services
In addition to emerging digital channels, counter (in-person), paper-based and 
phone (voice) services will remain as fundamental channels. Individuals who are 
not comfortable with new technologies may prefer to speak to someone in per-
son or over the phone to resolve an issue while certain public services, such as 
issuance of birth and marriage certificates, still warrant some form of personal 
interaction for identity authentication and authorisation among other reasons.
Research in China shows that digital and traditional channels supplement each 
other, particularly among disadvantaged and vulnerable populations in rural are-
as.23 Therefore, governments must provide multiple channels for different constit-
uents, at times allowing them a choice of service access online, over the counter, 
over the phone, at a kiosk, or via mobile phone. Figure 5.10 shows that more than 
80 per cent of countries (157 out of 193 United Nations Member States) indicate 
the full address of at least one government agency in its web portal, indicating the 
general acknowledgement of governments about the importance of maintaining 
45 countries
Figure 5.9. Number of countries with PPP e-service
box 5.8.  United States: promoting self-developed applications 
through open government and application interfaces (API)
One way that the United States is embracing mobile is through the release of 
hundreds of application interfaces (APIs) that can be used by private-sector 
developers to create new applications and services.
These APIs encompass government datasets such as home and business en-
ergy trends, real-time earthquake notifications around the world and the cur-
rent weather on Mars transmitted from the Curiosity Rover. To facilitate the 
creation of new apps, each government agency has released its own devel-
oper pages and Data.gov launched a government-wide API directory so these 
resources are easier to find and use. These moves were further supported by 
President Obama’s recent executive order and open data policy making open 
and machine-readable the new default for government data. The federal gov-
ernment also created the Mobile Application Development Program to help 
agencies launch mobile apps.22
   109 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
counter and paper-based channels. Similarly, voice has remained a fundamental 
channel of e-government services, especially among the poorest and low-income 
countries. One study shows that the phone remains an effective channel for solv-
ing problems whereas websites are more effective for getting information.24
In Sri Lanka, through the 1919 Government Information Centre (GIC),25 one could 
dial 1919 from any phone to access all services offered by the government. In 
many communities and states in Canada and the United States of America, a non-
emergency telephone number 311 is a central, all-purpose phone number that 
provides quick and non-emergency services. The City of New York 311 Customer 
Service Centre of the United States was recognised and awarded the United Na-
tions Public Service Award26 in 2012. Several European countries such as Finland, 
Germany and Sweden have offered similar non-emergency phone service. One 
drawback is the high cost of maintaining a call centre and this is the main consid-
eration when looking to replicate this service in developing countries.
5.3.  Building an inclusive multichannel 
e-government strategy
When delivering public service solutions and services, 
governments must consider an optimal mix of chan-
nels to interact with and conduct business with citi-
zens. Access issues, cultural and social norms, as well 
as government resources and approaches will play a 
part in this progression.
It is reported that half of the citizens (46 per cent) in the 
European Union go online to look for a job, file a tax 
return, register for a passport or use other e-govern-
ment services.27 This promising trend will deliver its 
expected results and impact provided if current users 
continue to trust and use online services and at the same time, access is provided 
0 193
157
M
O
RE
 TH
AN
 80
% O
F COUNTRIES!
Figure 5.10.  Number of countries showing full address of any government agency 
in its web portal, 2014
Multichannel service delivery 
mechanisms
 110 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
to a wider group of citizens. Therefore there is a need to embrace an inclusive 
multichannel approach as part of the national e-government strategy to ensure 
increased usage and citizen satisfaction while exercising caution to consider the 
possibility of increased cost and burden on existing resources (see Chapter 7).
5.3.1. Service principles of a multichannel approach
With multiple factors and choices, what are the service principles of a successful 
multichannel e-government strategy? Following is a list of selected questions that 
one should consider before setting metrics for a multichannel approach:
 • Are the vision, mission and goals of a multi-channel approach well deliberated 
and clearly defined? What are the agreed performance indicators?
 • What are the perceivable impacts of each channel option? Consideration 
should not only be given to achieving the aim of government for effective 
service delivery but also to meeting the needs and expectation of users. Ac-
complishments of desired key performance indicators will typically result in 
higher sustainability of the channel option in the longer term.
 • Who is the target audience? What are the ICT characteristics of each channel 
option? Making a good match between these two elements is critical; it is es-
sentially balancing what the technology does well, that is, managing a pleth-
ora of data in the most efficient way, with what people do well, that includes 
judgement, empathy, social context, etc.
 • How can the diversity of channels be best managed to balance flexibility and 
control in a fast-changing and increasingly complex delivery landscape and 
meeting citizen needs?
 • Should there be a smooth and robust transition of multichannel implementa-
tion, or should one undertake a strategic risk to leapfrog to the cutting edge?
 • Should one mobile-enable all online services including “matured” ones like 
paying of taxes which is already prevalent in some countries?
 • How should social media channel be integrated to the web and mobile chan-
nel? To what extent should government trust external social media platforms 
to take security and privacy issues into consideration?
 • Should government leaders “mobile-enable” front-line public servants so that 
they could better address the needs of citizens? One approach is the embrac-
ing of BYOD (Bring your own device) for public servants but this measure en-
tails complexities in consideration of the public servant capacity in addition to 
security and regulatory compliance concerns.
 • What are the infrastructure frameworks and service standards? Is there a need 
for enterprise architecture if non-existent? Is there a role of an interoperability 
framework?
Among other things, one myth is that in today’s information age, governments 
have to be at the forefront of deploying the most advanced online services of-
fered through the latest technologies. One should not be misguided based on 
wrong premises such as the mere availability and possibilities of technologies. 
For instance, given that more citizens have access to feature phones in some de-
veloping countries, instead of considering state-of-the-art smartphone applica-
   111 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
tions, SMS text service should perhaps be considered as the prime channel for its 
accessibility and more importantly, addressing the needs of the citizens. Tapping 
through a multichannel approach to meet sustainable development goals is not 
only an issue of understanding technologies; it is an issue of understanding the 
citizens, their concerns and needs.
For developing countries with little or no legacy in infrastructure or online process-
es, there is a potential to leapfrog by using available resources more effectively. 
Governments should develop services to leverage the benefits of the burgeoning 
wireless infrastructure including mobile broadband that is being deployed par-
ticularly in developing countries. Finally, the aim of a multichannel approach is not 
to utilise all channels but rather to optimise selected channels for specific service 
to deliver the best results and to achieve social equity by reaching out to all the 
population groups, including disadvantaged and vulnerable ones.
5.3.2. Integration and optimization of channels
Taking into consideration the converging delivery landscape, there is no long-
er a clear distinction between traditional and new channels. For instance, even 
though all 193 United Nations Member States have some form of online presence 
according to the 2014 Survey, in order to reach out to a wide group of citizens, 
particularly those with access to mobile phones, there is now a need for national 
portals to focus on optimizing government websites for mobile devices (see Ta-
ble 5.3 for service principles of a multichannel approach).
As e-government matures in each stage of its development, one important meas-
ure is for policymakers to select the right channel and service mix as part of a mul-
tichannel roadmap of their e-government strategy. Based on the 2014 Survey, as 
demonstrated by various national portals, different channels are selected for each 
maturity stage of the United Nations e-government model first adopted in 2003.28
While many countries face challenges in progressing to the third stage—trans-
actional and the fourth stage—connected, it is important to recall that the first 
and emerging stage still plays a foundation role as information providing and 
sharing remains at the top priority need of citizens. This is best supported by a 
multichannel service approach. For instance, dissemination of public alerts can 
be done in a short period with reliability, such as through SMS text services and 
email messages, and many countries have put in place such a system as part of 
their disaster management and response system. Providing information through 
various channels will also result in citizens’ trust of governments, thereby boost-
ing the accountability and transparency of the public service.
Table 5.3. Service principles of a multichannel approach
1.  A multichannel approach is a nexus of strategy, workflow,  
data and technology;
2.  One ultimate goal is to leave no citizens behind to achieve social equity;
3.  Map channels to citizen needs, service functions, value propositions and avail-
able technologies;
4.  Innovate and evolve for best results and citizen satisfaction; no silver bullet 
exists and due diligence needs to be in place for effective service delivery.
 112 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The important need of channel integration and optimization can be illustrated through 
the view that channels are citizen touch-points and these touch-points should play 
a complementary and/or supplementary role to one another. For instance, during 
a visit to a government office, the citizen’s past interaction with the office including 
through its online portal should be available as part of the customer relationship 
management system of the government office. No matter which channel is used 
Figure 5.13 shows a correlation between channel optimization,29 online service and 
income (GNI per capita) of selected countries according to the 2014 Survey.
The last edition of the Survey30 observed that countries with high income in gen-
eral are able to enhance their e-government services through channel optimiza-
tion. However, one can see through the 2014 Survey that some middle-income 
countries such as Armenia, Colombia, Turkey and Venezuela are also able to 
demonstrate channel optimization.
box 5.9.  channel integration and channel optimization
1) Channel integration in e-government 
In the context of e-government, channel integration refers to strategies aimed 
at consolidating or connecting online services, either physically or logically in 
the use of specific channels, in order to provide quality services that are both 
accessible and flexible for the user and in a cost-efficient and effective manner. 
2) Channel optimization in e-government
In the context of e-government, channel optimization refers to strategies 
aimed at taking the full advantage of selected channel(s) to deliver efficiency 
savings, improved customer experience or both. 
Figure 5.11.  Service principles and framework of multichannel approach 
to e-government delivery
 
St
ra
te
gy
 Workflow
 
D
ata 
Tec
hn
olo
gy
Multichannel
E-Government
Delivery
Vision, mission and goals;
performance metrics
Technologies (web, mobile);
infrastructure framework;
ICT access and ICT literacy;
identity management
Service type (information, 
transactional, connected);
frequency (ad-hoc, daily, 
yearly) service standards
User profiling;
service knowledge repository;
e-service usage data
   113 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Figure 5.14 illustrates how countries are doing more to integrate channels. In 
2012, 24 countries promoted the use of kiosks through their portal but there 
is an increase of close to 40 per cent with 36 countries in 2014. The number of 
countries promoting the use of phone payment increased by close to three-fold 
from 26 in 2012 to 69 in 2014.
A strategic national framework of e-government that encompasses multichannel 
service delivery is not an option but a natural progression of technological ad-
vancement in a society, particularly with the increasing trend of mobile devices. 
Channels:
Basic website,
Public kiosk
Channels:
Web portal, SMS text, 
Mobile portal, 
Public kiosk
Coordinated Channels:
Web portal, SMS text, 
Mobile app, Mobile portal, 
Public kiosk, PPPs
Integrated 
Channels: ALL
Emerging presence: 
Offering basic 
information online
Enhanced presence: 
Greater sources of 
information, and 
e-tools and e-services
Transactional presence: 
Two-way interactive 
applications provide 
citizens with opportunities 
for online, financial and 
non-financial transactions
Connected 
presence: 
The way government 
operates fundamentally 
changes, and there is better 
coherence, integration and 
coordination of processes 
and systems within and 
across government 
agencies. Government 
transforms itself into a 
connected entity.
Stages of e-government
Figure 5.12.  Channel use for each stage of the UN model of e-government 
development
Figure 5.13.  Correlation between channel optimization, online service and income 
(GNI per capita; represented by bubble size) of selected countries
Syria
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Channel optimization (score)
O
nl
in
e 
se
rv
ic
e 
(s
co
re
)
0
30
60
90
120
150
VenezuelaTurkey
Switzerland
Spain
Singapore
New Zealand
Kazakhstan
Jordan
Italy
Germany
Canada
Bolivia
Bahrain
Austria
Australia
Denmark
Armenia
JapanNetherlands
Colombia
Chile
USA
Uzbekistan
Pakistan
Bangladesh
Kenya
 114 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Countries, including European and other countries like the United States of Amer-
ica, Japan and Republic of Korea, have all benefitted in meeting some economic, 
social and environmental goals by having an explicit multichannel plan as part of 
their e-government strategy. A whole-of-government approach in designing e-
government strategy is essential in deciding the choice of channels, as there is 
increasing emphasis on integration and collaboration in public service delivery, as 
opposed to single-purpose silos in public administration (see Chapter 4).
5.3.3. Framework of a multichannel approach
Ideally policymakers should envision a longer term beyond one year for their 
e-government strategy. Some countries have embraced a two-year or three-year 
plan; however, a five-year plan, as demonstrated by several countries such as 
China, Denmark and others, may prove to be optimal, with evaluation at the mid-
term to make any adjustment. As technologies mature and user base increases, 
such applications can scale up to achieve more diverse objectives or reach out 
to a wider audience. The enabling environment and various blocks have to be 
considered carefully while establishing a multichannel approach.
Setting clear objectives
In general, there are two broad objectives31 of a multichannel approach. The 
first focuses on citizens’ needs and the second focuses on making service deliv-
ery more efficient. As various studies32 demonstrate, a multichannel approach 
does not mean that the needs of the citizen are addressed at the expense of the 
limitations of the service provider, or vice versa. One important consideration is 
to underpin reliable and cost-effective delivery of e-government service and at 
the same time maximise the flexibility to meet changing and emerging needs of 
citizens, including meeting the specific needs of disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups. There is a necessity to define policies and standards to span service lev-
els, different sectors and quality expectations.
Figure 5.14.  Illustration of integrated channels—web portal promoting phone 
and public kiosk
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
2012 2014
26 24
69
36
Portal promotes
phone payment
Portal promotes
phone payment
Portal promotes
public kiosk
Portal promotes
public kiosk
   115 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
User profiling and service personalisation
Through citizen demographics and taking stock of citizen needs, a good profil-
ing exercise will unlock insights about service users, their capacities and specific 
channels to reach out to them. For social inclusion, more efforts should be made 
to the specific disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. It is recommended to un-
dertake separate user profiling exercise for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, 
including: older persons; people living in poverty; the illiterate; youth; immigrants; 
women; and persons with disabilities. One approach is for governments to do 
user profiling as a big data33 initiative. Various data such as citizen demograph-
ics, actual usage of existing online services, and disparate data sources such as 
consumer use of social media, should be factored in the user profiling exercise. 
In addition to service user profiling, for some countries particularly the European 
countries, there has long been a trend to move towards service personalisation or 
customisation at the individual level, with the option for citizens “pulling” services 
they want via the channel of their preference and thereby “designing” their own 
unique service portfolio or dashboard, as in the “My Page” examples of Denmark, 
Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
Implementing and integrating different channels
Governance of channels in itself has to go beyond defining a strategy and pro-
vide a strong steer on developing in-house capacities which can support the im-
plemented channels. Embracing the diversity of the service delivery ecosystem, 
governments may explore cloud sourcing and cloud computing and green ICT 
for implementation of integrated channel service delivery. A successful imple-
mentation should be followed through with effective management and market-
ing of the channels in order to reach out to the target groups, particularly the 
vulnerable ones, or to entice citizens into using the most cost efficient channels 
based on the service type, frequency and complexity of interaction. Refer to 
Chapter 7 for analysis of different ways to promote the different channels, includ-
ing through training, promotional events with outreach through mass media, etc.
Monitoring, evaluation and review
As is the case for any project implementation, the monitoring of usage and critical 
evaluation of results is important for its own sustainability. With proper monitor-
ing and evaluation and leveraging data with key performance indicators, govern-
ments can make evidence-based decisions on the change of their e-government 
strategy or prepare for the next term plan of their e-government strategy. There 
should be a consideration of e-discovery, for example, that policymakers can be 
prompted to consider new areas for mobile apps implementation through an 
automated process initiated by increased usage of mobile websites.
 116 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5.4.  Challenges and opportunities of the emerging 
channels
The delivery landscape of public service changes with the technological trends 
and emerging needs of citizens, both of which are continuously evolving. Over 
the past few decades, we have witnessed a reduced reliance on channels such as 
the television and radio, and we are now witnessing changes brought about by 
disruptive technologies such as mobile devices and social media.
Challenges of a multichannel approach will become increasingly complex and in-
tractable. Some strategic risks are inherent and henceforth their negative impact 
should be seriously considered when planning and implementing pubic services.
5.4.1. Challenges of the multichannel approach
Maintaining a single consistent citizen view and experience
Although it is evident that a multichannel approach will reach out to more citi-
zens as compared to a single channel approach, the former will also result in loss 
or fragmented information and misalignment of service standards. In advanced 
countries, citizens are also expecting that e-government services will be sup-
ported for the wide spectrum of multi-screen devices that they own. It is also 
likely that citizens will request more information through their mobile devices in-
cluding smartphones and tablets while visiting a government office. Such citizens 
will be more informed about government services and this would in turn speed 
up the service request, both online and offline, saving both public resources and 
citizen’s time and effort.
With converging channels and a diverging range of consumer devices, there is 
an increased blurring of what belongs to one channel and what does not. For 
instance, users could be assessing websites through mobile but miss out on in-
formation and get frustrated if the websites are not optimized for mobile devices. 
When users move from one channel to another channel, there is an expectation 
for seamless flow of information between the channels. This in itself is a chal-
lenge for data flow within one agency. For services that concern different agen-
cies, this challenge is even more apparent.
This challenge may be overcome through channel synchronization including tap-
ping on common infrastructure such as use of cloud computing, deploying a 
unified knowledge base and setting service standards to aim for a “single citizen 
view” such that one will access the same information with consistent standards 
regardless of channel selection. One approach, as observed through trends in 
some countries, is the citizen-driven approach where one can have a consistent 
view of own data that is also controlled and personalised at the individual level, 
for example through “My Page” or a personal dashboard.
Addressing security and privacy concerns
The increasing use of mobile channels has resulted in the increasing vulnerability 
of sensitive information. While service providers have to exercise caution in ad-
   117 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
dressing this concern, there is also a need to educate citizens on how they can re-
duce this risk, as users may be the primary cause for certain threats. For instance, 
citizens should adhere to the advice of selecting a good password following best 
practice and accept two-factor authentication, should that be offered.
Governments must conduct due diligence in ensuring citizen data is protected such 
as through secured system access, user identification, data protection and other 
critical security measures. When putting in place such measures, other factors like 
cost effectiveness, speed-to-market delivery and integration of new channels to 
legacy systems including through cloud services, should also be considered.
Getting ahead of technologies
Due to the complexities and possible high costs involved for some channel im-
plementation, an overly ambitious implementation of a multichannel approach 
may lead to failure points such as unused ICT infrastructure and lack of in-house 
expertise to provide service maintenance or user support. Managing the chan-
nels does not equate to managing technologies but it entails more. There is a 
need to understand the different challenges beyond technologies while under-
standing and addressing citizen needs.
Evaluating BYOD (Bring your own device)
There needs to be a cross-device approach or a multi-device user context for 
some services. One approach is the embracing of BYOD (Bring your own de-
vice) for public servants, as well as for citizens and businesses, and these entail 
complexities in the context of the capacity of public servants and other concerns 
such as security and regulatory compliance. Half of the world’s organizations and 
private companies are expected to embrace BYOD—how public servants can 
tap on mobile devices, for example, in providing front line services is a challenge 
for the public sector. There are also some views that BYOD is not ready for main-
stream adoption in e-government processes.
Other challenges
Language diversity is a challenge in many countries and language considerations 
should be included as part of the user profiling exercise in deciding the most ap-
propriate channels.
5.4.2. Opportunities of the emerging channels
Dissecting the mobile wave, we note that there are two major categories of de-
vices—smartphones and feature phones. There is a high potential for developing 
and least developed countries to tap on the mobile channel, including SMS text 
service on feature phones and mobile apps on smartphones, since these coun-
tries have been historically limited by poor or non-existent fixed communications 
infrastructure. Figure 5.15 shows that there is an expected high growth potential 
of smartphones with the convergence of technologies, with at least three-fold 
increase of the smartphone users over the next few years.
 118 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The utilisation of the mobile channel, including through tapping the SMS capabil-
ity on feature phone, is far from saturation. Even in developed countries, where 
the mobile market is close to saturation, the adoption of mobile government is 
relatively low. Likewise, successful adaptive applications of mobile government 
remain limited. As illustrated in Figure 5.16, in 2008, there was higher use of SMS 
text but in 2012, there were more countries using mobile apps and portals as 
compared to SMS text and the trend continues in 2014. As observed through the 
2014 Survey, there are 49 countries offering mobile app/websites whilst 32 coun-
tries offering the SMS text service. Through the estimated figures, we expect a 
continued growth of the number of countries offering SMS text service, mobile 
app and mobile website as part of their e-government offerings. The mobile 
channel is relatively more cost effective and it is also flexible and personalisable 
for both “pull” and “push” services, stimulating the innovation of many new busi-
ness models which especially people living in poverty, the self-employed and 
small-medium enterprises can benefit from.
Some governments have driven a policy direction with high priority for the 
mobile channel. In June 2013, the Government of the United Arab Emirates 
decided to change the name of their e-government initiative to Mobile Govern-
ment (m-government), signalling the government’s priority on the delivery of 
government service to the public through their mobile phones, anywhere and 
round-the-clock.34
M-Government will also offer countries the opportunity to tackle a number of 
issues—such as those related to the digital divide—which remain a critical factor 
in the take-up of online services.35 Mobile is driving change and the impact of 
mobile government will be ground-breaking in the next few years.
5.4.3. Hybrid and integrated channels
When two or more channels are involved in a single service provision, a hybrid 
channel is evolved. Tight integration is a necessity to ensure seamless user expe-
rience. Some examples of hybrid channels are as follows.
Figure 5.15. Global smartphone versus mobile phone users in 2013
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
G
lo
b
al
 u
se
rs
 (M
M
)
Smartphone Mobile phone
1.5B users
5B+ users
Source:  Morgan Stanley 
Research estimates.
   119 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Integration of voice to web channels
It is understandable that some citizens prefer to speak to a person for a specific 
or any service. This is particularly the case for some disadvantaged and vulner-
able groups such as older persons and the illiterate. One new approach is the in-
troduction of integrated “online live chat” or “virtual assistant” to online services 
so that users can be assisted in a more personalised manner. One example is the 
portal of the Mexican state of Guanajuato, where virtual assistants are presented 
as a cartoonlike character to answer custom questions asked in a written or even 
oral form.
At the same time, service delivery may be extended from voice to web channels, 
for example, by referring citizens who call public hotlines to access web informa-
tion about public healthcare or to a mobile application for public housing. Effec-
tive management of service across traditional and digital channels is essential to 
a good citizen experience.
Gamification
Gamificaton37 is relatively new but it has the potential to engage youth in public af-
fairs particularly through sustainable development objectives. One good example 
is the application “OPower”38 that has seen success in countries including France, 
Canada, Australia and New Zealand, United Kingdom and the United States of 
America. It encourages people to become more responsible about their energy 
consumption by utilizing gamification to enable people to use less energy through 
collaboration with utility companies to provide households with data on how much 
energy they are consuming, how they match up with neighbours, and if they are 
close to any new milestones. Another solution, m.Paani,39 aims to solve the clean-
water problem in developing countries through an innovative loyalty program. In 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
201820162014201220102008
Mobile channel
SMS Text channel
N
um
b
er
 o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
Figure 5.16. Countries36 offering SMS text and mobile web/app services
 120 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
gamification, a good blend of information service and online community engage-
ment will result in greater citizen satisfaction in their interaction with the govern-
ment which in turn enhances public service delivery. More potential is seen for 
gamification in emerging channels such as mobile devices and social media.
Citizen’s unified mailbox
Building on the self-service expectation of citizens, an extension of the email 
channel takes the form of a unified communication system between govern-
ments and citizens. The Government of Denmark, through a legislation adopted 
in 2012, pledged that by 2014 all citizens would have a secure digital letter box 
(“Digital Post”) in which they would receive all emails from public authorities. 
All citizens would also be able to authorise family members to access their Digi-
tal Post on their behalf. Singapore has also implemented “OneInbox” in 2013, 
which is the official Government platform where individuals and businesses can 
receive all their government-related correspondences electronically, in place of 
hardcopy letters.40 This service was launched based on findings from surveys 
and polls that most individuals and businesses prefer to receive electronic corre-
spondences instead of hardcopy letters. Singapore’s OneInbox aims to provide 
a trusted and guaranteed delivery of correspondences and make it easier for 
individuals and businesses to file and track their correspondences from a single 
aggregated platform.
Mobile Government Office
With the use of mobile technologies, a physical government office could be set 
up to provide services to rural villages. The Australian Government Mobile Of-
fices are mobile offices providing a range of government payments and services, 
making it easier for people in rural communities to conduct their business with 
Centrelink,41 targeting older persons, students, jobseekers, persons with disabili-
ties, farmers and self-employed.
5.5. Conclusion
With increasing user demands to access public services from anywhere, anytime 
and the practical needs to reach out to everyone in society, including disad-
vantaged and vulnerable groups, new forms of online, hybrid and integrated 
channels have emerged over the years, transforming the way online services are 
delivered to citizens. From traditional citizen touch points, like counter and voice 
services, to evolving forms of online web portals, from SMS text services, mobile 
portals and mobile apps to social media, an inclusive multichannel approach is 
seen to be a relevant solution for the sustainability of e-government itself since it 
allows governments to utilize a multiplicity of the channels to reach out to disad-
vantaged and vulnerable groups and find smart ways to increase usage of online 
services. 
The web portal, mobile channel and social media channel will be main drivers 
to reach a wider user base and bridge the digital divide with the exponential 
uptake of mobile devices and increasing user base, particularly in developing 
   121 
C
hap
ter 5
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
countries. The mobile channel is essentially one that augments other channels 
by reaching out to new users but, at the same time, it is a pervasive one that is 
in close proximity to its users and is action-oriented, meaning that one uses the 
mobile phone to “do something”. The use of social media and social analytics are 
both complex and fragmented but it has strong potential to reach disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups, such as indigenous peoples and youth. Counter (face-to-
face), paper-based and telephone (voice) services will continue to play essential 
roles in public service delivery, especially to reach out to people living in poverty 
and in low-income countries. 
The challenge is to manage the balance of need to support these platforms 
while encouraging citizens to take advantage of more cost effective digital chan-
nels. Public service delivery can, therefore, be reinvented through a smart blend 
of channel selection and integration, optimizing the characteristics of different 
channels with the citizen’s profile and having a consolidated view and analysis, 
business needs, cost efficiency, channel performance and social analytics as met-
rics to govern and streamline the e-government development process.
Given these findings and conclusions, the following recommendations can con-
tribute to an effective and inclusive multichannel approach to public service de-
livery:
 • Profile e-government users and map effective channel(s) to citizen groups and 
needs. For more efficient and effective delivery of public services, it is more im-
portant to understand the needs of citizens that one is targeting and to provide 
services that address specific citizen needs through a multichannel approach. 
With a good user profiling exercise, policymakers may then focus on the ca-
pacities, both the supply and demand ends and subsequently exploit fully the 
power of mobile and other channels without leaving out citizens, particularly 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups with limited capacities or limited ICT 
access. Training and upgrading of ICT skills of citizens should not be ignored. 
 • Build key integrated infrastructure, deploy a unified knowledgebase, set com-
mon standards and invest in training to facilitate multichannel provision of 
public services. Government Chief Information Officers or equivalent officials 
should plan for an overall ICT infrastructure with emphasis on ubiquity, among 
other factors. Setting common service standards help address service consist-
ency and interoperability needs. Taking into consideration data security and 
user privacy, ubiquitous integrated cloud-based multichannel management 
may be tapped with the spread, availability and reduced cost in its offering.
 • Be innovative; learn and replicate good practices from around the world to 
integrate and optimise channels. Sticking to tried and tested channels will no 
longer suffice in today’s connected information age. Online services should 
be reinvented through a multichannel service approach. Careful deliberation 
is needed, for instance, on how email notification and/or SMS text notification 
can be best integrated into the workflow of an online or mobile application. 
Governments need to constantly explore and experiment, adapt and hone an 
integrated multichannel e-government strategy.
 122 
C
ha
p
te
r 
5
CHAPTER 5 • MObILE AND OTHER CHANNELS fOR INCLuSIVE MuLTICHANNEL SERVICE DELIVERy UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
 • Set indicators and measure impact of channels through usage statistics and 
social analytics; adapt to emerging citizen needs and technological advance-
ment. The goal of setting indicators and measuring channel analytics is to 
measure public service performance for promoting data-driven decisions rath-
er than subjective ones for identifying problematic issues or areas of growth. 
Metrics such as business needs, channel cost and channel usage, as well as 
intangible ones, like channel perception and citizen satisfaction, should be de-
termined with clear expected accomplishment statements and realistic goals. 
With increasing knowledge and technological ability to analyze information 
from disparate sources, governments are able to make wiser use of the pletho-
ra of data they collect with predictive and preventive analytics to continuously 
evolve e-government development to deliver more public value.
In this chapter:
Chapter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
6.1. Introduction 123
6.2. Characteristics of the digital divide 124
6.3. Disparity in technology access: trends in the digital divide 125
6.4.
National income as a 
determinant of socioeconomic 
digital disparity
128
6.5. ICT skills, language and content barriers 131
6.6.
Lack of e-services for 
disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups compounds digital 
disparities
134
6.7. Conclusion 139
Bridging the digital 
divide
6.1. Introduction
Today 1.2 billion people of the world living in extreme 
poverty account for only one per cent of the consumption 
as compared to the richest 1 billion people which con-
sume 72 per cent.1 The United Nations Secretary-Gen-
eral’s High Level Panel on Post-2015 Development has 
called for a new agenda which “must tackle the causes of 
poverty, exclusion and inequality. It must connect people 
in rural and urban areas to the modern economy through 
quality infrastructure—electricity, irrigation, roads, ports 
and telecommunications.”2 In outlining his vision for the 
way forward on Post-2015, the United Nations Secretary-
General stated that “in order to leave no one behind and 
bring everyone forward, actions are needed to promote 
equality of opportunity.”
One key area which can allow for leapfrogging in devel-
opment outcomes is to think in terms of the benefits de-
rived from mitigating the digital divide as opportunities 
for wellbeing. The digital divide is inextricably linked to 
social equity in today’s information world. This involves 
recognition that addressing the multivariate causes of the 
digital divide go beyond connectivity and capability is-
sues to include human, economic and social wellbeing, 
lack of which impinge on developmental outcomes, in-
cluding those for the Post-2015 development agenda.
The emerging imperative today is to re-think the scope of 
e-government in order to understand the opportunities 
offered by new technologies for better development out-
comes. Governments can enhance the role of e-govern-
ment in bridging the digital divide by embedding inter-
connected and holistic technological solutions in policy 
frameworks.
This chapter looks at trends in digital divide to identify is-
sues which needs ICT and e-government policy redress for 
 124 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
greater economic, social and environmental sustainability and overall wellbeing for 
all. The 2014 Survey questionnaire includes a set of questions assessing the digital 
divide in e-government development (see Survey Methodology). All sources of 
data used in this chapter come from this questionnaire, unless otherwise stated.
While the chapter aims to offer an overall picture of digital connectivity its specif-
ic focus is on e-services for vulnerable and disadvantaged populations at the na-
tional level, including persons with disabilities, older persons, women and youth. 
In doing so it seeks a better understanding of the challenges to Member States 
stemming from this disparity at a time when ICT is at the core of productivity 
growth and participation in the world economy.
6.2. Characteristics of the digital divide
Initially the digital divide was considered primarily an issue of access to relevant 
information technology infrastructure compounded by the prohibitive cost of 
access, especially in the developing countries. As technology has proliferated, 
the physical and financial access barriers have given way to challenges which 
stem more from capacity and capability of individuals. Digital divides exist even 
within seemingly connected populations where access to digital information is 
impeded for some due to language barriers or lack of culturally-relevant content. 
A lesser form of disparity in connectivity can also be the result of the ‘quality’ of 
connectivity depending upon whether access is through fixed or mobile device, 
or the Internet or a telephone connection. These are issues of national policy 
and priority since the quality of usage in terms of access, retrieval, interactivity or 
digital social inclusion for many depends on political, economic, investment and 
regulatory policies, among other things.
At the basic level, the digital divide stems from a lack of physical access to tech-
nology between groups and individuals. This can be in terms of Internet connec-
tion, availability of broadband, computers, smart phones, mobile devices and 
in general a disparity in access to the communication infrastructure. In many 
countries this is mainly a supply side issue stemming from differences in the level 
of development of the country; government policy; priority of the technology re-
gime in the country; IT regulatory environment; private sector involvement; and 
investment in ICT infrastructure, among others. It is also aggravated by prohibi-
tive pricing of ICT devices.
The digital divide also arises from a disparity between individuals and popula-
tions in the levels of education and skills needed to use the technology. The lack 
of ability to use the technology may stem from differences among Internet users 
in the capacity to efficiently and effectively find information on the Web to take 
advantage of the medium in a variety of ways. Disparities in the appropriate use 
of the information and e-services is particularly relevant to social equity inasmuch 
as it impacts everything from the ability to gather and use information on an ur-
gent health issue in a faraway village to finding the right government documenta-
tion, to emergency announcements at the time of a natural disaster, to participa-
tion in elections. Whereas the earlier concept of the digital divide was primarily 
   125 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
about access to technology, the successive levels of the digital divide are about 
capability and ability. As such digital divide is prevalent in both developed and 
developing countries.
6.3.  Disparity in technology access: 
trends in the digital divide
In the globalized world, whereas technology proliferation and advancement may 
have allowed for an Internet enabled device in the hands of many, the distance 
between governments, businesses and the citizen with real access and those 
with limited access and skills has increased in many countries. 
Considerable progress has been made in mitigating the digital divide. As high-
lighted in Chapter 2, in 2014 for the first time all United Nations Member States 
demonstrate an online presence. Despite an overall trend towards progress in 
the past decade, the difference within high income economies, middle and low 
income developing countries are stark. Even among the G20 economies,3 which, 
together comprise 90 per cent of global GDP and two thirds of the world popu-
lation, the digital divide, as measured by the change in percentage of Internet 
usage, is apparent. A subset of the G20 counties are illustrated in Figure 6.1. The 
figure shows that on one hand, countries such the United Kingdom, Canada, Ger-
many and the United States of America are far in advance; and on the other hand, 
other emerging economic power houses such as Brazil, Russia, China and South 
Africa have experienced a catching up phenomenon, starting around 2008–2009. 
The digital divide between other high and low or middle income countries is sub-
stantial too, as measure by the percentage of population using the Internet. For 
example in 2013, in Sweden (94 per cent), Estonia (79 per cent) and Singapore (74 
per cent) a vast majority of the population used the Internet. This is in contrast 
to Costa Rica, Georgia or Egypt where less than half of the population had ac-
cess to the Internet. This disparity becomes particularly acute with low income 
countries such as Guinea-Bissau (3 per cent), Madagascar (2 per cent) or Somalia 
(1 per cent) (see Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.1. Change in percentage of people using the Internet, selected countries
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
%
 o
f 
 p
e
o
p
le
 u
si
n
g
  
In
te
rn
e
t 
United Kingdom
Canada
Germany
United States
Russia
Brazil
Turkey
China
South Africa
Mexico
India
Source: ITU World Telecom-
munication/ICT Indicators data-
base.
 126 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Figure 6.2.  Disparity in use of Internet between developed and developing 
countries, 2013
1
2
3
5
8
10
11
15
17
18
19
2 0
2 1
2 4
2 5
2 7
3 2
3 3
3 6
3 8
4 1
4 4
4 5
4 7
5 1
5 4
5 6
5 8
6 0
6 1
6 3
6 4
6 5
6 8
7 0
7 2
7 3
7 4
7 5
7 9
8 0
84
8 5
90
9 3
9 4
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Somalia
Madagascar
Guinea-Bissau
Cambodia
Rwanda
Pakistan
Nepal
Uganda
Zimbabwe
Honduras
Senegal
Swaziland
S. Tomé & Principe
Syrian Arab Rep.
Bhutan
Paraguay
Kenya
Ukraine
Philippines
Peru
Mauritius
Egypt
Georgia
Costa Rica
Puerto Rico
Azerbaijan
Greece
Italy
Oman
Chile
TFYR Macedonia
Portugal
Poland
Lithuania
Slovenia
Spain
Barbados
Singapore
Czech Republic
Estonia
Slovak Republic
Antigua & Barbuda
United Arab Emirates
New Zealand
Netherlands
Sweden
Percentage of individuals using the Internet
Source:  ITU World Telecom-
munication/ICT Indi-
cators database. 
http://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Statistics/Pag-
es/stat/default.aspx
   127 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
In addition to the lack of infrastructure, there are other characteristics of the 
digital divide such as the institutional access where individual access is available 
only through group spaces such as schools, community centers, or cybercafés 
because of a high cost or a low level of personal income. This is especially true 
of millions in the developing world where access is limited by a lack of availability 
of devices and connection at home or work and, in particular, in Africa which re-
mains minimally wired compared to other regions (see Figure 6.3). Despite over a 
billion people living in Africa, making up around 15 per cent of the world popu-
lation, only 7 per cent of the households have Internet access. In Europe, which 
has 12 per cent of the world population, more than 75 per cent of the households 
have access to the Internet. In tracking these countries, the United Nations E-
Government Survey has consistently highlighted that Africa as a whole remains 
far behind other continents.
In many developing countries, among other government policies, telecommuni-
cation and regulatory policies have not yielded a fully competitive telecom mar-
ket resulting in barriers to broadband diffusion. For example, in terms of access 
to citizens, 68 out of 100 inhabitants in Europe enjoyed an active mobile broad-
band compared to only 22 out of 100 inhabitants in Asia and the Pacific and 19 
in the Arab states (see Figure 6.4).
Figure 6.3. Percentage of households with access to Internet in 2013, by region
Europe The Americas CIS Arab States Asia and Pacific Africa
P
er
 1
00
 in
ha
b
it
an
ts
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
77
61
46
34 33
7
Source: ITU World Telecom-
munication/ICT Indicators 
database. 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/
Statistics/Pages/stat/default.
aspx
Figure 6.4. Active mobile broadband subscriptions in 2013, by region
11
19
22
46 48
68
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Africa Arab States Asia and Pacific CIS The Americas Europe
P
er
 1
00
 in
ha
b
it
an
ts
Source:  ITU World Telecom-
munication/ICT Indi-
cators database. 
http://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Statistics/Pag-
es/stat/default.aspx
 128 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
6.4.  National income as a determinant 
of socioeconomic digital disparity
Though proliferation of technology, especially mobile telephony, has caused a 
burst of digital participation in general, income remains a key determinant of ac-
cess to technology. Those who are lower on the socioeconomic ladder may face 
multiple access barriers to engaging in economic, social and political participa-
tion. This holds true especially for the most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 
who are less wired to the digital economy, even in the advanced economies of 
the world. A study of 18 European countries found that low income was the 
single most important barrier to acquiring basic technology with a high-income 
household 4 times more likely to have access to a computer and the Internet than 
a low-income one. In the Netherlands and Norway, the probability is around 2.5 
times higher and in Portugal, where the high income household is 14 times more 
likely to possess a computer and Internet than a poor home, the gap is particu-
larly acute (Montagnier & Wirthmann, 2011).
Prohibitive costs to Internet or technology use also prevents populations from 
access. In Mexico, despite multiple telecommunication providers entering the 
market, the country has one of the highest connectivity costs among OECD 
countries resulting in 40 per cent of users accessing the Internet only in public 
places. In contrast, 90 per cent of households in the upper socio-economic strata 
in Mexico possess a computer at home.4
These trends are especially accentuated for disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups. The phenomenon is not limited to countries with lower levels of devel-
opment but also among the advanced economies. According to Pew research, 
one in five American adults who does not use the Internet is more likely to be 
an individual with no high school degree, earning less than US $30,000 per year, 
older persons or persons with disabilities.5
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in its 
Article 21 requires that countries ‘Promote access for persons with disabilities to 
new information and communications technologies and systems, including the In-
ternet’.6 But progress in digitally connecting persons with disabilities and other 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups has been slow, especially in the developing 
countries. As Figure 6.5 depicts, the proportions of key online services for persons 
with disabilities, older persons, women and youth were far more readily available 
among the high income and upper middle income countries than in countries with 
a lower tier of gross national income per capita.
Some of the 36 high income countries providing services for older persons are 
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom and 
the United States. Eleven countries from the upper middle income group pro-
viding for older persons are Azerbaijan, Belize, China, Colombia, Ecuador, Hun-
gary, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru and Tunisia. Among the lower middle 
income only four countries, Bolivia, Georgia, Mongolia and Morocco provided 
the same while Rwanda is the only low income country providing any services 
directly aimed at older persons. 
   129 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Income is only one contributory factor, albeit a major one, in provision of services 
which also depend on government priority, policy and focus on e-inclusion. These 
patterns are witnessed across subregions as well. For example in South-Eastern 
Asia, Singapore—a high income country—provides more than 70 per cent of the 
services to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups far in advance of Indonesia (36 
per cent); Vietnam (29 per cent) and Cambodia (14 per cent). As can be seen from 
Table 6.1, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines, though at lower per capita 
income level, offer a higher level of services to disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups compared to Brunei Darussalam—a high income country. This is also ap-
parent in the case of some middle income countries of Central America. Mexico, 
Panama and Costa Rica in the middle income range of US$ 13,000–17,000 nev-
ertheless provide varying levels of services with Panama and Costa Rica far less 
than Mexico as well as Belize—a country with a much lower GNI per capita at 
US$ 7,529.
Table 6.1.  National income and provision of services to disadvantaged 
and vulnerable groups in South-East Asia
Percentage of services GNI per capita (2013)
Malaysia 86% 17143
Singapore 86% 61803
Indonesia 36% 4956
Brunei 29% 53348
Philippines 29% 4413
Thailand 29% 9815
Vietnam 29% 3635
Cambodia 14% 2494
Lao 14% 2926
Myanmar 14% 1300
Timor-Leste 14% 1709
Figure 6.5. Services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, by income
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
High Income Upper middle
Income
Lower middle
Income
Low Income
Services for older persons
Services for youth
Services for women
 130 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 6.2. Downloadable forms for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups
Total number 
of countries
Downloadable forms 
for disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups
High income 55 46
Upper Middle Income 56 30
Lower Middle Income 46 20
Low income 36 1
A key useful service for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups would be the fa-
cility to download forms. Of the 55 high income countries, 46 or 84 per cent, 
provided downloadable forms specifically for services aimed at older persons, 
women and youth compared to around half of the upper middle income coun-
tries. Some of the upper middle income countries which provided online forms 
were: Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, 
Brazil, China, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Islamic Republic of Iran and Malay-
sia. It is notable that the number of countries providing the same became much 
less in the case of lower middle income and was negligible among low income 
where only Burkina Faso provided any downloadable forms.
box 6.1.  brazil’s efforts at mitigating the digital divide: 
universal access to the web
The government and civil society have teamed up to bridge the digital di-
vide for the millions of Brazilians. The Rede Marista de Solidariedade—a Porto 
Alegre-based non-profit organization focused on social inclusion and solidar-
ity through social projects—seeks to help bridge the digital gap in Brazil by 
promoting universal access to the web. New in the community of Nova Santa 
Marta—located in the Rio Grande do Sul city of Santa Maria—the region with 
the lowest human development indexes of the state, the Marista network es-
tablished a Center for Digital Inclusion which focuses on areas such as meta-
recycling, free robotics and tele-centers. The initiative was first implemented 
in a Computer Refurbishment Center in Brazil in 2005 with the support of the 
municipality of Porto Alegre, the Hospital Conceição healthcare group, devel-
opment organization Avina Foundation and drinks producer Vonpar. The work 
carried out by the Computer Refurbishment Center has so far benefited thou-
sands of users in tele-centers and schools with the donation of refurbished 
computers. The project offers training in hardware and free software to about 
100 young apprentices from among the socially vulnerable populations.
Source: h t t p : / / i t d e c s .
com/2011/06/case-study-
brazilian-ngo-fights-digital-
divide/
   131 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
6.5. ICT skills, language and content barriers
Educational disparity is another contributory factor of the digital divide. A strong 
correlation exists between the education and literacy on the one hand and the 
ability to use technology on the other. Education is the most important determi-
nant of the intensity of Internet use. This allows advanced countries with a solid 
human resource base to remain far ahead of others. According to one study the 
probability of an individual using the Internet everyday increases by 2.4 times in 
Europe and by 3.6 times in the Republic of Korea if he has a university degree 
and above (Montagnier & Wirthnann, 2011). A first step to being ICT literate in 
today’s information age is the availability of a computer and a certain level of 
information literacy.7
Whereas a basic level of technology and its use may allow for some integration 
into a digital economy, digital inclusion will still require an enhanced set of skill 
tools. For example, though smartphones have ushered in innovative means of 
providing those with no access, no education and no skills in many developing 
countries with opportunities to transact and participate, a smartphone is not a 
substitute for a wired connection because of the limitations of what it can do 
such as filling up a form which is hard to do on a hand-held device. Further, not 
all websites allow for smartphone optimization, so some cannot be accessed, or 
if they can, they may not show all the content.
Language and content barriers
The ability to understand, use and deploy the Internet content determines the 
extent to which one can participate in the economy and the society. Conversely, 
inability to use one’s language on global information networks affects the capa-
bility of populations to avail of the benefits of technology and adds to the digital 
divide. As can be seen from Table 6.3, even in 2012, barriers from inaccessibility 
to own-language content remain, with 56 per cent of the Internet content in Eng-
lish which, though, only a quarter of the total users can understand.
Whereas some progress has been made to offer other languages in the last dec-
ade, the overwhelming content still remains in English as seen in Figure 6.6.
Table 6.3. Disparity in Internet content and language
Language % of Internet users by language % of content on the Internet
English 27 56
Chinese 25 4
Spanish 8 4
Portuguese 4 2
German 4 6
Arabic 3 1
French 3 4
Russian 3 6
Source: Language by content 
statistics from W3Techs. Web 
technologies Surveys. http://
w3techs.com/technologies/
overview/content_language/all. 
accessed 13 September 2013 
Data for Internet users from: 
World Internet Users Statistics. 
30 June 2012. http://www.inter-
networldstats.com/stats7.htm
 132 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
 The adverse impact of lack of relevant content contributes to the digital di-
vide in two ways. First, for example, despite the fact that India had manifold 
increase in Internet users from 5 million in 2000 to 137 million in 2012,8 literacy 
is comparatively low at 74 per cent.9 This means barriers to Internet access 
remain for over 300 million people. Secondly, of those who can access the 
Internet, the majority cannot speak English. Unless users have some knowl-
edge of the English language—regardless of how good machine translators 
become—they will be barred from the vast reservoir of information available 
in the electronic world.
The increase in the use of more than one language on national portals is par-
ticularly notable. This convenience is likely to draw in special populations such 
as immigrants who may not be fully conversant in the widely spoken national 
language. In 2014, 74 per cent of the national portals offered the facility of in-
formation in more than the national language compared to 54 per cent in 2012. 
The progress is regionally spread with almost all of the European countries; 
85 per cent in Asia; 66 per cent in the Americas and 61 per cent in Africa (see 
Figure 6.7). In Africa, around two thirds of all countries offered more than one 
language. Though Oceania is the least accessible in this regard, as a whole, 
special efforts have been made in Australia where among others, a special 
programme has taken a holistic approach to community building and economic 
development using new technologies as tools to provide equal access to all 
(see Box 6.2).
There has been much progress in the design of websites to allow for configura-
tion and options of font size, font type, font and background color to increase 
the flexibility and appeal of national portals to greater users. In 2014, 40 per 
cent of countries allowed for flexible font size and type compared to 31 per 
cent in 2012.
Source: Language by content 
statistics from W3Techs. Web 
technologies Surveys. http://
w3techs.com/technologies/
overview/content_language/all. 
accessed 13 September 2013
Figure 6.6.  Lack of content in own language as a barrier to accessibility, selected 
countries
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
En
gl
ish
Ru
ss
ian
Ge
rm
an
Ja
pa
ne
se
Sp
an
ish
, C
as
tili
an
Ch
ine
se
Fr
en
ch
Po
rtu
gu
es
e
Po
lis
h
Ita
lia
n
Tu
rk
ish
Du
tc
h,
 F
lem
ish
Ar
ab
ic
Pe
rsi
an
Cz
ec
h
Sw
ed
ish
Pe
rc
en
ta
g
e 
of
 In
te
rn
et
 c
on
te
nt
 in
 e
ac
h 
la
ng
ua
g
e
   133 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Figure 6.7. Online services in more than one language, by region
Asia
85
Europe
98
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
AfricaAmericas Oceania
61
66
29Pe
rc
en
ta
g
e 
of
 c
ou
nt
rie
s
Source: Human development 
data from UNDP International 
Human Development Indica-
tors, http://hdr.undp.org. Ac-
cessed: 9/15/2013
box 6.2.  e-AcE Project in Australia: providing language content 
to integrate communities
The electronic Atherton Community Enterprise, or e-ACE, is Infoxchange Aus-
tralia’s first and longest running digital inclusion project. It focuses on world-
wide communications, alongside education, skills development, improved 
health and well-being, access to health and community services and employ-
ment opportunities. Local information has been made available in multiple lan-
guages and residents are easily able to access local employment and training 
opportunities through the e-ACE intranet, as well as connect with their family 
and friends on the other side of the world. Without the technology made avail-
able to them through the e-ACE project, most Atherton Gardens residents, 
mainly low income earning, migrants or the children of migrants, would have 
not been able to access a computer at all.
Source: http://www.infox-
change.net.au/welcome-
digital-inclusion-program/
Figure 6.8. Accessibility attributes on national websites, by region
Europe
65
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
OceaniaAsiaAmericas Africa
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s
19
43 43
36
 134 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
6.6.  Lack of e-services for disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups compounds digital disparities
There has been progress in e-services aimed at disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups. In 2012, the United Nations E-Government Survey assessed that 28 per 
cent of the national government websites contained specific sections on at least 
one of these groups; by 2014, 64 per cent of the national government portals and 
websites provided integrated links to sources of archived information (policies, 
budget, legal documents, etc.) related to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, 
namely people living in poverty, persons with disabilities, older persons, immi-
grants, women and youth.
Clearly understanding the link between the burgeoning online opportunities 
and human wellbeing, many of the developed countries have a stated policy 
of e-inclusion of the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in society which are 
generally the last to come on board the technology train. Cross country compari-
sons show evidence of this divide for the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 
among countries of the world. Figure 6.9  indicates that countries with higher 
human development index pay greater attention to e-inclusion of vulnerable 
groups. Programs aimed at building skills for the vulnerable groups have encom-
passed special ease-of-use features for persons with disabilities, older persons, 
women and youth.
In Africa, online services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups remains lower 
than in other regions, with only 4 per cent of countries offering services for the 
poor and the persons with disabilities. In Asia, the disabled and vulnerable group 
that receives most online services is the immigrants with 38 per cent of countries 
offering this service. Oceania has 14 per cent of countries offering services to the 
older persons, persons with disabilities and the immigrants. Services for the poor 
are available in 21 per cent of the countries in Oceania. Finally, in the Americas, 
31 per cent of countries present services for the persons with disabilities and the 
older persons (see Table 6.4).
Figure 6.9.  A higher percentage of total services are aimed at disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups in high human development countries
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Human development index
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
of
 t
ot
al
 s
er
vi
ce
s 
fo
r 
th
e 
vu
ln
ra
b
le
Correlation coefficient: 0.6614
   135 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Table 6.4. Overview of online services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups
Region Services for poor
Services 
for persons with 
disabilities
Services 
for older persons
Services 
for Immigrants
Per centage of total countries in the region
Africa 4 4 6 7
Americas 20 31 31 17
Asia 34 32 30 38
Europe 47 53 53 44
Oceania 21 14 14 14
The disparity between regions is replicated between countries of a region and 
sub region indicating differential in approach, policy, programme, investment 
and focus on bringing disadvantaged and vulnerable groups into the fold of 
technology benefits. Figure 6.10 presents the disparity in provision of online ser-
vices for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in selected subregions.
Among selected economies of Eastern Europe, Hungary, Russian Federation, 
Czech Republic and Poland are far in advance of provision of online services to 
disadvantaged and vulnerable groups as compared to Belarus and Ukraine. Simi-
larly, in Southern Asia, India and the Islamic Republic of Iran provided 43 per cent 
followed by Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, Maldives and Sri Lanka at 21 per cent 
of online services to vulnerable groups (see Figure 6.10). 
The United Nations E-Government Survey 2014 for the first time tracked spe-
cific services for immigrants as a group. As Figure 6.11 shows, 44 per cent of the 
countries in Europe and 38 per cent in Asia have some services earmarked for 
immigrants. In Asia, China, Kazakhstan, Japan, Mongolia, the Republic of Korea, 
Pakistan, Maldives and Sri Lanka offered services while in Europe, Czech Repub-
lic, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom were among those putting out 
information and services for the immigrants.
box 6.3. US portal devoted to disability providing comprehensive services
The US portal on disability states ‘We are committed to ensuring that Disabil-
ity.gov is accessible to all visitors’. Under US Section 508 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973, which was enacted to eliminate barriers to information technol-
ogy for people with disabilities by requiring federal government agencies to 
provide comparable information and data to individuals with or without dis-
abilities, the site provides a plethora of features for ease of use of People with 
Disabilities, Caregivers, Children & Youth, Employers & Human Resources Spe-
cialists, Health Care Providers, among other. The site is regularly monitored to 
ensure that it meets and exceeds the requirements of Section 508.
Source: ht tps://www.dis -
ability.gov/
 136 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
As in the case of other services national priority and policy plays an important 
role in provision of services. In Pakistan immigrant services are among the first 
and foremost reflection on the national portal (see Box 6.4).
Figure 6.11. Online services for immigrants, by region
0
20
40
60
7
Africa
17
Americas
38
Asia
44
Europe
14
Oceania
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s 
o
ff
er
in
g
 s
er
vi
ce
s
box 6.4.  Pakistan puts immigrant services among the top popular searches
Among other causative factors in the provision of specific services for disad-
vantaged and vulnerable groups is the focus and priority of a government. In 
the case of Pakistan a newly revamped national portal puts immigrant services 
among the top under popular searches.
Source: National portal of Pakistan. http://www.pakistan.gov.pk
Figure 6.10.  Online services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 
in Eastern Europe and Southern Asia, selected countries
Slo
va
kia
21
Hu
ng
ar
y
64
Be
lar
us
21
Bu
lg
ar
ia
14
Cz
ec
h 
Re
pu
bl
ic
43
Po
lan
d
43
Ru
ss
ia
43
M
ol
do
va
21
Ro
m
an
ia
14
Uk
ra
ine
14
Ba
ng
lad
es
h
21
Ira
n (
Isl
am
ic 
Re
p.
 o
f)
43
Ind
ia
43
M
ald
ive
s
21
Ne
pa
l
21
Pa
kis
ta
n
21
Sr
i L
an
ka
21
Af
gh
an
ist
an
14
Bh
ut
an
14
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
se
rv
ic
es
 a
ss
es
se
d
Eastern Europe Southern Asia
   137 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The digital divide is also a function of existing disparities in access by gender, 
demographics, rural-urban and of marginal groups on the fringes of mainstream 
society. Barring a few countries such as Jamaica, Ireland and Thailand, where 
there are more women users of the Internet than men, the majority of countries 
display the norm where men have an edge over women (see Figure 6.12). It is 
notable that in Jamaica 29.8 per cent of women are Internet users compared to 
25.4 per cent of men. In Finland and New Zealand it is pretty much equal while 
in the Russian Federation (47.5 for men and 38.8 for women): the gap is much 
higher in countries such as Croatia (71.9 per cent for men to 55.8 per cent for 
women) and Turkey (52.9 per cent for men and 33.5 per cent for women). Though 
the differences have become smaller, they still remain large in several countries 
contributing one more factor to the overall digital divide. Because educational 
levels in general are lower for women in developing countries than men, their ac-
cess opportunities are likely to be lower.
The causes of this gender divide can stem from disparities between men and 
women in terms of a lack of education, lack of income, social attitudes towards 
female usage of technology, women having to balance their roles of mother and 
worker and lack of Internet content relative to women’s needs. 
Figure 6.12. Disparity in use of Internet between men and women
Turkey
Croatia
Morocco
Serbia
Italy
Switzerland
Russia
Korea (Rep.)
Singapore
Portugal
Austria
Germany
Slovak Republic
Mauritius
Senegal
Slovenia
Spain
Malta
Belgium
Iran (I.R.)
Norway
Iceland
Uruguay
El Salvador
Ecuador
Paraguay
Brazil
Lithuania
United Kingdom 
Colombia
New Zealand
Finland
Thailand
Ireland
Jamaica
–10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25
Source: Data from the ITU, 
based on national sources and 
Eurostat. http://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/de-
fault.aspx
 138 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Despite the fact that young people are far more likely to be online, as compared 
to women as a group as well as the overall population, national government on-
line services geared specifically towards the youth are still taking off. Disparities 
abound across all regions and are likely to be linked to the policy, level of devel-
opment and national income of a country. In the more advanced regions, such as 
Europe and the Americas, 47 per cent and 40 per cent of the countries provide 
specific services geared to the young on their national websites (see Figure 6.13).
Among upper middle income countries Belize, China, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Kazakhstan are among those providing specific services for women while Argen-
tina, Belize, Colombia and Cuba are among those providing services for youth. 
Around a quarter of the countries of Europe and the Americas had specific infor-
mation aimed at these groups on their websites.
It is also notable that a large number of countries are now providing more ar-
chival information related to government policies and programs (see Table 6.5). 
In 2014 more than 50 per cent of the countries in the world regions, except for 
Africa, provided some data pertaining to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. 
Despite not keeping up with the world averages in general, in terms of data, 
Africa was behind other regions with 28 per cent of the countries providing data 
pertaining to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. Among these were Egypt, 
Gabon, Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, 
Rwanda and Zimbabwe.
0
10
20
30
40
50
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
co
un
tr
ie
s 
in
 r
eg
io
n
Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania
Online services for women
Online services for youth
2
13
23
40 40
28 29
14
47
26
Figure 6.13. Countries providing online services for women and youth, by region
Table 6.5.  Online archived information and data for disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups
Region Archived sources of information Data
% of countries % of countries
Africa 41 28
Americas 69 69
Asia 68 51
Europe 86 60
Oceania 57 57
   139 
C
hap
ter 6
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
About half the countries in Europe and around one third in the Americas offered 
email or Really Simple Syndication (RSS) services to disadvantaged and vulner-
able groups while the same in Africa was 19 per cent (see Figure 6.14). Among 
the sub regions of Africa, six countries in Eastern Africa—Kenya, Mauritius, Mo-
zambique, Rwanda, Tanzania and Zimbabwe—offer the user the option to sub-
scribe to updates via email or RSS feed on services related to disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups, namely people living in poverty, illiterate persons, persons 
with disabilities, older persons, immigrants, women and youth. While Morocco 
in Northern Africa, Nigeria in West Africa and Sao Tome and Principe in Central 
Africa were alone in their sub regions. No country in Southern Africa provides RSS 
feeds aimed at these disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.
SMS services for disadvantaged and vulnerable groups were even less readily 
available with only about eight per cent of the countries of the world offering 
mobile apps or SMS service in regards to any of the disadvantaged and vulner-
able groups.
6.7. Conclusion
The global disparities in digital access have socioeconomic implications in to-
day’s world, contributing to barriers to information and knowledge on the one 
hand and access to services on the other. With increasing online opportunities 
of employment, jobs, entrepreneurship and personal development, large groups 
are deprived through a lack of basic access to technology. 
The digital divide has implications for the Post-2015 development agenda. While 
national governments have moved beyond connectivity parameters to employ 
ICT and e-government for service delivery aimed at e-inclusion, a broadening of 
the scope of these efforts is required to capture innovative technology solutions 
for poverty reduction and other development outcomes in the Post-2015 agen-
da. Meaningful access to ICT has gone beyond connectivity issues to embrace 
Figure 6.14. Updates via email and RSS source, by region
14
19
23
29
49
0 10 20 30 40 50
Oceania
Africa
Asia
Americas
Europe
Percentage of countries 
 140 
C
ha
p
te
r 
6
CHAPTER 6 • bRIDGING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
human, economic and social resources, institutional structures and governance 
networks, which are central to developmental outcomes. A number of recom-
mendations can be inferred from this Chapter.
 • From a policy standpoint, efforts at bridging the digital divide must be broad 
based across the policy spectrum and include government leaders at the high-
est levels. At the national level, it is important to provide for policies that are 
aimed at equal opportunities for ICT access and inclusion.
 • Formulation of a coherent and coordinated ICT policy at the national, regional 
and local levels should include a strategic framework identifying costs and 
benefits to the persons living in poverty and other disadvantaged and vulner-
able groups. 
 • New ICT policies should address gender sensitive issues, including women’s 
and girls’ access to education, as well as to higher levels of decision-making 
at all levels.
 • Governments also need to revisit the strategic framework of ICT access for 
the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in terms of both increasing the level 
and reducing the cost of connectivity, which in some countries is prohibitively 
expensive. 
 • Following the example in some countries, governments in developing coun-
tries can support research and development to encourage the production of 
low-cost ICTs to enable the vast majority of people to have access.
 • Finally, particular attention needs to be paid to the development of culturally 
relevant online content and services, especially aimed at supporting access for 
indigenous peoples.
In this chapter:
Chapter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
7.1. Introduction 141
7.2. E-Government usage: the current landscape 141
7.2.1. The demand-side of the equation 141
7.2.2. Countries’ efforts to increase e-government uptake 144
7.2.3. Users, usability and usage dilemma 145
7.3. Towards greater service uptake in a multichannel world 147
7.4.
Capturing e-government 
benefits: selected issues 
and cases
150
7.4.1. E-learning and learning without Internet access 150
7.4.2. Navigating e-health and m-health 153
7.4.3.
E-government usage 
in employment and other 
critical areas
156
7.5. Conclusion 160
E-Government 
for the post-2015 era: 
the usage perspective
7.1. Introduction
This chapter outlines the current situation of e-govern-
ment usage, particularly the efforts made by the 193 
United Nations Member States. It examines various e-
government service channels (including mobile and so-
cial media), service channel mix and management in a 
multichannel world, exploring effective channel manage-
ment strategies (with good opportunities) to increase e-
service uptake. The chapter also looks at selected issues 
related to e-government service usage in several critical 
areas which can generate high returns for sustainable de-
velopment, along with good practices; and provides con-
cluding observations, with some policy suggestions on 
increasing e-service uptake. 
7.2.  E-Government usage:  
the current landscape
Increasing e-government uptake is important in order 
to reach all citizens for whom the services are intended, 
thereby maximizing the impacts of government invest-
ments in providing e-government services.
7.2.1. The demand-side of the equation
While the provision of e-government services on the 
supply-side is generally increasing, improvements are 
needed to the demand-side of the equation (i.e. e-gov-
ernment uptake).1
In OECD countries, e-government usage averages out 
at 50 per cent of its citizens, but there is great variation 
among countries. The Nordic countries (Iceland, Den-
 142 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
mark, Norway, Sweden and Finland) are leading with over 80 per cent of citizens 
using e-government. At the opposite end of the spectrum, less than 20 per cent 
of citizens in Chile and Italy make use of e-government. Also, in terms of ad-
vanced e-government development, Iceland and Denmark are leading (with over 
70 per cent of citizens sending forms), whereas Italy’s and Chile’s usage rate is 
only about 10 per cent (see Figure 7.1).
In Europe, the E-Government Action Plan 2011–2015 and the Digital Agenda for 
Europe aim to increase the use of e-government services from 44 to 50 per cent 
of EU citizens (and 85 per cent of businesses) by 2015; with more than half (i.e. 
25 per cent of citizens) returning completed forms. EU citizens’ regular Internet 
use (including Internet use by disadvantaged groups) and the supply of e-gov-
ernment services have made much progress towards meeting the Digital Agenda 
targets. Figure 7.2 shows how the EU scored on e-government and Internet us-
age targets of the Digital Agenda in 2012 (70 per cent out of 75 per cent and 44 
per cent out of 50 per cent).2
According to some sources, if current trends continue, the EU could be on track 
for the European Digital Agenda target of 50 per cent of e-government users by 
2015. However, despite an e-government usage increase to 46 per cent of EU 
citizens in 2013, there are issues that warrant close attention, for example over 
half of them (28 per cent) are at risk of dropping out after their first experience. 
Citizens’ satisfaction with e-government services and their use also lags behind 
the private sector (e.g. online banking, online shopping), which is also seen to 
be problematic.3
Figure 7.1.  Citizens using the Internet to interact with public authorities in OECD 
countries (2012)
100%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Ice
lan
d
De
nm
ar
k
Fin
lan
d
Ne
th
er
lan
ds
Sw
itz
er
lan
d
Fr
an
ce
Lu
xe
m
bu
rg
Es
to
nia
Au
str
ia
Ne
w 
Ze
ala
nd
Ge
rm
an
y
O
EC
D
Be
lg
ium
Ire
lan
d
Slo
ve
nia
Ca
na
da
Sp
ain
Un
ite
d 
Ki
ng
do
m
Hu
ng
ar
y
Slo
va
k R
ep
ub
lic
Po
rtu
ga
l
Au
str
ali
a
Gr
ee
ce
Po
lan
d
Cz
ec
h 
Re
pu
bl
ic
Isr
ae
l
Ita
ly
Ch
ile
Ja
pa
n
Internet Use:
Interaction with public
authorities (last 12 months)
Internet Use: 
Sending filled forms 
(last 12 months)
No
rw
ay
Sw
ed
en
Source: OECD (2013), Govern-
ment at a Glance 2013, Prelimi-
nary Version
   143 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Moreover, overall e-government uptake rates in Europe greatly diverge among 
countries; with the gap between the best performing country (Iceland) with over 
80 per cent and the worst performing country (Italy) with less than 20 per cent. 
Also, national usage rates of United Nations Member States at an advanced e-
government development stage vary widely between countries. For example, 
in Romania, where only 10 per cent of e-government users return filled forms, 
whereas 85 per cent do in Denmark. Similarly to OECD countries, the EU is thus 
facing an ‘e-government usage divide’ among its Member States, which presents 
a major challenge for European e-government policy-making.
The usage level of advanced e-government remains relatively low. According 
to EUROSTAT (2013), 52 per cent of individuals in the European Union used e-
government to obtain information from public authorities’ websites. 35 per cent 
of them made use of more advanced services such as downloading official forms 
and 29 per cent sent filled forms in 2010. The latest country-specific data on 
the extent and type of e-government usage is available in some countries, such 
as Norway with very extensive (and relatively advanced) e-government usage. 
Eight in ten persons interacted with public authorities over the Internet, with 72 
per cent obtaining information, 52 per cent downloading official forms and 52 
per cent sending filled forms to public authorities, whilst 50 per cent sent their 
income declaration over the Internet.4
In the developing world, there is no comprehensive data on actual e-government 
usage on a global scale. Available country data shows that countries’ uptake rate 
greatly varies. For example, 50 per cent of Colombian citizens interacted with 
the government through electronic channels in 2012.5 Similarly, in Turkey, 41.3 
per cent of Internet users interacted with public authorities over the Internet, 
with 37.5 per cent of them obtaining information.6 In Egypt, e-government ser-
vice uptake is, however, very low; with only 11.3 per cent of Egyptian households 
being aware of the existence of e-government services and only 2 per cent of 
these households actually using these services (2012). The most commonly used 
services in Egypt are online payment of public utilities.7
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
E
U
 p
o
p
ul
at
io
n
Regular Internet use Internet use by
disadvantaged group
E-government use E-government user
who return forms
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80 Target
Actual75%
70%
60%
54%
50%
44%
25%
22%
Figure 7.2.  EU Digital Agenda targets and actual performance 2012
Source: Based on data from: 
European Commission 2013: 
Staff Working Document, Digi-
tal Agenda Scoreboard 2013, 
Brussels
 144 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Some governments make explicit efforts to encourage their citizens to use more 
advanced e-services, which has, however, not proven easy, for reasons such as 
security. For example, less than half of the taxpayers have adopted e-personal 
income tax filing in Malaysia, despite the promise of faster refunds by the Inland 
revenues agency.8 Basic threshold issues, such as the lingering fear or distrust 
of online transaction services entailing disclosure of their credit cards, inhibited 
take-up of e-transaction services.
7.2.2. Countries’ efforts to increase e-government uptake
The United Nations E-Government Survey does not provide data on the extent of 
the actual e-government usage in countries around the world. As is well known, 
it is based on e-government features available on the national portals (i.e. sup-
ply side analysis). On the other hand, the 2014 Survey questionnaire includes a 
set of questions (including usage-facilitating features) that offers some indication 
of 193 countries’ efforts to increase service uptake through provision of various 
usage-facilitating features. All sources of data used in this chapter come from 
this questionnaire, unless otherwise stated. While broadband infrastructure is 
certainly a driver of e-government uptake, other factors (e.g. awareness and digi-
tal skills) also influence e-government usage. Usage-facilitating features will also 
have bearings on citizens’ e-government uptake.
Countries’ efforts to develop e-government therefore need to go hand in hand 
with their efforts to increase demand. Figure 7.3 presents 193 United Nations 
Member States’ efforts to increase e-government uptake through provision of 
usage-facilitating features; in comparison with the level of their efforts to provide 
(non-usage specific) e-government features. Usage-facilitating features include 
features of usability, usage monitoring and tracking, user feedback and usage 
promotion; which reflect countries’ efforts to increase usage.
Figure 7.3.  Usage-facilitating features in comparison with other e-government 
features for 193 United Nations Member States
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
U
sa
g
e-
fa
ci
lit
at
in
g
 f
ea
tu
re
s
E-government development features
   145 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Countries are shown as dots in the scatterplot in Figure 7.3. The scoring is shown as 
a percentage. In each axis, 100 per cent means that all of the features measured by 
the United Nations E-Government Survey are available on the individual country’s 
national portal. The Y-axis represents the percentage of each country’s usage-facil-
itating features, whilst the X-axis presents the percentage of each country’s e-gov-
ernment development features—after deduction of the usage-facilitating features.
The figure shows that many countries have balanced their endeavors on e-gov-
ernment services with the aim to facilitate usage. Their efforts on the supply-
side are proportional to the efforts made on the demand-side. In countries like 
Denmark, Venezuela, Croatia and Spain, demand-side efforts even exceeded 
the supply-side. At the same time, there are many other countries where greater 
efforts to increase usage are warranted, such as through increased provision of 
usage-facilitating features on their national portals.
7.2.3. Users, usability and usage dilemma
There is not only a digital divide, but also an e-government usage divide across 
different types of users within many countries. The divide begins with access to 
the Internet and extends to the use of e-government services.
The extent of usage is not evenly distributed across different groups (OECD 
Glance 2012, Pew Institute 2010) and is generally correlated with demographic 
and socio-economic characteristics (e.g. income, education level, age). It is how-
ever interesting to note the “youth gap” in the e-government uptake. This may be 
because some of the most commonly deployed e-government services, such as 
tax filings, are either not relevant or are not necessarily dealt with by the youngest 
age group (OECD Glance 2013).
Furthermore, as more tasks are moved online, there is an increasing concern that 
a significant portion of the population is shut off from jobs, health care, educa-
tion and other government services.9 This situation creates a usage dilemma. 
Addressing the downside of e-service boom, Hall and Owens (2011) warned that 
progress in the field may cause a counter effect, with wealthier and tech-savvy 
citizens gaining faster and easier access to public services. But those underprivi-
leged, who rely on public services (and would benefit most from accessing them 
on-line) become even more cut off because they lack internet access and/or skills.
There are attempts to address some of these issues in Europe. The previous E-Gov-
ernment Action Plan (2006) focused strongly on “inclusive e-government” which 
recognized that over the next ten years at least up to 30 per cent of the adult popu-
lation would not be online and thus unable to avail of the benefits of e-government. 
It was clear these citizens were, by and large, those who were also vulnerable in 
some way, so that this group was doubly disadvantaged. Work with Member States 
was therefore undertaken to ensure that even this group received the advantages 
of e-government, including through the use of ICT in the back-office to better tar-
get people and localities in need and to make service delivery chains more effec-
tive, for example by using e-government intermediaries e.g. public kiosks.
During the current Action Plan (2011–2015), there is a heavy focus on admin-
istrative burden reduction for example through “digital by default” strategies 
 146 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
in which suitable services for citizens (as well as businesses) are only available 
online. In countries like Denmark, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, spe-
cific measures are taken for the 15 to 20 per cent of citizens who, it is recognized 
in practice, will not be able to access online services at least in the short term. 
Overall, the government still makes very significant efforts by making online ser-
vices compulsory through boosting usage, even though it needs to make special 
arrangements to assist this small group. (An example of the UK’s Assisted Digital 
Team is provided in Chapter 5.)
Moreover, there are substantial usability challenges for certain groups of citizens 
(e.g. older persons interacting with Medicare).10 Seen from an inclusive, sustain-
able development perspective, usability is therefore a particularly important us-
age issue; warranting governments’ primary attention in their efforts to advance 
sustainable development through increased uptake of such groups.
Better usability means greater ability to use e-services, hence increasing the 
chance for e-government uptake. If a website is difficult to use, people leave. 
The design needs to make it easy for visitors to find what they need and do the 
tasks that they have come for. The recent usability flaws of Healthcare.gov (one 
of the centrepieces of the US Affordable Care Act) show the critical importance 
of usability for user uptake and e-government success. Likewise, in the EU, dif-
ficulties in usage were also identified as a key barrier to adopting e-government 
services. Search features are the most common usability features found on Mem-
ber States’ websites, with 168 countries including such features. Audio or video 
contents were present on 148 websites. Advanced search features are less com-
mon with only 101 countries (see Table 7.1).
Table 7.1. Number of countries with selected usability features
Usage-enhancing features—available on national portals Number of countries
‘Contact us’ feature 185
Search feature 168
Audio or video contents 148
Site map or index 131
Advanced search options such as search filters 101
‘Help’ feature or ‘Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)’ section 89
Information on how to make use of datasets 34
Ultimately, it is however not easy to answer the question: what “usability” means 
and what its components are. Our understanding of usability is also changing 
and it needs to be interpreted in a variety of new ways, which will also depend 
on the particular stage of development and the specific needs of each country or 
locality. In more advanced countries like the United Kingdom, the United States 
of America, Finland, Singapore and the Republic of Korea, usability is moving 
away from reliance on sophisticated one-stop-shop navigation portals to a num-
ber of other approaches, including the “findability” of a specific service through 
advanced search engines. The new UK portal (www.gov.uk) has adopted this ap-
proach after it was shown that only about 10 per cent of citizens found a service 
   147 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
through the previous navigation portal with the rest arriving through search or 
linking from other websites, whilst Singapore’s citizen portal (www.ecitizen.gov.
sg) now highlights an advanced service engine with autocomplete and predictive 
search results.
There is also an increasing attempt to personalize services to make them more 
usable, given that users want services completely designed for their own very 
specific individual needs. This means very simple services are needed defined as 
having no irrelevant procedures, content or information and this requires that, in 
the words of the UK government’s digital service design principles “government 
must do the hard work to make it easy and simple for users.”11
In less advanced e-government countries, as well as in many emerging econo-
mies, usability will typically still need to be built strongly on one-stop-shops, 
awareness and promotion campaigns, user training and incentives. Common to 
all countries, however, there is a need to focus on maximizing user service fulfil-
ment through making sure that services are relevant, inclusive, easy to use, easy 
to find and available through multi-channels with mobile becoming increasingly 
important.
7.3.  Towards greater service uptake 
in a multichannel world
This section will look at different e-government service channels, channel mix 
and integration, which have important bearings on e-government usage.
In a world with a variety of service delivery channels, an effective channel man-
agement strategy—with a good opportunity to increase e-service usage—needs 
to be based on a careful consideration of the individual service channels for spe-
cific purposes and user needs, as well as a proper mix and integration of multiple 
offline and online channels. Recognizing the need for effective channel manage-
ment, the Danish city, Copenhagen, has even created a channel strategy team, 
moving people from its physical centers to the phone or the websites.12
The service channels have different characteristics and distinctive value in the 
channel mix, rendering them better suitable for certain service types than oth-
ers (see Chapter 5). Rather than moving all services online, it is therefore impor-
tant to align service delivery channels with different user needs,13 as well as the 
specific nature of different public services. The more e-government services (fit-
ting the specific user needs) are delivered through suitable channels, the more 
they are likely to be taken-up.
Governments therefore need to have a clear view of their users in relation to the 
services they offer and how these services will be accessed. At the same time, it 
is also important to deliver services across multiple channels, providing the op-
tion for citizens to take up public services via their preferred channels; instead of 
just relying on e-service channels.14
 148 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Seen from the inclusive, sustainable development perspective, service delivery 
across multiple channels is important, particularly as offline service channels con-
tinue to be relevant around the world.
Some governments include a range of service channels, including telephone, 
video or face-to-face interactions as part of their plan to move their services 
online, though with provisions of channels for “IT have-nots” and “IT will-nots”.
Countries advanced in this service include the United Kingdom, Denmark, the 
Netherlands, Australia and the United States of America (see Chapter 5).
In addition to ‘aligning’ and ‘mixing’ the service channels, effective channel ‘in-
tegration’ is also likely to increase service uptake. A variety of service channels 
need to be interoperated seamlessly to enable their use for a single transaction.
Moreover, more personalized public services to the individual citizen, with iden-
tification and segmentation of user base (namely, deriving user segments and 
clustering group of user sharing similar characteristics such as gender, ages, 
marital status) will help better tailor public services to the needs of individual 
users with likely positive impact on user service take-up. As far as segmentation 
is concerned, which is gaining popularity, there are a few examples such as the 
portal sites of the Netherlands (http://www.overheid.nl) and the Korean Ministry 
of Health and Welfare (http://www.mw.go.kr/front_new/index.jsp).
The rapidly growing, increasingly ubiquitous, affordable and powerful mobile 
technology provides governments with important opportunities to extend public 
services to a wide population (including hard-to-reach citizens and underserved 
populations).
The socio-economic return of mobile technology is likely to be particularly high 
in rural areas and developing countries in low-resource settings, because they 
lack or have limited access to fixed line broadband.
On the demand side, mobile increases user take-up opportunities of public ser-
vices. In fact, some government agencies are seeing the impact of mobile ubiq-
uity, with a growing number of visitors accessing websites from mobile devices. 
An example is GobiernoUSA (with a 200 per cent increase in mobile traffic from 
2010 to 2011) and the US Department of Agriculture’s mobile food safety web-
sites with one-fifth of their traffic going to the new mobile version.15
Social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter) is a fast growing networking tool and an 
emerging channel for governments to listen and communicate directly with citi-
zens. The benefits of social media include helping governments to establish user 
needs and design more responsive services, instead of just relying on costly and 
more traditional user needs surveys.
Underlying increasing use of social media as a service channel is often the belief 
that social media (with its inherent, collaborative and participatory nature) can 
foster sharing of ideas and information among users themselves and with gov-
ernment towards service improvement. Such information sharing efforts and (po-
tential) user community activism may put pressure on governments to improve 
and expand services and this in turn is likely to increase user take-up.
   149 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Some governments are actively capitalizing on social media; for example Spain is 
using social media technologies in tax administration (OECD, 2011) and in Chile, 
the use of social media is firmly embedded as a key component in the govern-
ment’s e-government strategy 2011–2014. Social media is also legitimized in the 
country as one of the ‘valid’ channels for citizens to interact with the government 
to the extent that Chileans have the third highest take-up rate of Facebook in the 
world (OECD, 2012) and the official government Facebook account has 23,000 
likes. Chile’s umbrella government Twitter account (“Gobiernodechile”) is also 
the second most popular account across the OECD (after the British Number-
10gov account), with followers of almost 3 per cent of the country’s population 
(more than the White House Twitter). The e-government programme (“Startup 
Chile”), launched in 2011, is also actively taken up by its target users, this time, by 
non-Chilean users and prospective investors (see Box 7.1).
Such active embrace of social media by the Chilean government as well as the 
citizens is likely to help reduce the common problem of e-government (“supply-
demand disconnect”) in Latin America and the Caribbean. This problem of pro-
viding services not reflective of user needs is one of the major reasons for past 
failures of e-government initiatives in the region.17 Another example is the major 
US city governments in Washington, D.C., Chicago and San Francisco use social 
media (including Twitter) to handle 311 service requests by their citizens, which 
were actively taken up.18 Also, in African countries like South Africa, social media 
(especially, Twitter) is used to improve service delivery and is taken up actively by 
citizens (see Chapter 5).
Social media have their own distinctive value in the current service channel 
mix with growing potential, but this does not come for free. It enables citizens 
to have access to government information, provide feedback and even create 
‘pressure’ for service improvement. Governments can also use it to improve 
their presence and drive e-service uptake. But they should not underestimate 
the cost (e.g. data mining cost) and effort involved in fully utilizing social media 
as a service channel.
box 7.1. “Start-up chile”—Service uptake by non-chilean users
The online “Start-up Chile” programme was developed by the Ministry of Econ-
omy, with the objective of attracting foreign entrepreneurs to invest in Chile to 
launch their businesses and thereby help promote Chile as the innovation and 
entrepreneurial hub of Latin America. The website has all major social network-
ing tools such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube). In the same year, the pro-
gramme already had over 3,800 followers, over 100 blog posts, 1,474 likes on 
Facebook with active conversation about the programme and 105 subscribers 
and over 5,600 views on YouTube16 as of mid-October 2013, 1,910 applications 
were made to make use of the programme, as displayed on the website.
Source: http://startupchile.
org/
 150 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
7.4.  Capturing e-government benefits: 
selected issues and cases
This section will examine e-government usage, selected issues and cases in pri-
ority areas (e.g. education, health, poverty, employment and environment) in line 
with the MDGs and as highlighted in the post-2015 discussions. It will also en-
compass gender and environmental sustainability related issues in connection 
with e-government usage. Unlike some e-services developed mainly for efficien-
cy purpose (e.g. e-driver’s license), e-government services in these priority areas 
are likely to generate high returns for sustainable development across countries 
and for a wide segment of the population, which can then accrue to society as a 
whole (e.g. e-education).
7.4.1. E-learning and learning without Internet access
Education is one of the strategic development areas which generate high returns. 
Even small improvements in the quality of education will have a substantial, long-
term positive impact on countries’ overall development.
The global educational landscape is however full of challenges. While e-learning 
on the Internet and without Internet access can help deal with these challeng-
es, there are important issues that need to be addressed, including the need 
to increase e-education usage. In developed regions like Europe, some of the 
most popular e-government services include ‘enrolling in higher education and/
or applying for student grant’ (56 per cent of users will use the e-channel for this 
service next time), in addition to ‘declaring income taxes’ (73 per cent), ‘moving/
changing address’ (57 per cent).19 But on the whole, even in highly developed 
OECD countries, the intensity and quality of e-education usage is low.
The broadband imperative for education
Broadband is considered “the missing link” in global access and is an imperative 
for “Education for All” (one of MDGs), as well as one of the “building blocks of 
a digital learning environment”. In 2010, ITU and UNESCO established a Broad-
band Commission for Digital Development to boost the importance of broad-
band on the international policy agenda and promote the expansion of broad-
band access in every country to accelerate progress in meeting the MDGs. The 
Broadband Commission’s Working Group on Education (WG-E), which aims to 
promote education for all, emphasized the critical importance of broadband con-
nectivity, with unprecedented potential to bridge education divides and widen 
access to quality education for all.
Despite accelerated, on-going efforts to develop broadband infrastructures (e.g. 
the continental Eastern Africa Submarine Cable System (EASSy), an undersea 
fibre optic cable system connecting countries in Eastern Africa to the rest of the 
world in Africa) and rapidly advancing wireless broadband, the bandwidth bot-
tleneck still continues to present a major barrier to effective usage of e-educa-
tion. In 41 countries across Africa, lack of sufficient bandwidth is found to be the 
biggest constraint to e-learning.
   151 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Moreover, as an increasing number of governments push for greater technol-
ogy integration in schools, sometimes with large-scale initiatives, insufficient 
broadband can become more pronounced, posing a real problem for e-educa-
tion service uptake. For example, 64 per cent of the Turkish teachers using Tur-
key’s project, “FATÍH” have reportedly experienced problems with very slow 
Internet connections. The project seeks to integrate state-of-the-art computer 
technology into Turkey’s public education system and provide tablets and in-
ternet access.
So, broadband is undoubtedly a critical factor for maximizing e-learning oppor-
tunities. But for e-education to flourish and to maximize user uptake—broad-
band connectivity alone is not sufficient. As the Broadband Commission Working 
Group on Education said, the challenge is indeed to help teachers and students 
use ICTs and broadband in relevant and authentic ways that actually improve 
learning.20 Some initiatives, like the pilot e-Schools that the New Partnership for 
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) has established in Kenya (pushing for school con-
nectivity with accompanying training), have produced some encouraging results 
for uptake of ICTs as a tool to provide low-cost access to online curricular and 
other resources and to supplement traditional teaching methods. The e-School 
was regularly accessed by users, irrespective of their gender and role (as either 
teacher or student).
Wireless broadband to extend educational reach
A great deal of expectation is building around wireless broadband which is now 
the fastest growing segment of the global ICT market. It can extend the reach of 
the Internet, expanding access to “anywhere, anytime” learning; and effectively 
increasingly dissolve boundaries between e-education and m-education. While 
mobile-for-development services like m-health are currently ahead of m-educa-
tion services, m-education is poised to become a growth area with substantial 
investment in m-technology like wireless broadband technology for education. In 
2012, the global education sector already spent a higher share (19.3 per cent) of 
its IT budget on mobile than any other major sector (see Figure 7.4).
Source: Deloitte (2013), Gov on 
the Go—Boosting public sector 
productivity by going mobile
Figure 7.4. Percentage of mobile in IT budget, by sector
Retail
Communication, 
Media &
Services
Government
Banking
and
Securities
Manufacturing
and
natural
resources
Insurance
Healthcare
TransportationWholesale
trade
UtilitiesEducation
19.3%
17.2%
15.2%
13.1% 12.7% 12.1% 12.0% 11.4% 10.7%
9.2%
8.4%
 152 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Wireless broadband is experiencing rapid uptake, but an estimated 1.1 billion 
households worldwide are still not yet connected to the Internet and more 
than two-thirds of people in developing countries still remain unconnected. 
Also, the impact of potential ‘leap frogging’ over fixed broadband by mobile 
broadband is very uneven across different developing regions and countries. 
Furthermore, it remains to be seen whether and when mobile broadband in 
education will be used at any significant scale in the developing world. We are 
waiting for wireless broadband to significantly extend its educational reach. 
M-education is “operating in the dark” and mobile broadband is not yet fast, 
reliable, or cheap in many countries (see Box 7.2).
Benefits of SMS-education service
While progressively accommodating the emerging and growing broadband plat-
forms to enhance education, governments need to fully exploit and make use 
of the currently available, more basic options, like SMS. With broadband-based 
learning still remaining beyond the reach of many developing countries, an in-
creasing number of learning initiatives are making use of the current m-learning 
options, namely, learning on the mobile phone with basic functionalities. In par-
ticular, there are various, innovative SMS to improve learning opportunities in 
poor countries.
box 7.3. The SMS-based literacy programme for women in Pakistan
This programme (launched in 2007), which is entering a fourth phase in 2013, 
aims to educate 1,500 illiterate women in Punjab and Sindh using tutorials sent 
via text messages in Urdu. SMS message here is “tutor, textbook and school 
all rolled into one”.
At least 4,000 women have previously benefited from the same programme. 
In the latest phase, UNESCO has collaborated with government education de-
partments and agencies to increase the project’s outreach, leading to more 
students’ participation in the programme. With a view to increasing the pro-
gramme usage, the phase also includes capacity building of rural female teach-
ers as well as user incentives such as permanent ownership of the phone sets 
and free SMS from Mobilink for a fixed duration.21
Source: h t t p : / / w w w . p a -
k i s t ang e nd e r new s .o rg /
sms-based- l i teracy-pro -
gramme-education-maybe-
just-a-text-message-away/
box 7.2.  we need affordable broadband internet for m-learning  
in Senegal (and many other countries)
“(W)e can’t reliably use mobile broadband during class time. …what is the 
timeline for all the essential ingredients for wireless broadband to emerge so 
as to make it more viable for scale? The only thing we have now that is reliable 
and cheap is SMS. Yet SMS alone does not make for mLearning as a whole.”
Source: Founder of CyberS-
mart Africa
   153 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The initiatives include “Dr. Math” in South Africa, a mobile tutoring service and 
“go-to” resource for primary and secondary students in South Africa, with ac-
cessibility on the free application MXit and funding and support from the Gov-
ernment. Around 12,000 pupils have used Dr. Math, being assisted by over 100 
tutors, with SMS technology facilitating on-going communication between stu-
dents, coachers and teachers who are geographically distant. It won the 2011 
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa’s “Technology in Government in 
Africa” Award. Some SMS-based learning initiatives support and extend educa-
tion to underserved and particularly hard-to-reach users (see Box 7.3).
7.4.2. Navigating e-health and m-health
The Internet is affecting all sectors of the economy but it offers particular prom-
ise in health, and m-health is clearly emerging across the globe. Yet, there are 
issues and concerns over possible health inequalities through e-health provision 
and usage, such as data privacy and security issues. M-health (particularly, ben-
eficial for health care and development in low income countries) now needs to 
move past pilot projects and to be taken to scale, with a view to increasing its 
effectiveness and reach through uptake by a great number of individual patients, 
health workers and clinics.
E-health opportunities and inequalities
The great value of e-health (namely, health services and information delivered 
or enhanced through the Internet and related technologies) is that it enables 
remote consultations and healthcare service delivery and better dissemination 
of vital health information to patients (including particularly, in rural and remote 
areas). E-health may become an area for the emergence of key killer applications 
that utilize truly high-speed broadband networks—hence it is important for de-
velopment of e-government services on the whole. Despite its great promise, 
incorporating ICTs into daily use in healthcare has proven difficult in many parts 
of the world. In Europe, 81 per cent of hospitals have electronic patient records 
systems in place, but only 4 per cent grant patients online access to their health 
information. 71 per cent use online eBooking systems, but only 8 per cent offer 
patients the opportunity to book their own hospital appointment online. Further, 
there are only 8 per cent tele-monitor patients at home, and only 30 per cent use 
ePrescription for medicines.
On the other hand, there is a risk of e-health inequalities, such as differences in 
the opportunity to use the Internet for health, which present a major challenge 
for developing as well as developed countries.22 New health inequalities can also 
occur, if e-health implementation occurs at the expense of disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups or if it implies further cuts to already stretched health systems.
For example, the recent US Federal Communication Commission’s report (2010) 
found that there are growing broadband needs that are largely driven by the rap-
idly increasing amount of e-health data and exchange of increasingly large files 
(e.g. 3D imaging).23 This is leading to connectivity disparity between different 
 154 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
ethnic groups and geographies in the country, with health providers often using 
a lower level of broadband service in poor communities.
In developing countries, the risk of resource diversion is high. Experts warn that 
80 per cent of illnesses stem from preventable infectious diseases in low income 
countries in Africa and that a focus on high-tech healthcare solutions could come 
at the expense of basic prevention measures, such as access to clean water, hy-
giene, health and education.24 In order to fully exploit the opportunities that 
e-health provides, governments need to keep sight of actual health needs of 
their citizens with full consideration of local circumstances in their e-health policy 
efforts. Furthermore, with a view to facilitating e-health usage, governments in 
developed and developing countries also need to focus on their citizens’ and 
patients’ access, opportunity or requisite skills to participate in e-health under 
different circumstances.
Taking m-health to scale
M-health stands for the provision of health-related services using mobile com-
munication technology. In particular, m-health information is actively taken up 
by mobile phone users. For example, in the United States of America, half of 
smartphone users use their devices to obtain health information. In compari-
son, in developing countries, health service delivery is often based on basic mo-
bile technology (including particularly, SMS). Since a lot of health care revolves 
around information, simple text messages can often function as powerful tools 
to improve health.
M-health is particularly well suited to data gathering, tracking and analysis of 
health-related surveys, as well as to registering and monitoring patients. For 
example, the nationwide project, award-winning “mTrac” is a rapid SMS-based 
disease surveillance and medicine supply tracking system in Uganda, which is 
rolled out by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) Uganda and the Min-
istry of Health throughout the country.25 The user uptake is strong. As of April 
2013, more than 10 million mobile subscribers can engage with the government 
in monitoring of health services through mTrac, which is rapidly gaining popular-
ity among low income families without computer access.
SMS-based information service can bring impressive change, often meeting a 
need which would otherwise be impossible to satisfy. Several successful gov-
ernment-led, engaged or supported initiatives focus on maternal and baby’s 
health. They include the US “text4baby” service, “Mobile Alliance for Maternal 
Action” (MAMA) in Bangladesh and “M-health service initiative” (MOTECH) 
from Ghana, which delivers individually tailored health information to pregnant 
women in rural Ghana. There are now more than 25,000 people registered for 
the MOTECH service and almost 300 community health workers to track their 
patients via SMS.
At the same time, a vast majority of m-health projects are pilot projects, which 
are testing various ways to leverage mobile technology for public health. But 
most of them have been slow to reach scale, lacking a more robust evidence for 
their scale-up and thereby to move m-health to a greater level of effectiveness. 
   155 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Only 12 per cent of World Health Organization (WHO) Member States reported 
evaluating m-health services. In fact, WHO found that the dominant form of m-
health today is characterized by small-scale pilot projects that address single 
issues in information sharing and access.
In fact, some even warn that the inability to break out of the pilot stage holds 
back m-health in developing countries. Others stress the critical importance of 
integrating m-health needs into general health programmes. According to the 
Executive Director of the mHealth Alliance, which is hosted by the United Na-
tions Foundation, m-health could only meet its potential if it was fully integrated 
into general health programmes, becoming so much a part of health systems 
that we no longer need to use ‘m’ as a designation. But this is something that 
cannot happen unless m-health projects move beyond the pilot phase and really 
reach scale at a national or regional level.
In this connection, Mwana (an m-health project using SMS to deliver early infant 
HIV test results in Malawi and Zambia) merits special attention, as it presents one 
of the few projects that has been successful on a large scale, covering almost all 
of Zambia and Malawi (see Box 7.4). It also shows that sustainability and scale 
must be planned from the program’s inception, with inclusion and buy-in of tar-
geted users and stakeholders during the development phase. It also requires 
collaboration with multiple stakeholders, including governments, communities 
and local healthcare providers.
Notwithstanding some successful cases, there are challenges in scaling up in-
dividual pilot projects, especially, with a view to integrating them into compre-
hensive national (e-) health strategies. As m-health initiatives mature to realize 
their full potential and become fully sustainable, a large number of users should 
be able to benefit from them. In this connection, effective partnerships with 
private sector and civil society organizations are also considered essential, in-
cluding particularly active government involvement, as seen in the case of the 
Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) in English and known ás Aponjon 
in Bangali.
box 7.4. Taking m-health to scale: Mwana programme (Malawi and Zambia)
Launched in 2010 (and implemented by the Zambian Ministry of Health with 
support from UNICEF), “Mwana” presents “a large mHealth project focused 
on simple health interventions that provide large health impact”. It delivers 
early infant HIV test results via SMS and succeeds in cutting the turnaround 
time for HIV results to reach parents more than twice as fast as before. Apart 
from its simplicity, Mwana’s success also accrues from working with local health 
workers on the collaborative design of m-health information services.
In terms of service uptake, the number of individual end-users is not clear, but 
over 40 clinics in Malawi use Mwana. The programme aims to scale up the 
number of clinics using Mwana in the near future to 250 clinics, along with 
complete coverage of Zambia in three years as part of a national scale up.26
Source: UNICEF Zambia (2012), 
Project Mwana: Using mobile 
technology to improve early in-
fant diagnosis of HIV
 156 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Privacy and security concerns
Privacy and data security issues greatly influence the user uptake of e-govern-
ment and health care in particular.
Health care requires a great deal of privacy and confidentiality. There are con-
cerns that increased reliance, particularly on mobile devices (as well as today 
social media) will compromise the confidentiality of their medical information 
and even compromise healthcare delivery (see Box 7.5). M-health gives rise to 
serious new security concerns, as expressed during a congressional hearing held 
before the Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs, US Sen-
ate in 2012. It was reported that a security flaw in a wirelessly controlled insulin 
pump was identified, which allows for hackers to break into remotely monitored 
diabetes pumps. Moreover, while there are several security holes in the device, 
the principal vulnerability comes from the wireless connection between the glu-
cose monitoring system and the pump itself.27
7.4.3.  E-government usage in employment 
and other critical areas
E-employment service usage
E-government can help deliver employment services to potentially extend its 
reach to job seekers and other citizens, including the rural poor. As far as e-em-
ployment service types are concerned, information services are one of the most 
important. According to the latest study on youth employment in Bangladesh, 
Ghana, Indonesia and Spain, lack of skills and information on jobs available are 
actually perceived as bigger challenges than the lack of available jobs. Lack of 
information in all four countries scored high, with between 33 and 47 per cent of 
youth identifying lack of information as a challenge in job search (see Figure 7.5).29
Similarly, the lack of employment information was clearly recognized by many 
young people in Ghana, Morocco, Uganda and Maharashtra in India, who re-
ported that they did not know where to look for information on employment. 
For 36 per cent of youth in these four countries, friends and family are the pri-
box 7.5. further privacy and security concerns: social media use in health
Social media are increasingly used to obtain medical information and advice. 
For example, a recent US Survey (2012) found that 33 per cent of 1,040 US 
adults use social media to obtain health information, look up consumer reviews 
of health treatments or physicians. And more than 80 per cent of respondents 
aged 18 to 24 years said they are likely to share health information.28
Given the nature of social media, personal information can be distributed be-
yond the originally intended target recipients of such information (e.g. family 
members or healthcare providers), spreading to tens of thousands of people. 
The lack of subsequent control (exposure of personal health information) is a 
problem; presenting a challenge to policymakers and health practitioners.
Source: Scanfield  D, Scan-
field  V,  Larson  EL, 2011, 
Dissemination of health 
information through social 
networks: twitter and anti-
biotics, Am J Infect Control. 
2010 April 38(3): pp.182–8
   157 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
mary source of employment opportunities and 21 per cent of youth used the In-
ternet as a means of accessing job information. Overall in these countires, 73 per 
cent of the young people surveyed felt that job information is insufficient.30 In this 
connection, Saudi Arabia’s government website meets many of these needs, as 
it allows job seekers to obtain information about a job and also provides tracking 
tools to track actual usage, both by the number of user views and transactions 
(see below Figure 7.6).
Figure 7.5.  Youth unemployment in Bangladesh, Ghana, Indonesia and Spain: 
Job search challenges
0.0
10
20
30
40
50
Bangladesh Ghana Indonesia Spain
Lack of skills
Lack of information
Lack of jobs
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
un
em
p
lo
ye
d
 y
o
ut
h
35%
33%
18%
24%
47%
16%
39%
45%
8%
21%
44%
23%
Figure 7.6. Saudi government’s employment service website
Source: Dawes, L. and Marom, 
R. (2013), Mobile Services for 
Youth Employment in Bang-
ladesh, Ghana, Indonesia and 
Spain, p. 14.
Source: Saudi government 
website: http://www.saudi.gov.
sa/
 158 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
In 2011, an average of 18 per cent of citizens in OECD countries used the Internet 
for job search. In some countries, this was higher, with 25 per cent of citizens in 
Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Republic of Korea, Norway and the United 
Kingdom conducting job searches online. In Europe, in the current economic 
crisis, e-government policymakers actively expanded and adapted service of-
ferings. The citizen life-event service, ‘looking for a job’ is currently the service 
that is used most, with over 70 per cent of users making contact with govern-
ment online. This is even higher than ‘declaring income taxes’ (over 60 per cent), 
which is a highly popular activity in many countries. Some European countries 
have introduced ‘mandatory’ usage of e-employment services for job seekers. In 
the case of the Netherlands, such a policy measure has led to a very high user 
uptake, with 75 per cent of jobseekers using e-services during unemployment. In 
Denmark, digitization of the most used public services will also be made manda-
tory.31 The increasing demand to use the digital channel for job applications and 
other services also leads to unemployed citizens’ relatively active uptake of such 
services in countries like the United States.
In Europe, unemployed people are intensive users of the online job search and 
job application, with 69 per cent of unemployed internet users using online em-
ployment service.32 The tendency for Internet users to go online for job search-
ing, when they are in immediate need of employment, is apparent across many 
countries. According to the US government agencies’ report on the usage gap 
of e-employment service among different Internet users, unemployed Internet 
users were nearly twice as likely to look for work online as their employed coun-
terparts. 73 per cent of the unemployed used the Internet for this activity. In 
comparison, 37 per cent of employed Internet users conducted job searches 
online (see Figure 7.7).33
One of the ways in which Internet use may affect employment is through users’ 
ability to search and apply for jobs online, affecting the usage pattern in terms 
of different levels of e-employment service uptake among different user groups.
Unlike job seekers in developed countries, who often have such services available 
and are able to use them, the situation is often different in developing countries. 
Figure 7.7. Users seeking online job opportunities, by employment status
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Unemployed users Employed users Those not in labor force
73%
37%
18%
P
er
ce
nt
ag
e 
o
f 
us
er
s
Source:  United States National 
Telecommunications 
and Information Ad-
ministration and Eco-
nomics and Statistics 
Administration.
   159 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Here, digital skills and the abilities of job seekers are not sufficient to make use of 
e-employment services. Government policies to promote usage in this field thus 
need to be accompanied by focused policies to actively reach out to underserved 
user groups in order to increase their ability to use such services.
E-government uptake by the rural poor
There is a compelling case to be made for electronic delivery of payment by gov-
ernments (“e-payment”) and its utilization for poverty reduction through increased 
usage by people living in poverty, especially, the rural poor.
Three quarters of the world’s population living in poverty have no bank account. 
And a vast majority of people living in poverty in developing countries live in ru-
ral areas. E-payment can benefit millions living below the poverty line; improving 
service delivery, reducing corruption and generally boosting financial inclusion 
of people living in poverty. Several e-payment programmes around the world 
have shown positive results with substantial poverty reduction effects, govern-
ment savings on administrative costs by as much as 75 per cent, as well as user 
participation and uptake.
Brazil’s social safety net programme (an e-payment programme) with strong user 
uptake, called Bolsa Familia was used by 2 million Brazilian users. One of the 
most recent and noteworthy e-payment initiatives is the Indian Government’s 
Electronic Fund Management System (eFMS) which involves disbursement of 
wages direct to the accounts of National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(NREGS) beneficiaries.
NREGS is the largest public works programme in the world. Given the enormous 
size of NREGS, the user base of eFMS is also big. For example, there are 1.7 mil-
lion households in the Indian state of Odisha that were provided with NREGS 
jobs in the budget year 2012–2013. They could be paid using eFMS which aims to 
drastically cut down payment delays of wages to NREGA beneficiaries and also 
bring about much needed transparency. Some other Indian states like Odisha, 
Karnataka, Haryana and Rajasthan, have already made substantial progress in 
this regard, and there will be further expansion of eFMS facilities to other parts 
of India.
On the demand side, 4 million recipients of NREGA benefits have chosen e-
payment branchless banking over physical payment mechanisms, which has con-
siderably reduced number of complaints from rural wage seekers about delayed 
payments. Moreover, e-payment provides some important strategic (though, in-
direct) benefits. Efficient and reliable e-payment can lead to increased user trust 
in e-government services such as NREGS, thereby increasing user take-up and 
expanding public service reach. In fact, some e-payment pilot studies in India 
have demonstrated that e-payments increase the utilisation of government ser-
vices by people living in poverty. While in some parts of India, rural beneficiaries 
are not completely convinced about the government’s ability to follow through 
on its promise to pay them through their NREGS program, in other parts (e.g. 
districts in Andhra Pradesh), the utilisation of NREGS funds increased by 25 per 
cent once payment reliability was improved through e-payment initiatives.34
 160 
C
ha
p
te
r 
7
CHAPTER 7 • E-GOVERNMENT fOR THE POST-2015 ERA: THE uSAGE PERSPECTIVE UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
E-government and the poverty-environment links
Even though environmental sustainability in the context of poverty eradication in 
the development process has been highlighted, the critical links of environment 
with poverty are not yet fully addressed. The livelihoods and food security strate-
gies of people living in poverty often depend directly on the natural resources 
available to them such as farming and fishing. And there is much concern over 
a ‘resource squeeze’, due to growing competition for environmental resources 
that particularly affects people living in poverty. In this regard, e-government 
can make an important contribution, e.g. by providing environment information 
critical for ’survival’ of people living in poverty and also by helping to monitor the 
effects of climate change or impending natural disasters like drought or flood 
through early warning system and environmental surveillance. A pertinent case 
is the use of sophisticated mapping techniques overlaying data from a variety of 
sources, which enable policy-makers to better manage wetlands in Uganda.
In terms of environmental monitoring, the Service Level Benchmarking Connect 
project in India is a good example of using mobile technology to track how citi-
zens experience water service delivery. It collects and analyzes citizen feedback 
using innovative mobile applications; thereby providing a ‘reality check‘ on ser-
vice levels from the citizens’ standpoint. It gives city managers more ’granular‘ 
data at the sub-city level (ward/zone), which can facilitate improved monitoring 
and problem solving and provides inputs into project planning processes for 
service providers. Most importantly, the project provides a suitable platform to 
engage citizens in performance monitoring processes and encourages them to 
demand better services. Given the large urban populations living in informal set-
tlements in Indian cities and the service inequities commonly prevalent in service 
provision, the project enables explicit tracking of service delivery in slum areas 
including public facilities such as public stand posts and community toilets. The 
project was implemented in two cities of India over the past year and is now be-
ing replicated in 20 more cities.35
7.5. Conclusion
This section provides the following conclusions and a few policy suggestions on 
effective e-government uptake, so as to fully capture e-government benefits to-
wards advancing sustainable development.
 • At the most fundamental level, e-government policy must focus on the de-
mand side of the equation, instead of just focussing on the supply side of 
e-government services and on areas and applications which are likely to gen-
erate high returns for sustainable development and to benefit the majority of 
citizens (e.g. in education), rather than those primarily driven by efficiency con-
siderations (e.g. e-driver’s license). E-government policies aimed at increasing 
user uptake ought to be guided by the simple question: ‘how to get people 
to use e-government services’. This leads to questions of relevance of e-gov-
ernment content to users, motivational factors (especially convenience), as well 
as usability and other usage-influencing factors. At the same time, policies 
   161 
C
hap
ter 7
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
need to focus on a range of threshold issues and barriers to e-government 
usage (including particularly, privacy and security issues in health care and 
other areas). Policy efforts to maximize usage can however not just end with 
increasing usage, but also aim to obtain the actual benefit from that usage for 
all stakeholders.
 • The links between e-service delivery, usage and sustainable development are 
mediated and influenced by fundamentals like education, skills and digital in-
frastructure. Governments wishing to succeed in e-government would there-
fore do well to invest in strengthening these particular fundamentals, including 
broadband. 
 • Governments need to improve capacity to effectively seek citizen feedback, 
monitor, track and analyze usage trends, so as to prioritize service digitization 
and integrate relevant data into policy. User feedback can provide important 
data for integration into policy efforts to increase service usage.36 Besides e-
government promotion and awareness campaigns, evaluation needs to be an 
integral part of a policy effort to increase e-government uptake, which is also 
an important part of educating the public about the benefits of e-government, 
thereby helping to increase user uptake.
 • Finally, the government is a “platform”, not a “vending machine”.37 As aptly 
described, citizens tend to think of government as a kind of vending machine. 
They put in taxes and get out services that governments provide. However, 
this vending machine idea is giving way to the idea of “government as a plat-
form”. The platform metaphor means that government provides a system in 
place to deliver services not by governments alone, but also by citizens and 
others (which also allows people inside and outside to Innovate). In doing so, 
governments embrace collaboration with partners such as NGOs to enhance 
value for citizens and increase uptake; orchestrating these partnerships and 
acting as catalyst and facilitator. 
Governments need to effectively manage such collaboration with clear ‘rules 
of the game’, including partners’ roles and responsibilities, while also allowing 
for those inside and outside governments to develop innovative arrangements 
with a view to delivering services more effectively and increase usage.
In essence, the challenge of increasing e-government usage is therefore a gov-
ernance challenge.

In this chapter:
Chapter 8
8.1. Introduction 163
8.2. Global and regional trends 164
8.2.1. Survey findings on Open Government Data 164
8.2.2.
Policy, legal and institutional 
frameworks for Open 
Government Data
169
8.3. Opportunities and challenges 171
8.3.1. Data for development 171
8.3.2. Readiness for Open Government Data 172
8.3.3. A sustainable Open Government Data ecosystem 173
8.3.4. Return on investment 175
8.4. Conclusion 176
Open Government 
Data
8.1. Introduction
One of the tools used to increase transparency and par-
ticipation is Open Government Data (OGD), which can 
be defined as government information proactively dis-
closed and made available online for everyone’s access, 
reuse and redistribution without restriction. The term 
OGD came into prominence relatively recently after the 
publication of a set of principles by a group of experts 
and advocates in Sebastopol, California, United States of 
America. Often referred to as the “8 Open Government 
Data Principles” or “Sebastopol Principles”,1 they set out 
best practice recommendations on how governments 
publish data on the Internet. 
OGD introduces a new approach to publishing govern-
ment data and helps bridge the gap between govern-
ment and citizens. It represents the ability of all stake-
holders to have full and free access to public data and 
opens up the opportunity for people to evaluate the 
performance of various administrative institutions. Com-
bined with the use of modern ICTs, this open platform 
allows for greater accessibility of key records to a much 
wider audience. Making data easily available gives citi-
zens the opportunity to make informed decisions about 
public policies and identify development opportunities. 
Consequently, opening up government data can lead to 
more efficient use of resources and improved service de-
livery for citizens. 
 164 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
8.2. Global and regional trends
8.2.1. Survey findings on Open Government Data
The 2014 Survey introduced new questions to assess the level of data publish-
ing in national portals. The Survey started its assessment with the basic premise 
that all government data can be made public as long as there are no conflicting 
privacy or national security concerns. During the initial assessments, researchers 
looked for the mere presence of datasets in national government portals. In the 
succeeding assessments, they evaluated and categorized the type of data avail-
able according to sectoral focuses, such as education, health, finance, social se-
curity, labour and environment. Table 8.1 summarizes the main features of Open 
Government Data assessed in these national portals.
Table 8.1. Summary of features assessed related to data publishing
Existence of datasets in government portals including sectoral datasets for education, health, 
finance, social security, labor and environment
Existence of dedicated portals for data publishing such as open government data catalogues
Availability of datasets in various technical formats particularly in those formats that enable 
accessibility
Number of different government agencies that provide datasets
Guidelines by government agencies describing how to make use of datasets
Availability of datasets on location information such as maps
Availability of public channels to propose new datasets
The 2014 Survey questionnaire includes a set of questions assessing the devel-
opment of data publishing (see Survey Methodology). All sources of data used 
in this chapter come from this questionnaire, unless otherwise stated. Table 8.2 
presents the countries that scored higher than 66.6 per cent on data publishing 
in 2014. Figure 8.1a highlights the regional representation of countries with a 
higher than 66.6 per cent score in data publishing.2 21 countries from Europe, 15 
from Asia and 9 from the Americas are on this list, as well as 3 African countries 
and 2 countries from Oceania. Figure 8.1b presents the distribution of countries 
with a score higher than 66.6 per cent according to income level; 86 per cent 
of these are high income or upper middle income countries. India, El Salvador, 
Georgia, Morocco, Republic of Moldova and Sri Lanka constitute the lower mid-
dle income bloc. Kenya is the only low income country on the list.
As the next step, researchers tried to locate sectoral datasets for education, 
health, finance, social security, labour and environment, as well as checked for 
the availability of any data related to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, in-
cluding immigrants, women, youth, people living in poverty, the illiterate, per-
sons with disabilities and older persons. According to Figure 8.2, 130 United 
Nations Member States share data on government spending, 115 on education 
   165 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
42%
30%
6% 4% 18%
Oceania
Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Figure 8.1a. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent, by region
Figure 8.1b. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent, by income level
60%26%
12%
2%
Low income
Lower middle income
Upper middle income
High income
Table 8.2. Countries with a score higher than 66.6 per cent in data publishing
Albania Denmark Italy Netherlands Singapore
Australia El Salvador Japan New Zealand Spain
Austria Estonia Kazakhstan Norway Sri Lanka
Bahrain Finland Kenya Oman Sweden
Belgium France Latvia Peru Thailand
Brazil Georgia Lithuania Portugal Tunisia
Canada Germany Luxembourg Qatar
United Arab 
Emirates
Chile India Malta Republic of Korea United Kingdom
China Ireland Mexico
Republic  
of Moldova
United States 
of America
Costa Rica Israel Morocco Saudi Arabia Uruguay
 166 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
data, 109 on health, 107 on labour, 106 on the environment and 94 on social 
welfare. In addition, the Survey noted that 97 out of 193 United Nations Member 
States have data specifically on disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. Sharing 
data on government spending was the most common data publishing activity 
undertaken by United Nations Member States. The advocacy of various non-
governmental organizations in this area, such as OpenSpending,3 which aims to 
track every government financial transaction across the World, or Open Budget 
Surveys,4 a global research and advocacy programme promoting public access 
to budget information and the adoption of accountable budget systems, seems 
to contribute to this trend.
The Survey then assessed whether government data is made available in a form 
that ensures ease of use and reuse. Indicators of accessibility included presence 
of a dedicated data portal, availability of guidelines on how to make use of data-
sets, existence of a feedback mechanism to propose new datasets and technical 
openness of datasets (i.e. availability of datasets in various formats including in 
machine-readable structured formats, or non-proprietary formats like CSV in-
stead of excel), open standards and availability of Application Programming In-
terfaces (APIs) to access the published data.
While a large number of United Nations Member States provided sectoral data, 
only 46 of these have taken the next step and established dedicated portals 
for data sharing, as seen in Figure 8.3. In Europe, 44 per cent of countries (or 
19 countries) have dedicated open data portals as compared to 7.4 per cent in 
Africa. Kenya, Tunisia, Morocco and Ghana are the only African countries with 
an open government data portal. The majority of countries with open govern-
ment data catalogues are high income and upper middle income (nearly 85 per 
cent). Kenya is the only low income country with an OGD portal; the lower mid-
dle income countries with such portals are India, Sri Lanka, Morocco, Republic 
of Moldova, Ghana and Indonesia.
The utility, quality and accessibility of information depend on the format used 
for data publishing. Processing and analysing data through software programs 
Figure 8.2. Number of countries offering data, by sector
0 30 60 90 120 150
Social Welfare
Number of countries
Environment
Labour
Health
Education
Government
Spending 130
115
109
107
106
94
   167 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
(technical openness) requires open standards and open file formats exploring, 
sorting, filtering and recombining data. Technical data standards allow policy 
makers to compare datasets and generate the creation of relevant data. When 
data becomes more accessible, more people can engage in and benefit from 
data analysis which, in turn, can contribute to better policymaking. The 2014 Sur-
vey checked the availability of various data types in different formats and noted 
that 86 countries provide data in machine-readable structured data (e.g. Excel), 
56 in non-proprietary formats (e.g. CSV), 24 countries provide Application Pro-
gramming Interfaces (APIs) and only 11 countries provide data in open standards 
from W3C such as RDF and SPARQL (see Figure 8.4).
Figure 8.3. Countries with OGD portals, by region
0
5
10
15
20
N
um
b
er
 o
f c
ou
nt
rie
s
8
19
13
4
2
AmericasEurope Asia Africa Oceania
Figure 8.4. Availability of data types in different formats
0 20 40 60 80 100
Open Standards
Application
Programming Interface
Non-proprietary
formats
Machine-readable
structured data 86
56
24
11
Number of countries
 168 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Government agencies can increase the benefits of OGD initiatives by provid-
ing detailed descriptions of data fields as well as tools and guidelines for how 
to analyze and make use of the datasets. In 2014, 34 countries offered this type 
of instructional information. For example, the open data portal of Kenya has a 
section specifically for developers where it lists the tools designed to access and 
integrate the data. In the same section, developers can also learn more about 
upcoming events like workshops on utilizing government data and get informa-
tion on the APIs used to provide access to the data.
Following a demand-driven approach into publishing datasets can help ensure 
that governments meet their citizens’ needs. Governments can collect feedback 
on which datasets to publish by surveying citizens and other potential users, like 
civil society organizations, academic institutions or businesses. While individual 
citizens may want information useful for their daily lives, civil society groups would 
likely be more interested in data to help them hold governments accountable or 
data that can be used for advocacy. Businesses by contrast demand high-quality 
raw data to create value-added products and services. The 2014 Survey noted 
that 31 of the countries with a dedicated data portal have a section in their por-
tals to receive inputs on the data types to be published.
Providing datasets in bulk, with open standards and an open license, eases the 
job of data analysis and increases participation in policymaking. Providing data-
sets as they are, however, is already beneficial for transparency, participation and 
efficiency. The 2014 Survey scored Ireland, El Salvador, Luxembourg, Peru, Qa-
tar, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, Thailand and Argentina higher than 66.6 per cent 
in data publishing, even though those countries do not have dedicated open 
government data portals. Researchers, nevertheless, were able to access many 
relevant databases across portals. This implies that they already have policies 
in place for centralizing and digitizing data and that they are ready to take the 
box 8.1. bahrain open government data portal
The open data platform of Bahrain is an important initiative for the country as 
it aims to implement a public data hub and a strategy for open data to enable 
transparency, promote e-participation and inspire innovation. The primary role 
of the platform is to publish datasets from ministries and government agencies 
in an open format and making this data available to the public. The platform 
enables the public to have a central point of access to find, download and use 
datasets generated by the ministries and governmental entities in the country. 
The public benefits from the data provided in different ways, as gaining access 
to government data helps the public in acquiring a better understanding of 
how the government works. It also allows the general public and businesses 
to use the data for research, creating reports, provide feedback, develop web 
and smart phone applications and solutions based on public data. With the 
platform, the government pursues to expand the portfolio of the e-Govern-
ment services by extending the growing efforts to the private sector, enhanc-
ing transparency and allowing people for creativity.
Source: ht tp://w w w.data.
gov.bh/
   169 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
next step: publish data in bulk and in open formats through dedicated portals. 
Greece, Malta, Ghana, Slovakia and Indonesia, conversely, have open govern-
ment data catalogues but did not score higher than 66.6 per cent in data pub-
lishing, suggesting these portals should include a wider range of government 
agencies and more varied datasets in machine-readable formats. 
8.2.2.  Policy, legal and institutional frameworks 
for Open Government Data
Freedom of information legislation is essential for the development of Open Gov-
ernment Data. The foundations of OGD lie in the people’s right to information, 
as enshrined in article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and as 
recognized by the international community. The multilateral system, including 
the United Nations and other regional organisations, has addressed the right to 
information, commonly referred to as Freedom of Information (FOI), extensively 
through international treaties, conventions and other sources of international law. 
Domestic laws in about 93 Member States have addressed the subject through 
specific legislation (e.g. FOI acts, Access to Information Acts, etc.). 35 countries 
only have a FOI article in their constitutions—24 have relevant draft legislation. 
Meanwhile, 41 countries have no FOI legislation at all.
Privacy of personal information as well as confidentiality in national security mat-
ters need to be protected when publishing government data for public access and 
use. Preliminary research by UNDESA5 found that 79 countries have addressed 
data privacy and security through specific legislation, usually called Data Protec-
tion Acts (DPAs). 15 only have data privacy and security provisions in their consti-
tutions, six have relevant draft legislation and three countries cover data privacy 
in their access to information laws. 90 countries have no legislation on this at all.
Very few countries have passed or even drafted legislation requiring govern-
ment data to be published in machine-readable formats with open licenses. 
Among the few recent initiatives taken by various national governments, in Au-
gust 2011 New Zealand approved comprehensive general principles for data 
management6 drawing from several aspects of the 8 Principles for Open Gov-
ernment Data.7 These state that government data and information should be 
open, readily available, well managed, reasonably priced and re-usable, unless 
there are necessary reasons for its protection. The amendment made to the 
European Union (EU) Directive 2003/98/EC in June 2013 introduces a genuine 
right to reuse all content that can be accessed under national laws and invites 
Member State to make more documents available in machine-readable and 
open formats. The Republic of Korea enacted a law in July 2013 requiring gov-
ernment agencies to publish data in machine-readable formats.8 An executive 
order in May 2013 by the United States of America,9 which makes the open and 
machine-readable format the new default for government information, declared 
that information is a national asset whose value is multiplied when made easily 
accessible to the public. The Russian Federation’s Government Order No. 583 
of 10 July 2013 set out the rules for classifying public sector information as open 
data, the timeframe for updating this information, as well as other requirements 
concerning the publication of information as open data.10
 170 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Data is considered open when it is shared with an open license in a way that per-
mits commercial and non-commercial use and reuse without restrictions. While 
the 2014 Survey did not assess the licenses in depth, a quick review of the data 
catalogues revealed that licenses vary from strict, with clear copyright statements, 
to less strict. The Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License11 is one of the most 
common license types, used, for instance, in Australia, Austria, Chile, Germany, 
Italy, New Zealand and Uruguay. Countries such as Albania, Bahrain, Morocco, 
Netherlands and Tunisia use a common adaptation of the Open Knowledge 
Foundation’s Open Database License. In Austria in particular, cooperation be-
tween federal and local governments has led to the endorsement of a Creative 
Commons Attribution License for government data. Alliances such as these bring 
together federal, state and city governments, as well as local communities, to 
forge common standards and develop conditions in which OGDs can benefit all 
stakeholders. 
An overview of the data catalogues reveals a variety of agencies and ministries re-
sponsible for open government data initiatives across countries: the Department 
of Finance and Deregulation in Australia,12 the Federal Ministry of Finance in Aus-
tria,13 and the Ministry of Finance and the Accountant General in Israel,14 to name 
a few. In some countries, like Colombia15 and Ghana,16 the initiative is undertaken 
by the Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies. In others, there 
is cooperation between agencies, as with the Ministry of Finance and Infocomm 
Development Authority in Singapore,17 and the Ministry of Finance and Public 
Administration and Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism in Spain.18 Finally, in a 
few countries—France, the United Kingdom and the United States of America—a 
specific unit under the executive branch is engaged, like France’s Etalab.19
While there are different agencies responsible for open government data initia-
tives in different countries, one common need within government agencies is 
having an individual responsible for institution-wide control, governance and 
utilization of data. This individual, usually called a Chief Data Officer (CDO), 
would also be responsible for the formation of new strategies around govern-
ment data. It has already been noted that some governments, particularly at the 
local level, are moving towards having CDOs. For example in the United States 
of America, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), has appointed 
CDOs at every one of its major bureaus including Consumer & Governmental 
Affairs, Enforcement and Public Safety and Homeland Security, to emphasize 
the importance of this role.20 In a similar development, the newly enacted open 
data law by the City of San Francisco established the CDO position to imple-
ment the open data policy in cooperation with departmental data coordina-
tors.21 The CDO role is relatively new to government, although it has been 
common in the private sector since the early 21st century. Frequent changes in 
technology and advances in the types and formats of data available, as well as 
the emerging concept of transparency, are leading administrative institutions 
the world over to appoint Chief Data Officers at various levels.
Since open government data initiatives require cooperation among various gov-
ernment agencies, strong political and top level management support is need-
ed. A vision should be complemented with a well-thought-out policy and strat-
   171 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
egy. Countries that have progressed on open government data already have 
strong policies in place. For example, Bahrain’s OGD policy aims to enhance 
public participation and private sector involvement by publishing datasets via 
their Open Government Data Portal, thereby allowing everyone to develop web 
and/or mobile applications that improve government transparency and public 
participation. The National Policy on Data Sharing and Accessibility (NPDSA)22 
of India aims at increating the accessibility and sharing of non-sensitive data 
among registered users, as well as the availability of this data for scientific, eco-
nomic and social development purposes. The open data policy of the Obama 
Administration of the United States treats information as a valuable national 
resource and a strategic asset for the Federal Government, its partners and the 
public and further states that executive departments and agencies must man-
age information as an asset throughout its life cycle to promote openness and 
interoperability and properly safeguard systems and information.23
8.3. Opportunities and challenges
Open government data has the potential to improve decision-making on com-
plex problems in government and increase transparency for a range of civil soci-
ety as well as across government agencies. In addition, it can help governments 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their services by allowing the public 
to reuse and remix freely available data for any purpose, potentially leading to in-
novation, new services and thus to economic growth. However, it may also come 
with potential challenges and risks that policy makers need to be aware of.
8.3.1. Data for development
Readily available data on governments’ efforts to fight poverty, achieve universal 
primary education, fight HIV and foster maternal health, raises citizens’ awareness 
and helps them participate in and oversee government actions. This data, as pro-
vided by open data portals, gives the private sector opportunities to productively 
contribute to the development process. For example, data shared by the Liberian 
government will support donor-funded peacebuilding activities across the country 
and provide the government with information on the places, regions, projects and 
types of activities needed to make future decisions.24 If this kind of project-level 
information were available in all areas where development goals face challenges, 
donors, host governments and civil society could more easily target, coordinate 
and evaluate development assistance. 
Improving access to geographical information and geospatial data and building 
capacities to use scientific information in areas such as climate monitoring, land 
use planning, water management, disaster risk reduction, health and food secu-
rity, will allow for more accurate environmental and social impact assessments and 
more informed decision-making at all levels. For example, in Cambodia, much of 
the data that is of great importance to smallholder farmers and rural populations—
e.g. data related to agrarian structure, foreign investment, infrastructure develop-
ment plans and their environmental implications—is generated and controlled by 
the government, donor agencies and private companies. Only a limited amount 
 172 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
of available information ever reaches the public’s attention and is often difficult to 
access or systematically track. The open data portal, Open Development Cam-
bodia,25 unites disparate data collection efforts by individual groups advocating 
for social and environmental justice into a secure, coordinated network designed 
to strengthen their efficacy and make public previously inaccessible data in a po-
litically neutral way. In another example, opening data nationally revealed some 
countries were being asked to pay up to 25 times more than their neighbours for 
the same pharmaceutical drugs. The findings enabled governments to put pres-
sure on pharmaceutical companies to reduce prices.26
It is also important for governments and humanitarian organizations to standard-
ize data sets before a crisis starts as stated in one of the reports of the United 
Nations Secretary-General. Then it will be possible to identify quickly, for exam-
ple, the locations of key services like health centres or water sources. National 
and subnational authorities have a wealth of valuable data on the resources, in-
frastructures and capacities of their communities, but do not necessarily have 
mechanisms to enable the sharing of this information. Making this data available 
to partners and the public can help to drive better decision-making. For exam-
ple, the Kenya Open Data Initiative27 enables anyone to locate health facilities, 
while presenting broader developmental, demographic and statistical data that 
could be invaluable in a crisis. Adopting policies that improve the quality of data, 
facilitating the open exchange of information and implementing global best 
practices for the exchange of data, would further strengthen the coordination of 
emergency humanitarian assistance.
8.3.2. Readiness for Open Government Data
One key to a government’s success in open government data is to assess the 
country’s readiness to undertake such an initiative. Some international organiza-
tions have already led projects to assess country readiness for OGD initiatives. 
The Guidelines on Open Government Data for Citizen Engagement, developed 
by UNDESA, are a practical and easy-to-understand way for policy makers and 
technologists to design, implement and sustain open government data initiatives. 
Policy makers will find checklists on political commitment, capacity building, leg-
islative, regulatory and institutional frameworks, cultural and human resources, 
financial conditions and technological infrastructure. The World Bank has also de-
veloped an ‘Open Data Readiness Assessment’ (ODRA) methodological tool for 
conducting an action-oriented assessment of the readiness of a government—
or even an individual agency—to evaluate, design and implement an open data 
initiative. The tool assesses government readiness in various dimensions such as 
leadership, policy and legal framework, institutional structures, responsibilities 
and skills within government, data within government, demand for open data 
particularly for citizen engagement, open data ecosystems, financing and national 
technology and skills infrastructure. The Web Foundation, aiming to raise global 
awareness of the feasibility and benefits of open data in developing countries, has 
published readiness assessments for Ghana, Chile and Indonesia. The Foundation 
believes that initiatives should focus on releasing information that can be used 
to improve people’s lives and should be structured to achieve an open govern-
   173 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
ment paradigm shift that allows citizens to be better informed and more directly 
involved in political decision-making.
To have high-quality data in a government agency, systematic policies or leg-
islation on the management of government information ought to be in place, 
like mandatory record keeping standards. Each agency must make and keep full 
and accurate records of its activities. These records must be authentic and have 
integrity and should be usable and in conformity with the standards and codes 
of best practice in the country. Each agency also needs to collect, store and 
manage information, ideally in digital form and through a standardized process. 
As such, there should be no irregularities in datasets; data should be consistent 
across agencies, complete, accurate and frequently updated. The power of data 
is often in the updating, not merely in baseline recording. Once these practices 
are in place, publishing data in OGD catalogues should be planned with the 
understanding of all agencies involved. Data publishing should not happen in an 
ad hoc manner without commonly agreed upon data and metadata standards 
and without the common identifiers which make finding, reusing, integrating and 
making sense of data from different sources. The interest and willingness to share 
data may be different across agencies. Raising awareness within the government 
and informing on the benefits of data sharing would be helpful in overcoming 
any potential reluctance. Once a data catalogue is established, the process must 
still be sustained, monitored and evaluated. Sharing data is important, but shar-
ing updates to the data and keeping the data current is equally important. 
In spite of the vast advantages of OGD, there are also potential downsides and 
risks. Some relate to privacy issues and data that can be personalized and mis-
used against individuals or communities. The rights to privacy and to information 
are essential human rights in the modern information society. For the most part, 
they complement each other in holding governments accountable to individuals. 
There is the possibility of conflict between them, however, when access to gov-
ernment-held personal information is demanded. Governments need to develop 
mechanisms for identifying core issues to balance these two rights. A World Bank 
research paper28 examines legislative and structural means to better define and 
harmonize the rights to privacy and information. Another concern pertains to na-
tional security. Governments can have a schema of classified data to exclude from 
their data catalogues. While developing OGD strategies, policymakers must keep 
in mind the safeguard of personal privacy and national security issues, especially 
because concern for these easily becomes a trigger for hiding data. Having an 
Information (Privacy) Commissioner, to whom citizens can relate their concerns, 
such as lack of access to certain data or the publishing of personal data, would 
also contribute to preventing conflicts in the OGD field. It is of paramount impor-
tance that these organizations be independent of the executive branch.
8.3.3. A sustainable Open Government Data ecosystem
Open Government Data has no value if the data published is not utilized. In order 
for OGD initiatives to thrive and develop, the stakeholders involved should ac-
tively promote and encourage opening more data, participation and the devel-
opment of new applications. They should also foster an atmosphere of exchange 
 174 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
and collaboration among government agencies, citizens, civil society organiza-
tions and other stakeholders. Training and capacity-building of stakeholders and 
potential re-users should be given high priority in order to broaden the initiative. 
Policy makers cannot see open data as an end unto itself, but rather as a tool to 
reach further objectives. Engagement should be demand-driven and should take 
into consideration the views and requests of data users. The data should not only 
be clear but also provide information about metadata, frequency of updates and 
manuals for working with the data. 
Engagement strategies should also promote conversations about the data, by 
allowing users to comment on datasets, for instance. Interaction among vari-
ous stakeholders as well as participation of newcomers can be enhanced and 
facilitated by providing standard tools, how-to wikis, FAQs and discussion fo-
rums as well as capacity building workshops. A popular way of engaging with a 
community that reuses information and developing new applications is hosting 
competitions or hackathons. Most recently, many governments and international 
organizations interested in promoting open data have taken this approach. Table 
8.3 lists some major initiatives. These events not only help capitalize on local tal-
ent and community buy-in, but also generate ideas that transform the nature of 
traditional public service channels. 
Open Government Data is also one of the main drivers of data journalism. Data-
sets, critical thinking and thorough research provide context and depth to sto-
ries on complex issues. Specifically, data also helps journalists convey their stories 
through visually appealing and easy-to-follow graphs (usually called infographs). 
Government data is already commonly used in journalism—for stories on themes 
as varied as the environment, crime and education. Some countries are respond-
ing in interesting ways when government data is underused. The Data Dredger 
project29 in Kenya transforms government data into interactive sets and makes it 
more visually palatable, encouraging traditional media to embrace data-driven 
journalism. This journalistic practice can also open up more data: the Govern-
ment of the Netherlands, for one, publicly releases every dataset and document 
solicited via access-to-information requests on a specific website. This website 
thus contains a trove of information available to everyone.30
Table 8.3. Examples of Open Government Data competitions
Finland Apps for Finland apps4finland.fi
Netherlands Apps for the Netherlands nationaleappprijs.nl
Australia GovHack govhack.org
Germany Open Data Challenge opendatachallenge.org/
Singapore Ideas 4 Apps Challenge ideas.data.gov.sg
Africa Apps for Africa apps4africa.org
Worldwide Water Hackathon water.worldbank.org
International International Space Apps spaceappschallenge.org
International Apps for Climate wbchallenge.imaginatik.com
   175 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
8.3.4. Return on investment
Open Government Data is providing new economic opportunities, both for public 
and private sectors, however it is too early to assess the full magnitude of its im-
pact. Deloitte reported in a study32 that open data will drive growth, ingenuity and 
innovation in the United Kingdom’s economy, as organizations exploit the data in 
order to achieve sustainable growth, stronger performance and more meaningful 
engagement. In its study,33 the consulting firm Cap Gemini concluded that gov-
ernments are not sufficiently leveraging open data for economic benefits and rec-
ommended they follow the example set by Spain, which has over 150 companies 
focused on selling services on top of open government data. The Cap Gemini 
study also discusses how governments can save money through the transparency 
benefits OGD brings, as well as create jobs and develop skilled labour. It cites 
Australia’s spatial information industry, which is based on open data and employs 
over 31,000 people. According to a study34 conducted by the Research Institute 
of the Finnish Economy, firms in countries in which public sector agencies pro-
vide basic geographical information, either freely or at marginal cost, have grown 
on average about 15 percent more per annum than those in countries in which 
public sector geographical information is priced according to the cost-recovery 
principle. Another study reports that, when effectively deployed, an open data 
platform delivers at least a tenfold return on investment. In the beginning, the 
largest contributors to this return are in cost savings and internal efficiency gains. 
Open government data initiatives is a concern since these initiatives need more 
time in order to be seen as essential public services. When the United States 
Government shut down in October 2013, its open data portal was inaccessible 
for days. The notice read that the site was down due to lapse in federal fund-
ing—yet other online services, like passport application on firstgov.gov, were up 
and running. Even before the shutdown, there had been reports of cutting funds 
for open government data platforms throughout the country.35 This suggests that 
these portals could be the first affected in a crisis. It is all too easy for govern-
box 8.2. Promoting OGD usage in Moldova
One of the difficulties in launching open government data initiatives may lie 
in low public interest. Moldova is facing just such a problem.31 Its citizens 
are not demanding disclosure of government data, in contrast with most 
other countries where government data was released under strong public 
pressure. Officials in Moldova supporting an open data initiative have held 
events to generate interest and awareness .around the issue, in addition to 
training sessions on data journalism and app development using open data. 
According to these officials, a Moldova-based NGO is working on a project 
called Budget Stories that would essentially release budgetary information 
in the form of infographics, creating visual stories behind the facts. In a 
separate initiative, a group of students in Moldova is combining different 
cartographic and geographic data to produce maps that will assist the gov-
ernment visualising certain domestic challenges.
Source: ht tp://w w w.date.
gov.md/
 176 
C
ha
p
te
r 
8
CHAPTER 8 • OPEN GOVERNMENT DATA UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
ment agencies to forget that they would operate more effectively and efficiently 
with oversight from the portals, resulting, in turn, in taxpayer savings. OGD, when 
implemented well, tracks taxpayers’ money and provides them with tools to hold 
public officials more accountable. It increases data quality, including in the data 
collection and maintenance stages. It also facilitates data sharing among govern-
ment agencies and results in increased internal efficiencies. The short-term cost 
of releasing and maintaining data catalogues is likely to be outweighed by the 
long-term benefits.
8.4. Conclusion
Data has always been a strategic asset, but its availability to the public has 
grown markedly in the last decade thanks to the precipitous advancement of 
technologies. 
Opening up government data is fundamentally about more efficient use of re-
sources and improving service delivery for citizens. The effects are potentially far-
reaching for sustainable development: innovation, transparency, accountability, 
participatory governance and economic growth. The availability of data is para-
mount to the identification of development opportunities and policy decision-
making. Better data can improve decision-making tremendously, but only where 
decision-makers favour policy that is evidence-based and context specific. The 
amount of data government agencies collect will grow exponentially in the com-
ing years. Although open data provides many opportunities and capabilities for 
these agencies, its real impact will not be realised without carefully planned data 
management. A number of recommendations can be therefore extrapolated 
from the above conclusions:
 • To stave off yet another development divide, in this case a data divide, it is 
important for countries to prioritize and invest in open government data initia-
tives. 
 • In order to grow and sustain open data initiatives, governments may want to 
consider updating their legal and institutional frameworks, as well as raising 
awareness at higher decision-making levels. Government agencies need to 
publish information proactively and be “open by default”, rather than reac-
tively disclose information in response to requests. In addition, existing regula-
tions and laws can be reviewed to support open data initiatives and address 
privacy and security concerns. Information laws can be updated to specify 
new datasets to be published in open formats by all government agencies in 
a proactive way. 
 • Government agencies must have processes in place clearly defining which 
data to share with the public in which formats, at what time intervals and un-
der which licenses, ensuring no restrictions on reuse of government informa-
tion. In this context, not only policies but more importantly people, will make 
a difference in how the data is used to make governments more transparent, 
participatory and efficient. 
   177 
C
hap
ter 8
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
 • Countries undertaking open data initiatives need to closely monitor them to 
encourage usage, but also to improve internal processes. Policy makers aim-
ing to benefit from open data can also foster an atmosphere of exchange and 
collaboration among government agencies, citizens, civil society organizations 
and other stakeholders. 
 • Training and capacity-building of stakeholders and potential re-users ought to 
be given high priority in order to broaden the impact of open data initiatives. 
It is also important to emphasize the quality of data—how well it has been 
collected and analyzed. Consequently, decisions regarding open government 
data may consider existing capacities in order to develop the appropriate 
knowledge, attitudes and skills necessary for data collection and analysis. 

Annexes

In this chapter:
Annexes
Selected messages 
on ICT and public 
service delivery 
General Debate, 68th Session of the 
United Nations General Assembly 
(September 2013)
A key enabler to foster growth is the bold use of modern 
ICT solutions.
Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves, President of Estonia
Using the “state of the art” digital technology, the peo-
ple are today getting more than 200 services from 4,582 
digitalized Union Services and Information Centres. Rural 
women are also getting health care services from digitally 
inter-connected 15,500 Community Health Clinics and Un-
ion Health Centres, which are reaching the health care ser-
vices to the doorstep of the people. Advanced cell phone 
technologies are also providing services to over 100 million 
subscribers.
H.E. Mrs. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, Bangladesh
In reforming and developing its information and commu-
nication technology infrastructure, Fiji has adopted a com-
prehensive approach by combining a national framework 
for lCT development with effective and pragmatic policies 
and initiatives to deliver results directly to the Fijian people.
H.E. Mr. Commodore Josaia V. Bainimarama, Prime Minis-
ter, Fiji
In India, we promote inclusive development in multiple 
ways … Digital technology is being harnessed to improve 
the delivery of public services and benefits to the people.
H.E. Mr. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister, India
We are proud to acknowledge that the Government has 
embarked on a new course of technological modernization 
to enable direct public access to government services. Our 
Selected essage on ICT and public 
service delivery 181
Regional and subregional classification 183
Survey Methodology 185
A.1. Introduction 185
A.2. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (TII) 187
A.3. Human Capital Index (HCI) 189
A.4. Online Service Index (OSI) 191
A.5. Challenges in reviewing a country’s online presence 193
A.6. E-Participation Index (EPI) 196
A.7. Country classifications and nomenclature in the survey 197
A.8. United Nations e-government knowledge base 198
Data Tables 199
Notes 249
References 257
 182 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
aim is to make all such government services available electronically to all citizens by 
2020 at any time, from anywhere, using modern communication technologies and 
devices such as computers, mobile phones and interactive payment offices. This 
kind of system will ensure real transparency in the relationship between citizens and 
public officials, combat corruption and reduce unnecessary bureaucracy.
H.E. Mr. Iurie Leancǎ, Prime Minister, Republic of Moldova
We are cognizant of the momentum and impact of information and communication 
technology as a tool that will assist in the development of the economy.
H.E. Mr. Denzil Douglas, Prime Minister, Saint Kitts and Nevis
Today, there are more than 20 million mobile phone users across Afghanistan, an 
increasing number of them accessing information and using various platforms on 
the internet.
H.E. Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister of Foreign Affair, Afghanistan
One of the key elements that Azerbaijan is considering within the post-2015 agenda 
is information and communication technologies, which is a driving force of devel-
opment and progress. To achieve the objective of ensuring improved access to 
lCTs, there is a need for intensified efforts towards enhancing regional synergies for 
promoting investment in ICT capacity building, refocusing tools and contents for 
addressing particular needs of the population and thus better deploying ICTs in the 
service of sustainable development. In this connection, Azerbaijan has put forward 
a proposal to establish the Eurasian Connectivity Alliance—a regional platform in 
support of improved connectivity and greater cooperation in the field of ICTs.
H.E. Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu Mammadyarov, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Azerbaijan,
Science and knowledge are considered as common rights for all mankind and the 
tremendous advances and developments that have been made over the years in 
applying and using modern technologies have become essential tools of everyday 
life for human beings within their scientific and intellectual creations. From this point 
of view, my country worked with steady pace to keep up with the development of 
knowledge in response to current needs and in anticipation of the future.
H.E. Mr. Yousef Bin Al-Alawi Bin Abdulla, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Oman
Source: http://gadebate.un.org/
   183 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional and subregional classification
AFRICA AMERICA ASIA
Eastern Africa Caribbean Central Asia
Burundi Antigua and Barbuda Kazakhstan 
Comoros Bahamas Kyrgyzstan 
Djibouti Barbados Tajikistan 
Eritrea Cuba Turkmenistan 
Ethiopia Dominica Uzbekistan 
Kenya Dominican Republic Eastern Asia
Madagascar Grenada China 
Malawi Haiti Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Mauritius Jamaica Japan 
Mozambique Saint Kitts and Nevis Mongolia 
Rwanda Saint Lucia Republic of Korea 
Seychelles Saint Vincent and the Grenadines South-Eastern Asia
Somalia Trinidad and Tobago Brunei Darussalam 
South Sudan Central America Cambodia 
Uganda Belize Indonesia 
United Republic of Tanzania Costa Rica Lao People's Democratic Republic 
Zambia El Salvador Malaysia
Zimbabwe Guatemala Myanmar 
Middle Africa Honduras Philippines 
Angola Mexico Singapore 
Cameroon Nicaragua Thailand 
Central African Republic Panama Timor-Leste
Chad Northern America Viet Nam 
Congo Canada Southern Asia
Democratic Republic of the Congo United States of America Afghanistan
Equatorial Guinea South America Bangladesh 
Gabon Argentina Bhutan 
Sao Tome and Principe Bolivia (Plurinational State of) India 
Northern Africa Brazil Iran (Islamic Republic of) 
Algeria Chile Maldives
Egypt Colombia Nepal 
Libya Ecuador Pakistan 
Morocco Guyana Sri Lanka 
Sudan Paraguay Western Asia
Tunisia Peru Armenia 
Southern Africa Suriname Azerbaijan 
Botswana Uruguay Bahrain 
Lesotho Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Cyprus 
Namibia Georgia 
South Africa Iraq 
Swaziland Israel 
Western Africa Jordan 
Benin Kuwait 
Burkina Faso Lebanon 
Cape Verde Oman 
Côte d’Ivoire Qatar 
Gambia Saudi Arabia 
Ghana Syrian Arab Republic 
Guinea Turkey 
Guinea-Bissau United Arab Emirates 
Liberia Yemen 
Mali 
Mauritania 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Senegal 
Sierra Leone 
Togo 
 184 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
EUROPE OCEANIA
Eastern Europe Australia and New Zealand
Belarus Australia 
Bulgaria New Zealand 
Czech Republic Melanesia
Hungary Fiji 
Poland Papua New Guinea 
Republic of Moldova Solomon Islands 
Romania Vanuatu 
Russian Federation Micronesia
Slovakia Kiribati 
Ukraine Marshall Islands 
Northern Europe Micronesia (Federated States of) 
Denmark Nauru 
Estonia Palau 
Finland Polynesia
Iceland Samoa 
Ireland Tonga 
Latvia Tuvalu 
Lithuania 
Norway 
Sweden 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Southern Europe
Albania 
Andorra 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Croatia 
Greece 
Italy 
Malta 
Montenegro
Portugal 
San Marino 
Serbia
Slovenia 
Spain 
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
Western Europe
Austria
Belgium 
France
Germany 
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Monaco 
Netherlands 
Switzerland 
   185 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Survey methodology
A.1. Introduction
Every two years, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Af-
fairs (UNDESA) through its Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management (DPADM) publishes the United Nations E-Government Survey. The 
Survey provides a snapshot with relative rankings of e-government development 
of all Member States of the United Nations. 
By ranking the performance of countries on a relative scale, the Survey provides 
relevant information to support policy makers in shaping their e-government pro-
grammes for development. As a composite indicator, the e-government develop-
ment index (EGDI) is used to measure the willingness and capacity of national ad-
ministrations to use information and communication technologies to deliver public 
services. This measure of the index is useful for government officials, policy mak-
ers, researchers and representatives of civil society and the private sector to gain 
a deeper understanding of the comparative benchmarking of the relative position 
of a country in utilizing e-government for the delivery of inclusive, accountable and 
citizen-centric services. 
The Survey provides insights of common themes and different strategies in de-
velopment patterns among regions and across countries. By tracking the pro-
gress of countries globally over time, the Survey seeks to better understand the 
challenges that the United Nations Member States face in developing their e-
government programmes. The challenges include (a) how to promote greater 
use of e-government while ensuring equal access to services; (b) how to leverage 
resources to integrate new technologies into traditional development patterns 
while ensuring that such opportunities are fully utilized; (c) how to devise ap-
propriate e-government strategies and policies that can help to overcome in-
adequate human resources capabilities, infrastructure, as well as language and 
content. The Survey also highlights broad trends among countries and across re-
gions. By providing better understanding of the emerging patterns of countries' 
performance across the world, the Survey contributes to the ongoing discussion 
of the critical role of ICT in development. The Survey also identifies countries 
and areas where the potential of ICT and e-government have not been yet fully 
exploited.
The EGDI is based on an expert assessment survey of the online presence of all 
193 United Nations Member States, which assesses national websites and how 
e-government policies and strategies are applied in general and in specific sec-
tors for delivery of essential services. The assessment rates the e-government 
performance of countries relative to one another as opposed to being an ab-
solute measurement. The results are tabulated and combined with a set of in-
dicators gauging a country’s capacity to participate in the information society, 
without which e-government development efforts are of limited immediate use. 
 186 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Although the basic model has remained consistent, the precise meaning of these 
values varies from one edition of the Survey to the next as understanding of the 
potential of e-government changes and the underlying technology evolves. This 
is an important distinction because it also implies that it is a comparative frame-
work that seeks to encompass various approaches that may evolve over time 
instead of advocating a linear path with an absolute goal.
Mathematically, the EGDI is a weighted average of three normalized scores on 
three most important dimensions of e-government, namely: scope and quality of 
online services (Online Service Index, OSI), development status of telecommuni-
cation infrastructure (Telecommunication Infrastructure Index, TII) and inherent 
human capital (Human Capital Index, HCI). Each of these sets of indices is in itself 
a composite measure that can be extracted and analyzed independently.
EGDI = 13 (OSInormalized + TIInormalized + HCInormalized)
Prior to the normalization of the three component indicators, the Z-score stand-
ardization procedure is implemented for each component indicator to ensure 
that the overall EGDI is equally decided by the three component indexes, i.e. 
each component index presents comparable variance subsequent to the Z-score 
standardization. In the absence of the Z-score standardization treatment, the 
EGDI would mainly depend on the component index with the greatest disper-
sion. After the Z-score standardization, the arithmetic average sum becomes a 
good statistical indicator, where “equal weights” truly means “equal importance.”
For standard Z-score calculation of each component indicator:
xnew = 
x – μ
where:
x is a raw score to be standardized;
μ is the mean of the population;
σ is the standard deviation of the population.
The composite value of each component index is then normalized to fall be-
tween the range of 0 to 1 and the overall EGDI is derived by taking the arithmetic 
average of the three component indexes.
As indicated, the EGDI is used as a benchmark to provide a numerical ranking of 
e-government development across United Nations Member States, yet this ap-
proach has its own weaknesses. 
The methodological framework for the United Nations E-Government Develop-
ment Index has remained consistent across the Survey editions. At the same 
time, the Survey has been adjusted to reflect emerging trends of e-government 
strategies, evolving knowledge of best practices in e-government, changes in 
technology and other factors, and data collection practices have been periodi-
cally refined.
σ
   187 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A.2. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (TII)
Research shows that every 10 point increase in broadband penetration increases 
economic growth rates, on average, by 1.38 per cent in low- and middle-income 
countries.1 Ten years ago, there were only eight cell phones for every 100 people 
in the developing world while today there are almost 90,2 opening opportunities 
for tens of millions of people who previously felt marginalised or isolated and 
unable to participate fully in society and engage with others. In this context, the 
influence of mobile broadband in the overall telecommunication infrastructure in 
any one nation is important. 
Given the availability of suitable data,3 a new wireless broadband subscription 
indicator was included in the computation of Telecommunication Infrastructure 
Index (TII) in the 2014 Survey. The TII is an arithmetic average composite of five 
indicators: estimated internet users per 100 inhabitants, number of main fixed 
telephone lines per 100 inhabitants, number of mobile subscribers per 100 in-
habitants, number of wireless broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants and 
number of fixed broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants. The International 
Telecommunication Union is the primary source of data in each case. 
The TII has remained largely unchanged since 2002, except for the replacement 
of online population with fixed-broadband subscription and the removal of num-
ber of television sets in 2008; the replacement of personal computer (PC) users 
with fixed Internet subscriptions in 2012; and the replacement of fixed Internet 
subscriptions with wireless broadband subscriptions in 2014.
The improvement of data quality and coverage has led to reduction in some data 
gaps that appeared in prior Surveys. However, in the case where gaps still occurred, 
data was retrieved firstly from the Word Bank data base; and secondly, when all pre-
vious measures proved unsuccessful, the most recent ITU data was used.
Each of these indicators was standardized via the Z-score procedure to derive 
the Z-score for each component indicator. The telecommunication infrastructure 
composite value for country “x” is the simple arithmetic mean of the five stand-
ardized indicators derived this way:
Figure A.1. The three components of the E-Government Development Index (EGDI)
OSI
1/3
TII
1/3
HCI
1/3
EGDI
OSI—Online Service Index
TII—Telecommunication
Infrastructure Index
HCI—Human Capital Index
 188 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Telecommunication infrastructure composite value=
Arithmetic Mean  ( Internet user Z-score 
+ Telephone line Z-score 
+ Mobile subscription Z-score 
+ Wireless broadband subscription Z-score 
+ Fixed broadband Z-score)
Finally, the TII composite value is normalized by taking its value for a given coun-
try, subtracting the lowest composite value in the Survey and dividing by the 
range of composite values for all countries. For example, if country “x” has the 
composite value of 1.3813, and the lowest composite value for all countries is 
-1.1358 and the highest is 2.3640, then the normalized value of TII for country “x” 
would be:
Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (Country “x”) = 
[1.3813–(–1.1358)]
[2.3640–(–1.1358)]
 = 0.7192
Table A.1. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and changes of its components (2003–2014)
TII (2002) TII (2003) TII (2004) TII (2005) TII (2008) TII (2010) TII (2012) TII (2014)
Internet users Internet users Internet users Internet users Internet users Internet users Internet users Internet users
Online  
population
Online  
population
Online  
population
Online  
population
Fixed- 
broadband 
subscriptions
Fixed- 
broadband 
subscriptions
Fixed- 
broadband 
subscriptions
Fixed- 
broadband 
subscriptions
Personal 
computer (PC) 
users
Personal 
computer (PC) 
users
Personal 
computer (PC) 
users
Personal 
computer (PC) 
users
Personal 
computer (PC) 
users
Personal 
computer (PC) 
users
Fixed 
Internet 
subscriptions
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Mobile-
cellular 
subscriptions
Television 
sets
Television 
sets
Television 
sets
Television 
sets
- - - -
TII
1/5 1/5
1/51/5
1/5
Mobile-cellular
subscriptions (per 100)
Fixed-telephone
subscriptions (per 100)
Individuals using the Internet
(% population)
Fixed (wired)-broadband
subscriptions (per 100)
Wireless broadband
subscriptions (per 100)
Figure A.2. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index (TII) and its components
   189 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A.3. Human Capital Index (HCI)
The 2014 Survey introduced two new components to the Human Capital Index 
(HCI),  namely (i) expected years of schooling; and (ii) average years of schooling. 
A study was conducted to analyze the behaviour of the new HCI. The effects of 
introducing new components, i.e. the expected years of schooling and the mean 
years of schooling, were investigated and the impact was evaluated with par-
ticular attention on significant changes in the calculation of HCI. The preliminary 
statistical study commissioned by DPADM validated the use of the new HCI, ac-
centuating that the two new components has strengthened the HCI and it does 
not introduce any error.
These were added to two existing components of adult literacy rate and the 
combined primary, secondary and tertiary gross enrolment ratio which had been 
used for the past Surveys since 2002. This addition also echoed the call of the 
United Nations Secretary-General’s Report4 “A life of dignity for all: accelerat-
ing progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and advancing the 
United Nations development agenda beyond 2015, transformative and mutu-
ally reinforcing actions to provide quality education and lifelong learning were 
highlighted, amongst others, as essential for development. It was stressed that 
young people should be able to receive high-quality education and learning, 
from early childhood development to post-primary schooling, including not only 
formal schooling but also life skills and vocational education and training.
The definitions of the four indicators of HCI are:
1. Adult literacy is measured as the percentage of people aged 15 years and 
above who can, with understanding, both read and write a short simple state-
ment on their everyday life. 
2. Gross enrolment ratio is measured as the combined primary, secondary and 
tertiary gross enrolment ratio, of the total number of students enrolled at the 
primary, secondary and tertiary level, regardless of age, as a percentage of the 
population of school age for that level.
3. Expected years of schooling is the total number of years of schooling which 
a child of a certain age can expect to receive in the future, assuming that the 
probability of his or her being in school at any particular age is equal to the cur-
rent enrolment ratio age.5
4. Mean years of schooling (MYS) provides the average number of years of 
education completed by a a country’s adult population (25 years and older), ex-
cluding the years spent repeating grades.6
The HCI is a weighted average composite of the four indicators. Similar to calcu-
lating the TII, each of the four component indicators is first standardized via the 
Z-score procedure to derive the Z-score value for each component indicator. The 
human capital composite value for country “x” is the weighted arithmetic mean 
with one-third weight assigned to adult literacy rate and two-ninth weight as-
signed to the gross enrolment ratio, estimate years of schooling and mean years 
of schooling derived this way:
 190 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Human capital composite value = 
1/₃ x Adult literacy rate Z-score + 
2/₉ x Gross enrolment ratio Z-score + 
2/₉ x Expected years of schooling Z-score + 
2/₉ x Mean years of schooling Z-score
Then, the human capital composite value is normalized by taking its composite 
value for a given country, subtracting the lowest composite value in the Survey and 
dividing by the range of composite values for all countries. For example, if coun-
try “x” has the composite value at 0.8438, and the lowest composite value for all 
countries is –3.2354 and the highest equal to 1.2752, then the normalized value of 
the Human Capital Index for country “x” would be:
Human Capital Index (Country “x”) = 
[0.8438–(–3.2354)]
[1.2752–(–3.2354)]
 = 0.9044
Missing data for mean years of schooling
For countries with missing data on the mean years of schooling (MYS) component 
the MYS is calculated by UNDP using UNESCO as a source and the 2010 Barro 
and Lee methodology.7 This methodology makes at least five assumptions in de-
termining the MYS estimate and it is based on the following steps:
 • The other three components of the HCI, for all the nations, have been used 
as an input of a linkage cluster algorithm. The components of the HCI are all 
connected because they all refer to education and culture.
Table A.2. Human Capital Index and changes of its components (2003–2014)
Components of HCI in past Surveys 
(2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2010, 2012) Components of HCI in 2014 Survey
Adult literacy Adult literacy
Gross enrolment ratio Gross enrolment ratio
- Expected years of schooling
- Mean years of schooling
Figure A.3. Human Capital Index (HCI) and its components
HCI
1/3
2/9
2/92/9
Adult literacy (%)
Gross enrolment ratio (%) Expected years of schooling
Mean years of schooling
   191 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
 • It has been verified that these clusters are composed by countries with similar 
MYS values.
 • The aim is to assign to nations with missing MYS value the average of the clus-
ter they belong to.
 • Tests have been applied to the results in order to verify the consistency of the 
results.
A.4. Online Service Index (OSI)
Taking into account the new and emerging trends since 2012 the 2014 Survey 
questionnaire was improved to encompass the new developments with a focus on: 
 • the rising importance of a whole-of government approach and integrated on-
line service delivery; 
 • the use of e-government to provide information and services to citizens on 
environment related issues;
 • e-infrastructure and its increasing role in bridging the digital divide, with a 
particular emphasis on the provision of effective online services for the inclu-
sion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, such as the poor, the disabled, 
women, children and youth, the elderly, minorities, etc;
 • the increasing emphasis on service usage, multichannel service delivery, ’open 
government data’, e-procurement;
 • the expansion of e-participation and mobile government. 
The outcome was an enhanced Survey instrument with a wider range of point dis-
tributions reflecting differences in levels of e-government development among 
countries.
To arrive at a set of Online Service Index values, more than 90 researchers -quali-
fied graduate students and volunteers from universities in the field of public ad-
ministration—assessed each country’s national website in the native language, 
including the national portal, e-services portal and e-participation portal, as well 
as the websites of the related ministries of education, labour, social services, 
health, finance and environment as applicable.
To ensure consistency of assessments, all the researchers were provided with a 
rigorous training by e-government and online service delivery experts, with years 
of experience in conducting the assessments. All the researchers were guided 
by a Data Team Coordinator who provided support and guidance throughout 
the assessment period. Researchers were instructed and trained to assume the 
mind-set of an average citizen user in assessing sites. Thus, responses were gen-
erally based on whether the relevant features could be found and accessed eas-
ily, not whether they in fact exist although hidden somewhere on the sites. While 
it is possible, although implausible, to search the sites meticulously for all content 
and features, this approach misses the key point that the average user needs to 
find information and features quickly and intuitively for a site to be “usable” with 
content readily discoverable by the intended beneficiaries.
 192 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
The data collection and Survey research ran from May 2013 until the end of June 
2013. Each country was assessed by at least two researchers who conducted the 
Survey in the country’s national language in May-June. After the initial assess-
ment, the evaluations by the two researchers on each country were compared 
and questions with discrepancies were reviewed again by the researchers. The 
third phase, from July to August, was the final review by the Data Team Coor-
dinators who analyzed all the answers and, where needed, carried out further 
review and verification processes using multiple methods and sources before the 
scores were sent for approval by a senior researcher. Through this multilevel ap-
proach, all surveyed sites were thoroughly assessed by at least three people, one 
of whom has years of experience in assessing public sector online services and 
reviewed by one of the Data Team Coordinators.
Once the evaluation phase was completed, the statistics team produced the first 
draft of the OSI ranking. The data was extracted from the platform and the raw 
OSI scores were created. Rankings were compared with previous OSI scores, and 
any discrepancies were reviewed thoroughly.
The Survey questionnaire is organized in specific thematic sets of questions 
(subthemes) structured in four patterns corresponding to the four stages of e-
government development (see Figure A.4). The patterns have been designed 
to provide a qualitative assessment within a rigorous quantitative methodology. 
Each question calls for a binary response. Every positive answer generates a new 
“more in depth question” inside and across the patterns. For the 2014 Survey 
questionnaire, the thematic subthemes identified are: 
 • Whole-of-government;
 • Multichannel service delivery;
 • Bridging the digital divide;
 • Increasing usage;
 • Open Government;
 • E-participation.
The outcome is an enhanced quantitative Survey with a wider range of point dis-
tributions reflecting differences in levels of e-government development among 
countries.
The total number of points scored by each country is normalized to the range 
of 0 to 1. The online index value for a given country is equal to the actual total 
score less the lowest total score divided by the range of total score values for all 
countries. For example, if country “x” has a score of 114, and the lowest score of 
any country is 0 and the highest equal to 153, then the online services value for 
country “x” would be:
Online Service Index (Country “x”) = 
(114–0)
(153–0)
 = 0.7451
   193 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A.5.  Challenges in reviewing a country’s online 
presence
Selecting the appropriate site/URL at the national level
The United Nations Member States are sent an invitation to provide information 
regarding their website addresses (URL) for different government ministries and 
the national portal(s). Information was also requested with regards to URLs for 
open government data, e-participation and the designated authority in charge of 
e-government policies. 80 Member States returned this information, compared to 
50 in 2012. All appropriate sites are then utilized during the verification process.
One of the essential decisions for researchers when undertaking this Survey is 
to identify the specific site(s) to review as the national government site for each 
country. Regardless of the sophistication of e-government in a specific country, 
the priority for users is to find a clear indication as to which of the many poten-
tially available government sites could be deemed as the “official” national gov-
ernment site—in a sense, the gateway or starting point for national users. Not 
only is this fairly easy to do—a simple, clear statement at the chosen website is 
sufficient to start—but also an important step towards providing government 
information and services to the public in an integrated, usable and easy-to-find 
manner. Many countries have in fact engaged in the procedure of actually not-
ing on their national site that it is their “official” Government site, or “Gateway to 
Government,” or other such statement.
Yet not all countries provided the appropriate URLs. Thus, some discretion is 
exerted when deciding whether to use the country-provided websites. What is 
noteworthy in this Survey is that the researchers not only reviewed the national 
portals but also undertook exhaustive research on e-participation and open gov-
ernment data where applicable.
One dilemma facing researchers is that a number of countries provide more than 
one apparently legitimate national access point. While some have simply not yet 
consolidated their government entry points into a single site or portal that could 
be clearly distinguished, others have actually taken this approach on purpose—
offering different access points to different audiences. Considering that the use 
of integrated portals or multi-portals is emerging as a trend in e-government 
strategies worldwide, researchers would select the integrated website as a Na-
tional Portal or other portal if it were deemed to be the official homepage of the 
government. However, more than one site could be scored if they were clearly 
part of a tightly integrated “network” of national sites. It should be noted that for 
those countries for which more than one site was assessed, having more than one 
national entry is neither a disadvantage nor a benefit.
Some countries do not offer certain public services at the federal level, but rather 
at the sub-national or local level. No country is penalized for offering a service 
at the sub-national level as opposed to the federal level per se. In fact, when the 
issue arises researchers tend to be inclusive in assessing the matter as long as the 
information and/or service can be found from the national level.
 194 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
A more difficult problem arises when not only a specific service is located at the 
local level but when the entire ministerial functions are altogether missing at the 
national level. If researchers are unable to locate a ministry as per the above de-
scribed method, then the final step is to find out whether the country in question 
actually has such a ministry at the national level or whether the functions might 
be locally administered.
Integrated portal and multi-portal approaches
Some countries have adopted a different approach to their online e-government 
portal, through utilizing multiple websites for different topics. Hence, instead of 
centralizing all the e-services, e-participation and forms in one portal, they have 
been made available on separate websites for a more audience-targeted ap-
proach. Researchers made sure to examine all possible websites when making 
the assessment, through links or search engines, to cover all government web-
sites where relative information can be found.
Even though the norm has been to follow a one-stop-shop type of service deliv-
ery and an integrated portal approach, countries who have used a decentralized 
approach have not been penalized in their score, and the assessment was con-
ducted as though for a single portal.
For example, Finland has a website www.valtioneuvosto.fi which is the informa-
tion portal of the Finnish Government, whereas the website www.suomi.fi is the 
e-service and public service information portal with also open government data. 
Information on e-participation is centralized on the websites www.kansalaisa-
loite.fi and otakantaa.fi. This approach of having several websites for different 
purposes (information, services, participation and open government data) is typi-
cal of several European countries.
Accessing websites in national official languages
The research team was fully equipped to handle the six official languages of the 
United Nations, namely Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish. 
However, as in previous Survey cycles, the team went beyond this mandate and 
made an effort to review each website in the official language of the country or, 
where that was not possible, in another of the languages available on the site. 
Translators provided assistance as necessary so that possible errors based on 
language have been reduced to a minimum.
Data quality checks
In order to ensure the data quality, UNDESA has put Survey procedures under 
close monitoring including developing a standard web-based application plat-
form for data collection and storage, preparing the methodological and training 
guidelines for researchers and instituting a training programme for either group 
training or individual hands-on support for researchers to resolve thorny issues. 
Among other tasks, team members were asked to justify the selection of URLs 
and indicate whether the URLs had been reviewed in past Surveys. Regular meet-
ings were held to discuss concerns and ensure consistency of evaluation methods.
   195 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
UNDESA applied the Survey scores to generate an ordering of online service pres-
ence of all United Nations Member States and compared them with the historical 
results in previous Surveys so as to detect possible shortcomings in the process. 
The new scores are then compared to scores from the previous Surveys by remov-
ing the new questions and only considering the ones that remain unchanged.
The team was assisted in the research by United Nations interns and volunteers 
with language skills not otherwise covered by the core group.
Stage 1 Emerging information services
Government websites provide information on public policy, governance, laws, regulations, rel-
evant documentation and types of government services provided. They have links to ministries, 
departments and other branches of government. Citizens are able to obtain updated information 
in the national government and ministries and can follow links to archived information.
Stage 2 Enhanced information services
Government websites deliver enhanced one-way or simple two-way e-communication between 
government and citizen, such as downloadable forms for government services and applications. 
The sites have audio and video capabilities and are multi-lingual. Some limited e-services enable 
citizens to submit requests for non-electronic forms or personal information.
Stage 3 Transactional services
Government websites engage in two-way communication with their citizens, including request-
ing and receiving inputs on government policies, programmes, regulations, etc. Some form of 
electronic authentication of the citizen’s identity is required to successfully complete the ex-
change. Government websites process non-financial transactions, e.g. filing taxes online or ap-
plying for certificates, licences and permits. They also handle financial transactions, i.e. where 
money is transferred on a secure network.
Stage 4 connected services
Government websites have changed the way governments communicate with their citizens. They 
are proactive in requesting information and opinions from the citizens using Web 2.0 and other 
interactive tools. E-services and e-solutions cut across the departments and ministries in a seam-
less manner, information, data and knowledge is transferred from government agencies through 
integrated applications. Governments have moved from a government-centric to a citizen-cen-
tric approach, where e-services are targeted to citizens through life cycle events and segmented 
groups to provide tailor-made services. Governments create an environment that empowers 
citizens to be more involved with government activities to have a voice in decision-making.
Figure A.4. The four stages of online service development
Connected
Transactional
Enhanced
Emerging
 196 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Towards a more citizen-centric approach
In line with the global trend towards a more citizen-centric approach as driven 
by the demand for greater efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the public sector, 
the Survey questionnaire has been designed to reflect this paradigm of e-gov-
ernment. As mentioned above, user take-up has been included as one special 
subject in the Survey, which encourages the governments to take account not 
only of the supply side but also the demand side of e-services. Accordingly, the 
research team was instructed to enforce this approach consistently throughout 
the whole Survey. If features could not be found easily, quickly and intuitively, 
then a site would score poorly.
A.6. E-Participation Index (EPI)
The e-participation index (EPI) is derived as a supplementary index to the UN E-
Government Survey. It extends the dimension of the Survey by focusing on the use 
of online services to facilitate provision of information by governments to citizens 
(“e-information sharing”), interaction with stakeholders (“e-consultation”) and en-
gagement in decision-making processes (“e-decision making”). (see Box A.1)
A country’s EPI reflects on e-participation facilities that are deployed by the gov-
ernment as compared to all other countries. The purpose of this measure is not 
to prescribe any particular practice, but rather to offer insight into how different 
countries are using online tools to promote interaction between citizen and gov-
ernment, as well as among citizens, for the benefit of all. As the EPI is a qualitative 
assessment based on the availability and relevancy of participatory services avail-
able on government websites, the comparative ranking of countries is for illustra-
tive purposes and should serve only as indicative of the broad trends in promoting 
citizen engagement. As with the EGDI, the EPI is not intended as absolute meas-
urement of e-participation, but rather, it attempts to capture the e-participation 
performance of counties relative to one another at a particular point in time.
In the 2014 Survey, the e-participation questions were carefully reviewed and 
expanded to reflect current trends and modalities in how governments engage 
their citizens in public policy-making, implementation and evaluation. New ques-
tions were added to address data publishing and sharing by government agen-
cies. Other features and updates were made included the availability of informa-
tion on the citizens’ rights to access government information, providing outcome 
on feedback received from citizens concerning the improvement of its online 
services, providing the tools in order to obtain public opinion for public policy 
deliberation through social media, online polls, petition tools, voting tools, on-
line-bulletin boards and online discussion forums. While the EPI provides a useful 
qualitative analytical tool when comparing the data and ranking of countries for 
one particular year, caution must be taken in comparing e-participation rankings 
with past editions of the Survey.
Mathematically, the EPI is normalized by taking the total score value for a given 
country subtracting the lowest total score for any country in the Survey and divid-
ing by the range of total score values for all countries. For example, if country “x” 
   197 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
has an e-participation score of 29, and the lowest value of any country is 0 and 
the highest equal to 38, then the normalized index value for country “x” would 
be:
E-Participation Index (Country “x”) = 
29–0
38–0
 = 0.7632
In 2014, the e-participation ranking of countries is determined by the value of EPI 
through the “standard competition ranking”. In standard competition ranking, 
countries with the same EPI receive the same ranking number and a gap is left 
in the ranking numbers. This ranking strategy is adopted in view that if two or 
more countries tie for a position in the ranking, the positions of all those ranked 
below them are unaffected. For example, if country A ranks ahead of B and C, 
both of which share the same EPI value and scores ahead of D, then A is ranked 
first (1st), B and C are ranked second (2nd) and D is ranked fourth (4th). In 2012, the 
“modified competition ranking” was used and for comparison reasons, all ranks 
are adjusted using the standard competition ranking.
A.7.  Country classifications and nomenclature 
in the Survey
Regional groupings are taken from the classification of the United Nations Statistics 
Division. For details, see http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49regin.htm.
‘There is no established convention for the designation of “developed” and “de-
veloping” countries or areas in the United Nations system. In common practice, 
Japan in Asia, Canada and the United States in northern America, Australia and 
New Zealand in Oceania and Europe are considered “developed” regions or 
areas. In international trade statistics, the Southern African Customs Union is 
also treated as a developed region and Israel as a developed country; countries 
emerging from the former Yugoslavia are treated as developing countries; and 
countries of Eastern Europe and of the Commonwealth of Independent States in 
Europe are not included under either developed or developing regions.’
Economies are divided according to 2012 GNI per capita, calculated using 
the World Bank Atlas method. The groups are: low income, US $1,025 or less; 
lower middle income, US $1,026–US $4,035; upper middle income, US $4,036–
US $12,475; and high income, US $12,476 or more.
A.1. E-Participation framework 
 • E-information: Enabling participation by providing citizens with public in-
formation and access to information without or upon demand 
 • E-consultation: Engaging citizens in contributions to and deliberation on 
public policies and services
 • E-decision-making: Empowering citizens through co-design of policy op-
tions and co-production of service components and delivery modalities.
 198 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
For details, see http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications.
This report uses the terminology ‘developed’ and ‘developing’ countries in line 
with the United Nations practice and keeping in mind the familiarity of the aver-
age reader with common usage. Wherever data and statistics are reported by in-
come groups, the report classifies countries according to the World Bank income 
classification of high, middle and low income groups.
The lists of least developing countries, landlocked developing countries and 
small island developing countries were obtained from the United Nations Office 
of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked De-
veloping Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS).
For details, see http://www.unohrlls.org/en/ldc/25/
A.8. United Nations e-government knowledge base
The Division for Public Administration and Development Management of the 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs is maintaining the 
United Nations e-government knowledge base (egovkb) to provide governments 
and all stakeholders an easy access to data and information on e-government 
development. 
The egovkb is an interactive tool to view, sort and download information and 
datasets in open data formats from the 2014 UN E-Government Survey and pre-
vious editions (2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2010 and 2012). The egovkb also in-
cludes advanced research features such as customisable regional and country 
comparisons, rankings and country profiles. 
For more information and details, see the United Nations e-Government Knowl-
edge Base at http://unpan3.un.org/egovkb/
   199 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Data tables
1. E-Government Development Index
Rank Country EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infra structure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
173 Afghanistan 0.1900 0.1811 0.1472 0.2418
84 Albania 0.5046 0.4488 0.3548 0.7100
136 Algeria 0.3106 0.0787 0.1989 0.6543
43 Andorra 0.6426 0.4331 0.7671 0.7277
140 Angola 0.2970 0.2992 0.0978 0.4941
60 Antigua and Barbuda 0.5927 0.4173 0.5938 0.7669
46 Argentina 0.6306 0.5512 0.4835 0.8571
61 Armenia 0.5897 0.6142 0.3889 0.7660
2 Australia 0.9103 0.9291 0.8041 0.9978
20 Austria 0.7912 0.7480 0.7597 0.8660
68 Azerbaijan 0.5472 0.4331 0.4605 0.7480
92 Bahamas 0.4900 0.3386 0.4176 0.7138
18 Bahrain 0.8089 0.9370 0.7055 0.7840
148 Bangladesh 0.2757 0.3465 0.0941 0.3866
59 Barbados 0.5933 0.2205 0.6730 0.8865
55 Belarus 0.6053 0.3228 0.6069 0.8861
25 Belgium 0.7564 0.6772 0.6988 0.8932
120 Belize 0.3774 0.3780 0.1530 0.6012
180 Benin 0.1685 0.1102 0.1196 0.2756
143 Bhutan 0.2829 0.2441 0.1755 0.4290
103 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.4562 0.3937 0.2324 0.7424
97 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.4707 0.2835 0.3998 0.7288
112 Botswana 0.4198 0.3071 0.2969 0.6555
57 Brazil 0.6008 0.5984 0.4668 0.7372
86 Brunei Darussalam 0.5042 0.3622 0.3690 0.7815
73 Bulgaria 0.5421 0.2362 0.5941 0.7960
178 Burkina Faso 0.1804 0.2992 0.0842 0.1578
172 Burundi 0.1928 0.0157 0.0233 0.5393
139 Cambodia 0.2999 0.1732 0.2075 0.5189
144 Cameroon 0.2782 0.1969 0.0958 0.5421
11 Canada 0.8418 0.9134 0.7168 0.8952
127 Cape Verde 0.3551 0.1654 0.2966 0.6032
187 Central African Republic 0.1257 0.0394 0.0280 0.3099
189 Chad 0.1076 0.0472 0.0415 0.2341
33 Chile 0.7122 0.8189 0.4940 0.8236
 200 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infra structure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
70 China 0.5450 0.6063 0.3554 0.6734
50 Colombia 0.6173 0.7874 0.3297 0.7348
177 Comoros 0.1808 0.0157 0.0604 0.4662
160 Congo 0.2570 0.1024 0.1453 0.5233
54 Costa Rica 0.6061 0.6142 0.4461 0.7582
171 Côte d’Ivoire 0.2039 0.1732 0.1392 0.2992
47 Croatia 0.6282 0.4646 0.6271 0.7928
116 Cuba 0.3917 0.2283 0.0969 0.8497
58 Cyprus 0.5958 0.4724 0.5320 0.7828
53 Czech Republic 0.6070 0.3701 0.5753 0.8755
149 Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 0.2753 0.0079 0.0173 0.8007
183 Democratic Republic of the Congo 0.1551 0.0472 0.0337 0.3845
16 Denmark 0.8162 0.6614 0.8740 0.9132
184 Djibouti 0.1456 0.0630 0.0556 0.3182
110 Dominica 0.4338 0.1890 0.4424 0.6701
107 Dominican Republic 0.4481 0.3858 0.2945 0.6639
83 Ecuador 0.5053 0.4803 0.3318 0.7037
80 Egypt 0.5129 0.5906 0.3571 0.5912
88 El Salvador 0.4989 0.5354 0.3198 0.6414
168 Equatorial Guinea 0.2268 0.0315 0.1200 0.5288
192 Eritrea 0.0908 0.0000 0.0000 0.2723
15 Estonia 0.8180 0.7717 0.7934 0.8889
157 Ethiopia 0.2589 0.4567 0.0266 0.2934
85 Fiji 0.5044 0.3937 0.2872 0.8322
10 Finland 0.8449 0.7717 0.8594 0.9037
4 France 0.8938 1.0000 0.8003 0.8812
131 Gabon 0.3294 0.0945 0.2260 0.6677
167 Gambia 0.2285 0.2047 0.1482 0.3326
56 Georgia 0.6047 0.5984 0.4261 0.7895
21 Germany 0.7864 0.6693 0.8038 0.8862
123 Ghana 0.3735 0.3150 0.2444 0.5613
34 Greece 0.7118 0.6063 0.6549 0.8741
78 Grenada 0.5220 0.3465 0.4029 0.8166
133 Guatemala 0.3160 0.1496 0.2713 0.5272
190 Guinea 0.0954 0.0000 0.0504 0.2359
182 Guinea-Bissau 0.1609 0.0079 0.0878 0.3869
124 Guyana 0.3695 0.2441 0.2344 0.6301
176 Haiti 0.1809 0.1102 0.0952 0.3372
114 Honduras 0.4083 0.4016 0.1951 0.6281
39 Hungary 0.6637 0.5591 0.5654 0.8668
1. E-Government Development Index (continued)
   201 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infra structure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
19 Iceland 0.7970 0.6142 0.8591 0.9178
118 India 0.3834 0.5433 0.1372 0.4698
106 Indonesia 0.4487 0.3622 0.3054 0.6786
105 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.4508 0.3701 0.2940 0.6882
134 Iraq 0.3141 0.1969 0.2173 0.5283
22 Ireland 0.7810 0.6772 0.7039 0.9619
17 Israel 0.8162 0.8740 0.7200 0.8545
23 Italy 0.7593 0.7480 0.6747 0.8552
109 Jamaica 0.4388 0.3150 0.2753 0.7262
6 Japan 0.8874 0.9449 0.8553 0.8621
79 Jordan 0.5167 0.5197 0.3104 0.7202
28 Kazakhstan 0.7283 0.7480 0.5749 0.8619
119 Kenya 0.3805 0.4252 0.1612 0.5552
132 Kiribati 0.3201 0.2126 0.0665 0.6812
49 Kuwait 0.6268 0.5748 0.5862 0.7194
101 Kyrgyzstan 0.4657 0.2756 0.3801 0.7413
152 Lao People’s Democratic Republic 0.2659 0.1417 0.1618 0.4941
31 Latvia 0.7178 0.7008 0.6237 0.8288
89 Lebanon 0.4982 0.3543 0.4030 0.7374
153 Lesotho 0.2629 0.1575 0.1179 0.5135
179 Liberia 0.1768 0.0787 0.0763 0.3754
121 Libya 0.3753 0.0157 0.3281 0.7821
35 Liechtenstein 0.6982 0.5118 0.7468 0.8361
29 Lithuania 0.7271 0.7559 0.5697 0.8557
24 Luxembourg 0.7591 0.6220 0.8723 0.7830
155 Madagascar 0.2606 0.2441 0.0488 0.4889
166 Malawi 0.2321 0.1732 0.0484 0.4746
52 Malaysia 0.6115 0.6772 0.4455 0.7119
94 Maldives 0.4813 0.3622 0.3952 0.6865
181 Mali 0.1634 0.1339 0.1350 0.2212
40 Malta 0.6518 0.4016 0.7683 0.7855
142 Marshall Islands 0.2851 0.1102 0.0448 0.7002
174 Mauritania 0.1893 0.0472 0.1626 0.3581
76 Mauritius 0.5338 0.4724 0.4406 0.6882
63 Mexico 0.5733 0.6614 0.3139 0.7445
130 Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.3337 0.1890 0.1099 0.7023
38 Monaco 0.6715 0.2205 1.0000 0.7940
65 Mongolia 0.5581 0.6142 0.2714 0.7887
45 Montenegro 0.6346 0.5276 0.5481 0.8279
82 Morocco 0.5060 0.6929 0.3350 0.4901
1. E-Government Development Index (continued)
 202 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infra structure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
164 Mozambique 0.2384 0.3150 0.0545 0.3457
175 Myanmar 0.1869 0.0236 0.0084 0.5288
117 Namibia 0.3880 0.3228 0.2719 0.5693
145 Nauru 0.2776 0.0551 0.2159 0.5617
165 Nepal 0.2344 0.1575 0.1684 0.3774
5 Netherlands 0.8897 0.9291 0.8175 0.9224
9 New Zealand 0.8644 0.8425 0.7506 1.0000
147 Nicaragua 0.2759 0.0945 0.1692 0.5639
191 Niger 0.0946 0.1260 0.0385 0.1192
141 Nigeria 0.2929 0.3071 0.1905 0.3811
13 Norway 0.8357 0.7559 0.8133 0.9380
48 Oman 0.6273 0.7323 0.4873 0.6624
158 Pakistan 0.2580 0.3228 0.1174 0.3337
108 Palau 0.4415 0.1654 0.3592 0.7999
77 Panama 0.5242 0.3701 0.4571 0.7455
188 Papua New Guinea 0.1203 0.0079 0.0530 0.3000
122 Paraguay 0.3740 0.2283 0.2236 0.6700
72 Peru 0.5435 0.6299 0.2718 0.7289
95 Philippines 0.4768 0.4803 0.2451 0.7051
42 Poland 0.6482 0.5433 0.5618 0.8396
37 Portugal 0.6900 0.6378 0.6094 0.8227
44 Qatar 0.6362 0.6535 0.5879 0.6671
1 Republic of Korea 0.9462 0.9764 0.9350 0.9273
66 Republic of Moldova 0.5571 0.5276 0.4236 0.7201
64 Romania 0.5632 0.4409 0.4385 0.8100
27 Russian Federation 0.7296 0.7087 0.6413 0.8388
125 Rwanda 0.3589 0.5118 0.0828 0.4820
90 Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.4980 0.1339 0.6321 0.7279
104 Saint Lucia 0.4525 0.2441 0.4000 0.7133
113 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 0.4158 0.1575 0.3810 0.7088
111 Samoa 0.4204 0.2441 0.2672 0.7499
62 San Marino 0.5823 0.2756 0.6358 0.8354
169 Sao Tome and Principe 0.2218 0.0079 0.1398 0.5177
36 Saudi Arabia 0.6900 0.7717 0.5523 0.7461
151 Senegal 0.2666 0.3071 0.1644 0.3283
69 Serbia 0.5472 0.3937 0.4681 0.7796
81 Seychelles 0.5113 0.3307 0.4721 0.7310
186 Sierra Leone 0.1329 0.0472 0.0821 0.2692
3 Singapore 0.9076 0.9921 0.8793 0.8515
51 Slovakia 0.6148 0.4882 0.5296 0.8265
1. E-Government Development Index (continued)
   203 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infra structure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
41 Slovenia 0.6505 0.4252 0.6193 0.9072
170 Solomon Islands 0.2087 0.0551 0.1008 0.4702
193 Somalia 0.0139 0.0157 0.0259 0.0000
93 South Africa 0.4869 0.3858 0.3466 0.7282
185 South Sudan 0.1418 0.0079 0.0141 0.4035
12 Spain 0.8410 0.9449 0.6629 0.9152
74 Sri Lanka 0.5418 0.6535 0.2341 0.7376
154 Sudan 0.2606 0.2913 0.1847 0.3059
115 Suriname 0.4045 0.1417 0.3968 0.6749
138 Swaziland 0.3056 0.1339 0.1629 0.6200
14 Sweden 0.8225 0.7008 0.8866 0.8802
30 Switzerland 0.7267 0.5039 0.8199 0.8562
135 Syrian Arab Republic 0.3134 0.1575 0.1992 0.5835
129 Tajikistan 0.3395 0.0630 0.2306 0.7249
102 Thailand 0.4631 0.4409 0.2843 0.6640
96 The former Yugoslav Republic  
of Macedonia 
0.4720 0.2441 0.4521 0.7198
161 Timor-Leste 0.2528 0.2047 0.0704 0.4831
162 Togo 0.2446 0.1102 0.0836 0.5401
98 Tonga 0.4706 0.3465 0.2348 0.8304
91 Trinidad and Tobago 0.4932 0.3307 0.4543 0.6945
75 Tunisia 0.5390 0.6378 0.3074 0.6717
71 Turkey 0.5443 0.5591 0.3605 0.7133
128 Turkmenistan 0.3511 0.0866 0.2189 0.7478
137 Tuvalu 0.3059 0.0394 0.1761 0.7022
156 Uganda 0.2593 0.1496 0.1011 0.5271
87 Ukraine 0.5032 0.2677 0.3802 0.8616
32 United Arab Emirates 0.7136 0.8819 0.5932 0.6657
8 United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland
0.8695 0.8976 0.8534 0.8574
146 United Republic of Tanzania 0.2764 0.2992 0.0808 0.4492
7 United States of America 0.8748 0.9449 0.7406 0.9390
26 Uruguay 0.7420 0.8504 0.5607 0.8148
100 Uzbekistan 0.4695 0.4488 0.2333 0.7264
159 Vanuatu 0.2571 0.0787 0.1188 0.5736
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.5564 0.5512 0.3495 0.7685
99 Viet Nam 0.4705 0.4173 0.3792 0.6148
150 Yemen 0.2720 0.3071 0.1249 0.3840
163 Zambia 0.2389 0.1417 0.1247 0.4504
126 Zimbabwe 0.3585 0.3071 0.2238 0.5445
1. E-Government Development Index (continued)
 204 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional and Economic Groupings
Country EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
Africa 0.2661 0.2011 0.1478 0.4492
Americas 0.5074 0.4216 0.3805 0.7202
Asia 0.4951 0.4652 0.3584 0.6615
Europe 0.6936 0.5695 0.6678 0.8434
Oceania 0.4086 0.2621 0.2564 0.7073
World 0.4712 0.3919 0.3650 0.6566
 
EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
Small Island Developing States 0.4069 0.2520 0.3033 0.6654
Land Locked Developing Countries 0.3368 0.2710 0.2025 0.5368
Least Developed Countries 0.2121 0.1475 0.0929 0.3960
 
EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
High Income 0.7207 0.6503 0.6845 0.8343
Upper Middle Income 0.4828 0.3709 0.3522 0.7253
Lower Middle Income 0.3523 0.3076 0.2307 0.5787
Low Income 0.2094 0.1523 0.0876 0.3884
   205 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
2. E-Government Development Index by region—AFRICA
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
136 Algeria Northern Africa 0.3106 0.0787 0.1989 0.6543
140 Angola Middle Africa 0.2970 0.2992 0.0978 0.4941
180 Benin Western Africa 0.1685 0.1102 0.1196 0.2756
112 Botswana Southern Africa 0.4198 0.3071 0.2969 0.6555
178 Burkina Faso Western Africa 0.1804 0.2992 0.0842 0.1578
172 Burundi Eastern Africa 0.1928 0.0157 0.0233 0.5393
144 Cameroon Middle Africa 0.2782 0.1969 0.0958 0.5421
127 Cape Verde Western Africa 0.3551 0.1654 0.2966 0.6032
187 Central African  
Republic 
Middle Africa 0.1257 0.0394 0.0280 0.3099
189 Chad Middle Africa 0.1076 0.0472 0.0415 0.2341
177 Comoros Eastern Africa 0.1808 0.0157 0.0604 0.4662
160 Congo Middle Africa 0.2570 0.1024 0.1453 0.5233
171 Côte d’Ivoire Western Africa 0.2039 0.1732 0.1392 0.2992
183 Democratic Republic 
of the Congo 
Middle Africa 0.1551 0.0472 0.0337 0.3845
184 Djibouti Eastern Africa 0.1456 0.0630 0.0556 0.3182
80 Egypt Northern Africa 0.5129 0.5906 0.3571 0.5912
168 Equatorial Guinea Middle Africa 0.2268 0.0315 0.1200 0.5288
192 Eritrea Eastern Africa 0.0908 0.0000 0.0000 0.2723
157 Ethiopia Eastern Africa 0.2589 0.4567 0.0266 0.2934
131 Gabon Middle Africa 0.3294 0.0945 0.2260 0.6677
167 Gambia Western Africa 0.2285 0.2047 0.1482 0.3326
123 Ghana Western Africa 0.3735 0.3150 0.2444 0.5613
190 Guinea Western Africa 0.0954 0.0000 0.0504 0.2359
182 Guinea-Bissau Western Africa 0.1609 0.0079 0.0878 0.3869
119 Kenya Eastern Africa 0.3805 0.4252 0.1612 0.5552
153 Lesotho Southern Africa 0.2629 0.1575 0.1179 0.5135
179 Liberia Western Africa 0.1768 0.0787 0.0763 0.3754
121 Libya Northern Africa 0.3753 0.0157 0.3281 0.7821
155 Madagascar Eastern Africa 0.2606 0.2441 0.0488 0.4889
166 Malawi Eastern Africa 0.2321 0.1732 0.0484 0.4746
181 Mali Western Africa 0.1634 0.1339 0.1350 0.2212
174 Mauritania Western Africa 0.1893 0.0472 0.1626 0.3581
76 Mauritius Eastern Africa 0.5338 0.4724 0.4406 0.6882
82 Morocco Northern Africa 0.5060 0.6929 0.3350 0.4901
164 Mozambique Eastern Africa 0.2384 0.3150 0.0545 0.3457
117 Namibia Southern Africa 0.3880 0.3228 0.2719 0.5693
191 Niger Western Africa 0.0946 0.1260 0.0385 0.1192
141 Nigeria Western Africa 0.2929 0.3071 0.1905 0.3811
 206 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
125 Rwanda Eastern Africa 0.3589 0.5118 0.0828 0.4820
169 Sao Tome and Principe Middle Africa 0.2218 0.0079 0.1398 0.5177
151 Senegal Western Africa 0.2666 0.3071 0.1644 0.3283
81 Seychelles Eastern Africa 0.5113 0.3307 0.4721 0.7310
186 Sierra Leone Western Africa 0.1329 0.0472 0.0821 0.2692
193 Somalia Eastern Africa 0.0139 0.0157 0.0259 0.0000
93 South Africa Southern Africa 0.4869 0.3858 0.3466 0.7282
185 South Sudan Eastern Africa 0.1418 0.0079 0.0141 0.4035
154 Sudan Northern Africa 0.2606 0.2913 0.1847 0.3059
138 Swaziland Southern Africa 0.3056 0.1339 0.1629 0.6200
162 Togo Western Africa 0.2446 0.1102 0.0836 0.5401
75 Tunisia Northern Africa 0.5390 0.6378 0.3074 0.6717
156 Uganda Eastern Africa 0.2593 0.1496 0.1011 0.5271
146 United Republic 
of Tanzania 
Eastern Africa 0.2764 0.2992 0.0808 0.4492
163 Zambia Eastern Africa 0.2389 0.1417 0.1247 0.4504
126 Zimbabwe Eastern Africa 0.3585 0.3071 0.2238 0.5445
2. E-Government Development Index by region—AFRICA (continued)
   207 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
3. E-Government Development Index by region—AMERICAS
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
60 Antigua and Barbuda Caribbean 0.5927 0.4173 0.5938 0.7669
46 Argentina South America 0.6306 0.5512 0.4835 0.8571
92 Bahamas Caribbean 0.4900 0.3386 0.4176 0.7138
59 Barbados Caribbean 0.5933 0.2205 0.6730 0.8865
120 Belize Central America 0.3774 0.3780 0.1530 0.6012
103 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) South America 0.4562 0.3937 0.2324 0.7424
57 Brazil South America 0.6008 0.5984 0.4668 0.7372
11 Canada Northern 
America
0.8418 0.9134 0.7168 0.8952
33 Chile South America 0.7122 0.8189 0.4940 0.8236
50 Colombia South America 0.6173 0.7874 0.3297 0.7348
54 Costa Rica Central America 0.6061 0.6142 0.4461 0.7582
116 Cuba Caribbean 0.3917 0.2283 0.0969 0.8497
110 Dominica Caribbean 0.4338 0.1890 0.4424 0.6701
107 Dominican Republic Caribbean 0.4481 0.3858 0.2945 0.6639
83 Ecuador South America 0.5053 0.4803 0.3318 0.7037
88 El Salvador Central America 0.4989 0.5354 0.3198 0.6414
78 Grenada Caribbean 0.5220 0.3465 0.4029 0.8166
133 Guatemala Central America 0.3160 0.1496 0.2713 0.5272
124 Guyana South America 0.3695 0.2441 0.2344 0.6301
176 Haiti Caribbean 0.1809 0.1102 0.0952 0.3372
114 Honduras Central America 0.4083 0.4016 0.1951 0.6281
109 Jamaica Caribbean 0.4388 0.3150 0.2753 0.7262
63 Mexico Central America 0.5733 0.6614 0.3139 0.7445
147 Nicaragua Central America 0.2759 0.0945 0.1692 0.5639
77 Panama Central America 0.5242 0.3701 0.4571 0.7455
122 Paraguay South America 0.3740 0.2283 0.2236 0.6700
72 Peru South America 0.5435 0.6299 0.2718 0.7289
90 Saint Kitts and Nevis Caribbean 0.4980 0.1339 0.6321 0.7279
104 Saint Lucia Caribbean 0.4525 0.2441 0.4000 0.7133
113 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Caribbean 0.4158 0.1575 0.3810 0.7088
115 Suriname South America 0.4045 0.1417 0.3968 0.6749
91 Trinidad and Tobago Caribbean 0.4932 0.3307 0.4543 0.6945
7 United States of America Northern 
America
0.8748 0.9449 0.7406 0.9390
26 Uruguay South America 0.7420 0.8504 0.5607 0.8148
67 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) South America 0.5564 0.5512 0.3495 0.7685
 208 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4. E-Government Development Index by region—ASIA
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
173 Afghanistan Southern Asia 0.1900 0.1811 0.1472 0.2418
61 Armenia Western Asia 0.5897 0.6142 0.3889 0.7660
68 Azerbaijan Western Asia 0.5472 0.4331 0.4605 0.7480
18 Bahrain Western Asia 0.8089 0.9370 0.7055 0.7840
148 Bangladesh Southern Asia 0.2757 0.3465 0.0941 0.3866
143 Bhutan Southern Asia 0.2829 0.2441 0.1755 0.4290
86 Brunei Darussalam South-Eastern Asia 0.5042 0.3622 0.3690 0.7815
139 Cambodia South-Eastern Asia 0.2999 0.1732 0.2075 0.5189
70 China Eastern Asia 0.5450 0.6063 0.3554 0.6734
58 Cyprus Western Asia 0.5958 0.4724 0.5320 0.7828
149 Democratic People’s  
Republic of Korea 
Eastern Asia 0.2753 0.0079 0.0173 0.8007
56 Georgia Western Asia 0.6047 0.5984 0.4261 0.7895
118 India Southern Asia 0.3834 0.5433 0.1372 0.4698
106 Indonesia South-Eastern Asia 0.4487 0.3622 0.3054 0.6786
105 Iran (Islamic Republic of) Southern Asia 0.4508 0.3701 0.2940 0.6882
134 Iraq Western Asia 0.3141 0.1969 0.2173 0.5283
17 Israel Western Asia 0.8162 0.8740 0.7200 0.8545
6 Japan Eastern Asia 0.8874 0.9449 0.8553 0.8621
79 Jordan Western Asia 0.5167 0.5197 0.3104 0.7202
28 Kazakhstan Central Asia 0.7283 0.7480 0.5749 0.8619
49 Kuwait Western Asia 0.6268 0.5748 0.5862 0.7194
101 Kyrgyzstan Central Asia 0.4657 0.2756 0.3801 0.7413
152 Lao People’s Democratic Re-
public 
South-Eastern Asia 0.2659 0.1417 0.1618 0.4941
89 Lebanon Western Asia 0.4982 0.3543 0.4030 0.7374
52 Malaysia South-Eastern Asia 0.6115 0.6772 0.4455 0.7119
94 Maldives Southern Asia 0.4813 0.3622 0.3952 0.6865
65 Mongolia Eastern Asia 0.5581 0.6142 0.2714 0.7887
175 Myanmar South-Eastern Asia 0.1869 0.0236 0.0084 0.5288
165 Nepal Southern Asia 0.2344 0.1575 0.1684 0.3774
48 Oman Western Asia 0.6273 0.7323 0.4873 0.6624
158 Pakistan Southern Asia 0.2580 0.3228 0.1174 0.3337
95 Philippines South-Eastern Asia 0.4768 0.4803 0.2451 0.7051
44 Qatar Western Asia 0.6362 0.6535 0.5879 0.6671
1 Republic of Korea Eastern Asia 0.9462 0.9764 0.9350 0.9273
36 Saudi Arabia Western Asia 0.6900 0.7717 0.5523 0.7461
3 Singapore South-Eastern Asia 0.9076 0.9921 0.8793 0.8515
74 Sri Lanka Southern Asia 0.5418 0.6535 0.2341 0.7376
   209 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
135 Syrian Arab Republic Western Asia 0.3134 0.1575 0.1992 0.5835
129 Tajikistan Central Asia 0.3395 0.0630 0.2306 0.7249
102 Thailand South-Eastern Asia 0.4631 0.4409 0.2843 0.6640
161 Timor-Leste South-Eastern Asia 0.2528 0.2047 0.0704 0.4831
71 Turkey Western Asia 0.5443 0.5591 0.3605 0.7133
128 Turkmenistan Central Asia 0.3511 0.0866 0.2189 0.7478
32 United Arab Emirates Western Asia 0.7136 0.8819 0.5932 0.6657
100 Uzbekistan Central Asia 0.4695 0.4488 0.2333 0.7264
99 Viet Nam South-Eastern Asia 0.4705 0.4173 0.3792 0.6148
150 Yemen Western Asia 0.2720 0.3071 0.1249 0.3840
4. E-Government Development Index by region—ASIA (continued)
 210 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
5. E-Government Development Index by region—EUROPE
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
84 Albania Southern Europe 0.5046 0.4488 0.3548 0.7100
43 Andorra Southern Europe 0.6426 0.4331 0.7671 0.7277
20 Austria Western Europe 0.7912 0.7480 0.7597 0.8660
55 Belarus Eastern Europe 0.6053 0.3228 0.6069 0.8861
25 Belgium Western Europe 0.7564 0.6772 0.6988 0.8932
97 Bosnia and Herzegovina Southern Europe 0.4707 0.2835 0.3998 0.7288
73 Bulgaria Eastern Europe 0.5421 0.2362 0.5941 0.7960
47 Croatia Southern Europe 0.6282 0.4646 0.6271 0.7928
53 Czech Republic Eastern Europe 0.6070 0.3701 0.5753 0.8755
16 Denmark Northern Europe 0.8162 0.6614 0.8740 0.9132
15 Estonia Northern Europe 0.8180 0.7717 0.7934 0.8889
10 Finland Northern Europe 0.8449 0.7717 0.8594 0.9037
4 France Western Europe 0.8938 1.0000 0.8003 0.8812
21 Germany Western Europe 0.7864 0.6693 0.8038 0.8862
34 Greece Southern Europe 0.7118 0.6063 0.6549 0.8741
39 Hungary Eastern Europe 0.6637 0.5591 0.5654 0.8668
19 Iceland Northern Europe 0.7970 0.6142 0.8591 0.9178
22 Ireland Northern Europe 0.7810 0.6772 0.7039 0.9619
23 Italy Southern Europe 0.7593 0.7480 0.6747 0.8552
31 Latvia Northern Europe 0.7178 0.7008 0.6237 0.8288
35 Liechtenstein Western Europe 0.6982 0.5118 0.7468 0.8361
29 Lithuania Northern Europe 0.7271 0.7559 0.5697 0.8557
24 Luxembourg Western Europe 0.7591 0.6220 0.8723 0.7830
40 Malta Southern Europe 0.6518 0.4016 0.7683 0.7855
38 Monaco Western Europe 0.6715 0.2205 1.0000 0.7940
45 Montenegro Southern Europe 0.6346 0.5276 0.5481 0.8279
5 Netherlands Western Europe 0.8897 0.9291 0.8175 0.9224
13 Norway Northern Europe 0.8357 0.7559 0.8133 0.9380
42 Poland Eastern Europe 0.6482 0.5433 0.5618 0.8396
37 Portugal Southern Europe 0.6900 0.6378 0.6094 0.8227
66 Republic of Moldova Eastern Europe 0.5571 0.5276 0.4236 0.7201
64 Romania Eastern Europe 0.5632 0.4409 0.4385 0.8100
27 Russian Federation Eastern Europe 0.7296 0.7087 0.6413 0.8388
62 San Marino Southern Europe 0.5823 0.2756 0.6358 0.8354
69 Serbia Southern Europe 0.5472 0.3937 0.4681 0.7796
51 Slovakia Eastern Europe 0.6148 0.4882 0.5296 0.8265
41 Slovenia Southern Europe 0.6505 0.4252 0.6193 0.9072
12 Spain Southern Europe 0.8410 0.9449 0.6629 0.9152
   211 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
14 Sweden Northern Europe 0.8225 0.7008 0.8866 0.8802
30 Switzerland Western Europe 0.7267 0.5039 0.8199 0.8562
96 The former Yugoslav  
Republic of Macedonia 
Southern Europe 0.4720 0.2441 0.4521 0.7198
87 Ukraine Eastern Europe 0.5032 0.2677 0.3802 0.8616
8 United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland
Northern Europe 0.8695 0.8976 0.8534 0.8574
5. E-Government Development Index by region—EUROPE (continued)
 212 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
6. E-Government Development Index by region—OCEANIA
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
2 Australia Australia  
and New Zealand
0.9103 0.9291 0.8041 0.9978
85 Fiji Melanesia 0.5044 0.3937 0.2872 0.8322
132 Kiribati Micronesia 0.3201 0.2126 0.0665 0.6812
142 Marshall Islands Micronesia 0.2851 0.1102 0.0448 0.7002
130 Micronesia  
(Federated States of) 
Micronesia 0.3337 0.1890 0.1099 0.7023
145 Nauru Micronesia 0.2776 0.0551 0.2159 0.5617
9 New Zealand Australia  
and New Zealand
0.8644 0.8425 0.7506 1.0000
108 Palau Micronesia 0.4415 0.1654 0.3592 0.7999
188 Papua New Guinea Melanesia 0.1203 0.0079 0.0530 0.3000
111 Samoa Polynesia 0.4204 0.2441 0.2672 0.7499
170 Solomon Islands Melanesia 0.2087 0.0551 0.1008 0.4702
98 Tonga Polynesia 0.4706 0.3465 0.2348 0.8304
137 Tuvalu Polynesia 0.3059 0.0394 0.1761 0.7022
159 Vanuatu Melanesia 0.2571 0.0787 0.1188 0.5736
   213 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
7. E-Government Development Index of Small Island Developing States
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
60 Antigua and Barbuda Caribbean 0.5927 0.4173 0.5938 0.7669
92 Bahamas Caribbean 0.4900 0.3386 0.4176 0.7138
18 Bahrain Western Asia 0.8089 0.9370 0.7055 0.7840
59 Barbados Caribbean 0.5933 0.2205 0.6730 0.8865
120 Belize Central America 0.3774 0.3780 0.1530 0.6012
127 Cape Verde West Africa 0.3551 0.1654 0.2966 0.6032
177 Comoros Eastern Africa 0.1808 0.0157 0.0604 0.4662
116 Cuba Caribbean 0.3917 0.2283 0.0969 0.8497
110 Dominica Caribbean 0.4338 0.1890 0.4424 0.6701
107 Dominican Republic Caribbean 0.4481 0.3858 0.2945 0.6639
85 Fiji Melanesia 0.5044 0.3937 0.2872 0.8322
78 Grenada Caribbean 0.5220 0.3465 0.4029 0.8166
182 Guinea-Bissau West Africa 0.1609 0.0079 0.0878 0.3869
124 Guyana South America 0.3695 0.2441 0.2344 0.6301
176 Haiti Caribbean 0.1809 0.1102 0.0952 0.3372
109 Jamaica Caribbean 0.4388 0.3150 0.2753 0.7262
132 Kiribati Micronesia 0.3201 0.2126 0.0665 0.6812
94 Maldives Southern Asia 0.4813 0.3622 0.3952 0.6865
142 Marshall Islands Micronesia 0.2851 0.1102 0.0448 0.7002
76 Mauritius Eastern Africa 0.5338 0.4724 0.4406 0.6882
130 Micronesia  
(Federated States of) 
Micronesia 0.3337 0.1890 0.1099 0.7023
145 Nauru Micronesia 0.2776 0.0551 0.2159 0.5617
108 Palau Micronesia 0.4415 0.1654 0.3592 0.7999
188 Papua New Guinea Melanesia 0.1203 0.0079 0.0530 0.3000
90 Saint Kitts and Nevis Caribbean 0.4980 0.1339 0.6321 0.7279
104 Saint Lucia Caribbean 0.4525 0.2441 0.4000 0.7133
113 Saint Vincent  
and the Grenadines 
Caribbean 0.4158 0.1575 0.3810 0.7088
111 Samoa Polynesia 0.4204 0.2441 0.2672 0.7499
169 Sao Tome and Principe Middle Africa 0.2218 0.0079 0.1398 0.5177
81 Seychelles Eastern Africa 0.5113 0.3307 0.4721 0.7310
3 Singapore South-Eastern Asia 0.9076 0.9921 0.8793 0.8515
170 Solomon Islands Melanesia 0.2087 0.0551 0.1008 0.4702
115 Suriname South America 0.4045 0.1417 0.3968 0.6749
161 Timor-Leste South-Eastern Asia 0.2528 0.2047 0.0704 0.4831
98 Tonga Polynesia 0.4706 0.3465 0.2348 0.8304
91 Trinidad and Tobago Caribbean 0.4932 0.3307 0.4543 0.6945
137 Tuvalu Polynesia 0.3059 0.0394 0.1761 0.7022
159 Vanuatu Melanesia 0.2571 0.0787 0.1188 0.5736
 214 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
8. E-Government Development Index of Landlocked Developing Countries
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
173 Afghanistan Southern Asia 0.1900 0.1811 0.1472 0.2418
61 Armenia Western Asia 0.5897 0.6142 0.3889 0.7660
68 Azerbaijan Western Asia 0.5472 0.4331 0.4605 0.7480
143 Bhutan Southern Asia 0.2829 0.2441 0.1755 0.4290
103 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) South America 0.4562 0.3937 0.2324 0.7424
112 Botswana Southern Africa 0.4198 0.3071 0.2969 0.6555
178 Burkina Faso West Africa 0.1804 0.2992 0.0842 0.1578
172 Burundi Eastern Africa 0.1928 0.0157 0.0233 0.5393
187 Central African Republic Middle Africa 0.1257 0.0394 0.0280 0.3099
189 Chad Middle Africa 0.1076 0.0472 0.0415 0.2341
157 Ethiopia Eastern Africa 0.2589 0.4567 0.0266 0.2934
28 Kazakhstan Central Asia 0.7283 0.7480 0.5749 0.8619
101 Kyrgyzstan Central Asia 0.4657 0.2756 0.3801 0.7413
152 Lao People’s Democratic Re-
public
South-Eastern Asia 0.2659 0.1417 0.1618 0.4941
153 Lesotho Southern Africa 0.2629 0.1575 0.1179 0.5135
166 Malawi Eastern Africa 0.2321 0.1732 0.0484 0.4746
181 Mali West Africa 0.1634 0.1339 0.1350 0.2212
65 Mongolia Eastern Asia 0.5581 0.6142 0.2714 0.7887
165 Nepal Southern Asia 0.2344 0.1575 0.1684 0.3774
191 Niger West Africa 0.0946 0.1260 0.0385 0.1192
122 Paraguay South America 0.3740 0.2283 0.2236 0.6700
66 Republic of Moldova Eastern Europe 0.5571 0.5276 0.4236 0.7201
125 Rwanda Eastern Africa 0.3589 0.5118 0.0828 0.4820
138 Swaziland Southern Africa 0.3056 0.1339 0.1629 0.6200
129 Tajikistan Central Asia 0.3395 0.0630 0.2306 0.7249
96 The former Yugoslav  
Republic of Macedonia
Southern Europe 0.4720 0.2441 0.4521 0.7198
128 Turkmenistan Central Asia 0.3511 0.0866 0.2189 0.7478
156 Uganda Eastern Africa 0.2593 0.1496 0.1011 0.5271
100 Uzbekistan Central Asia 0.4695 0.4488 0.2333 0.7264
163 Zambia Eastern Africa 0.2389 0.1417 0.1247 0.4504
126 Zimbabwe Eastern Africa 0.3585 0.3071 0.2238 0.5445
   215 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
9. E-Government Development Index of Least Developed Countries
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
173 Afghanistan Southern Asia 0.1900 0.1811 0.1472 0.2418
140 Angola Middle Africa 0.2970 0.2992 0.0978 0.4941
148 Bangladesh Southern Asia 0.2757 0.3465 0.0941 0.3866
180 Benin West Africa 0.1685 0.1102 0.1196 0.2756
143 Bhutan Southern Asia 0.2829 0.2441 0.1755 0.4290
178 Burkina Faso West Africa 0.1804 0.2992 0.0842 0.1578
172 Burundi Eastern Africa 0.1928 0.0157 0.0233 0.5393
139 Cambodia South-Eastern Asia 0.2999 0.1732 0.2075 0.5189
187 Central African Republic Middle Africa 0.1257 0.0394 0.0280 0.3099
189 Chad Middle Africa 0.1076 0.0472 0.0415 0.2341
177 Comoros Eastern Africa 0.1808 0.0157 0.0604 0.4662
183 Djibouti Middle Africa 0.1456 0.0630 0.0556 0.3182
184 DR Congo Eastern Africa 0.1551 0.0472 0.0337 0.3845
168 Equatorial Guinea Middle Africa 0.2268 0.0315 0.1200 0.5288
192 Eritrea Eastern Africa 0.0908 0.0000 0.0000 0.2723
157 Ethiopia Eastern Africa 0.2589 0.4567 0.0266 0.2934
167 Gambia West Africa 0.2285 0.2047 0.1482 0.3326
190 Guinea West Africa 0.0954 0.0000 0.0504 0.2359
182 Guinea-Bissau West Africa 0.1609 0.0079 0.0878 0.3869
176 Haiti Caribbean 0.1809 0.1102 0.0952 0.3372
132 Kiribati Micronesia 0.3201 0.2126 0.0665 0.6812
152 Lao People’s  
Democratic Republic
South-Eastern Asia 0.2659 0.1417 0.1618 0.4941
153 Lesotho Southern Africa 0.2629 0.1575 0.1179 0.5135
179 Liberia West Africa 0.1768 0.0787 0.0763 0.3754
155 Madagascar Eastern Africa 0.2606 0.2441 0.0488 0.4889
166 Malawi Eastern Africa 0.2321 0.1732 0.0484 0.4746
181 Mali West Africa 0.1634 0.1339 0.1350 0.2212
174 Mauritania West Africa 0.1893 0.0472 0.1626 0.3581
164 Mozambique Eastern Africa 0.2384 0.3150 0.0545 0.3457
175 Myanmar South-Eastern Asia 0.1869 0.0236 0.0084 0.5288
165 Nepal Southern Asia 0.2344 0.1575 0.1684 0.3774
191 Niger West Africa 0.0946 0.1260 0.0385 0.1192
125 Rwanda Eastern Africa 0.3589 0.5118 0.0828 0.4820
169 Sao Tome and Principe Middle Africa 0.2218 0.0079 0.1398 0.5177
151 Senegal West Africa 0.2666 0.3071 0.1644 0.3283
186 Sierra Leone West Africa 0.1329 0.0472 0.0821 0.2692
170 Solomon Islands Melanesia 0.2087 0.0551 0.1008 0.4702
 216 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank Country Sub-region EGDI
Online Service 
Component
Telecomm. 
Infrastructure 
Component
Human Capital 
Component
193 Somalia Eastern Africa 0.0139 0.0157 0.0259 0.0000
185 South Sudan Eastern Africa 0.1418 0.0079 0.0141 0.4035
154 Sudan Northern Africa 0.2606 0.2913 0.1847 0.3059
161 Timor-Leste South-Eastern Asia 0.2528 0.2047 0.0704 0.4831
162 Togo West Africa 0.2446 0.1102 0.0836 0.5401
137 Tuvalu Polynesia 0.3059 0.0394 0.1761 0.7022
156 Uganda Eastern Africa 0.2593 0.1496 0.1011 0.5271
146 United Republic of Tanzania Eastern Africa 0.2764 0.2992 0.0808 0.4492
159 Vanuatu Melanesia 0.2571 0.0787 0.1188 0.5736
150 Yemen Western Asia 0.2720 0.3071 0.1249 0.3840
163 Zambia Eastern Africa 0.2389 0.1417 0.1247 0.4504
9. E-Government Development Index of Least Developed Countries (continued)
   217 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
10. Online Service Index and its components
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Afghanistan 0.1811 38 23 5 18 20
Albania 0.4488 88 27 21 44 42
Algeria 0.0787 16 18 2 9 11
Andorra 0.4331 78 57 9 24 41
Angola 0.2992 59 50 0 12 29
Antigua and Barbuda 0.4173 78 41 16 29 39
Argentina 0.5512 91 66 26 24 50
Armenia 0.6142 94 61 33 41 56
Australia 0.9291 100 75 88 65 82
Austria 0.7480 100 75 51 44 67
Azerbaijan 0.4331 81 36 28 24 41
Bahamas 0.3386 53 34 14 35 33
Bahrain 0.9370 94 80 84 74 82
Bangladesh 0.3465 75 34 14 18 33
Barbados 0.2205 41 20 12 24 23
Belarus 0.3228 81 16 14 26 31
Belgium 0.6772 94 64 42 50 61
Belize 0.3780 66 50 16 15 36
Benin 0.1102 47 7 2 6 14
Bhutan 0.2441 69 23 2 15 25
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.3937 69 39 16 32 37
Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.2835 56 41 7 12 28
Botswana 0.3071 72 36 5 15 30
Brazil 0.5984 100 68 28 26 54
Brunei Darussalam 0.3622 34 39 28 38 35
Bulgaria 0.2362 59 30 0 15 24
Burkina Faso 0.2992 38 41 9 32 29
Burundi 0.0157 19 7 0 0 6
Cambodia 0.1732 50 18 5 9 19
Cameroon 0.1969 47 25 7 9 21
Canada 0.9134 100 73 84 68 80
Cape Verde 0.1654 34 16 12 15 18
Central African Republic 0.0394 13 11 5 3 8
Chad 0.0472 19 11 5 0 8
Chile 0.8189 100 57 70 71 73
China 0.6063 100 57 37 32 55
Colombia 0.7874 88 75 56 65 70
Comoros 0.0157 19 7 0 0 6
Congo 0.1024 22 16 9 6 13
 218 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Costa Rica 0.6142 94 55 37 44 56
Côte d’Ivoire 0.1732 38 25 5 12 19
Croatia 0.4646 59 68 26 18 43
Cuba 0.2283 69 18 7 9 24
Cyprus 0.4724 59 43 37 38 44
Czech Republic 0.3701 53 45 23 21 35
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 0.0079 9 7 2 3 5
Democratic Republic of the Congo 0.0472 25 5 2 6 8
Denmark 0.6614 97 70 33 44 59
Djibouti 0.0630 25 7 0 12 10
Dominica 0.1890 38 30 9 6 20
Dominican Republic 0.3858 53 50 21 24 37
Ecuador 0.4803 88 52 19 26 44
Egypt 0.5906 81 52 33 56 54
El Salvador 0.5354 94 55 30 24 49
Equatorial Guinea 0.0315 9 14 0 6 7
Eritrea 0.0000 9 9 0 0 5
Estonia 0.7717 100 66 56 59 69
Ethiopia 0.4567 53 48 28 44 42
Fiji 0.3937 75 36 21 24 37
Finland 0.7717 100 70 47 65 69
France 1.0000 100 73 91 91 88
Gabon 0.0945 31 16 2 3 12
Gambia 0.2047 56 23 2 12 22
Georgia 0.5984 91 57 44 29 54
Germany 0.6693 97 68 47 32 60
Ghana 0.3150 78 18 19 18 31
Greece 0.6063 81 59 42 41 55
Grenada 0.3465 75 41 7 18 33
Guatemala 0.1496 25 27 9 6 17
Guinea 0.0000 9 7 0 3 5
Guinea-Bissau 0.0079 9 7 2 3 5
Guyana 0.2441 63 30 5 9 25
Haiti 0.1102 28 16 2 12 14
Honduras 0.4016 59 48 26 21 38
Hungary 0.5591 88 70 37 9 51
Iceland 0.6142 84 57 49 35 56
India 0.5433 97 59 21 29 50
Indonesia 0.3622 69 34 9 35 35
10. Online Service Index and its components (continued)
   219 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.3701 59 48 19 18 35
Iraq 0.1969 41 25 5 18 21
Ireland 0.6772 91 64 42 53 61
Israel 0.8740 97 73 88 50 77
Italy 0.7480 97 66 51 59 67
Jamaica 0.3150 53 36 21 15 31
Japan 0.9449 97 73 79 88 83
Jordan 0.5197 91 41 21 50 48
Kazakhstan 0.7480 94 45 77 56 67
Kenya 0.4252 94 32 23 21 40
Kiribati 0.2126 44 27 12 9 22
Kuwait 0.5748 84 52 37 41 52
Kyrgyzstan 0.2756 81 27 2 9 27
Lao People’s Democratic Republic 0.1417 50 14 2 6 16
Latvia 0.7008 91 66 47 53 63
Lebanon 0.3543 66 41 14 21 34
Lesotho 0.1575 44 16 2 15 18
Liberia 0.0787 19 11 7 9 11
Libya 0.0157 9 11 2 0 6
Liechtenstein 0.5118 56 61 33 38 47
Lithuania 0.7559 94 70 49 62 67
Luxembourg 0.6220 94 59 42 35 56
Madagascar 0.2441 75 18 5 12 25
Malawi 0.1732 63 14 0 9 19
Malaysia 0.6772 84 73 40 50 61
Maldives 0.3622 66 48 14 15 35
Mali 0.1339 47 14 0 9 16
Malta 0.4016 88 43 14 15 38
Marshall Islands 0.1102 47 14 0 0 14
Mauritania 0.0472 25 7 0 6 8
Mauritius 0.4724 88 64 9 21 44
Mexico 0.6614 97 73 40 32 59
Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.1890 56 23 2 6 20
Monaco 0.2205 16 45 14 12 23
Mongolia 0.6142 88 57 42 41 56
Montenegro 0.5276 84 68 12 35 48
Morocco 0.6929 94 61 40 62 62
Mozambique 0.3150 69 41 5 15 31
Myanmar 0.0236 13 11 0 3 7
10. Online Service Index and its components (continued)
 220 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Namibia 0.3228 69 32 14 18 31
Nauru 0.0551 22 11 2 3 9
Nepal 0.1575 59 11 2 6 18
Netherlands 0.9291 100 75 70 88 82
New Zealand 0.8425 97 66 84 53 75
Nicaragua 0.0945 16 14 16 3 12
Niger 0.1260 47 14 0 6 15
Nigeria 0.3071 56 36 14 18 30
Norway 0.7559 97 77 44 56 67
Oman 0.7323 97 64 60 44 65
Pakistan 0.3228 78 25 14 18 31
Palau 0.1654 53 16 2 9 18
Panama 0.3701 84 36 12 18 35
Papua New Guinea 0.0079 9 11 0 0 5
Paraguay 0.2283 59 25 2 15 24
Peru 0.6299 88 55 51 38 57
Philippines 0.4803 84 57 19 24 44
Poland 0.5433 72 59 42 26 50
Portugal 0.6378 100 55 40 44 58
Qatar 0.6535 91 61 42 47 59
Republic of Korea 0.9764 100 82 77 88 86
Republic of Moldova 0.5276 88 55 26 32 48
Romania 0.4409 78 45 19 29 41
Russian Federation 0.7087 91 77 51 35 63
Rwanda 0.5118 78 64 19 32 47
Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.1339 34 18 2 12 16
Saint Lucia 0.2441 44 32 14 12 25
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 0.1575 50 16 2 9 18
Samoa 0.2441 75 20 0 15 25
San Marino 0.2756 56 39 5 15 27
Sao Tome and Principe 0.0079 6 14 0 0 5
Saudi Arabia 0.7717 94 68 63 53 69
Senegal 0.3071 78 32 5 15 30
Serbia 0.3937 72 52 12 18 37
Seychelles 0.3307 53 30 7 47 32
Sierra Leone 0.0472 13 16 5 0 8
Singapore 0.9921 100 89 88 71 87
Slovakia 0.4882 84 50 16 38 45
Slovenia 0.4252 63 64 7 29 40
10. Online Service Index and its components (continued)
   221 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Solomon Islands 0.0551 19 14 2 3 9
Somalia 0.0157 6 16 0 0 6
South Africa 0.3858 75 43 12 24 37
South Sudan 0.0079 16 5 2 0 5
Spain 0.9449 100 93 70 71 83
Sri Lanka 0.6535 88 73 28 53 59
Sudan 0.2913 66 20 2 38 29
Suriname 0.1417 50 14 0 9 16
Swaziland 0.1339 50 16 0 3 16
Sweden 0.7008 91 70 44 50 63
Switzerland 0.5039 56 66 21 44 46
Syrian Arab Republic 0.1575 19 7 12 38 18
Tajikistan 0.0630 31 7 2 3 10
Thailand 0.4409 94 34 14 35 41
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 0.2441 50 34 5 15 25
Timor-Leste 0.2047 47 25 7 12 22
Togo 0.1102 41 16 2 0 14
Tonga 0.3465 69 41 12 18 33
Trinidad and Tobago 0.3307 63 41 7 24 32
Tunisia 0.6378 91 61 33 53 58
Turkey 0.5591 81 57 23 50 51
Turkmenistan 0.0866 34 11 0 6 12
Tuvalu 0.0394 25 9 0 0 8
Uganda 0.1496 25 25 5 15 17
Ukraine 0.2677 75 20 5 18 27
United Arab Emirates 0.8819 100 77 67 71 78
United Kingdom of Great Britain  
and Northern Ireland
0.8976 100 73 63 88 79
United Republic of Tanzania 0.2992 81 32 2 12 29
United States of America 0.9449 100 68 77 94 83
Uruguay 0.8504 94 70 72 68 75
Uzbekistan 0.4488 88 41 23 24 42
Vanuatu 0.0787 34 5 5 6 11
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.5512 88 55 33 32 50
Viet Nam 0.4173 78 50 16 18 39
Yemen 0.3071 66 18 12 35 30
Zambia 0.1417 47 16 0 9 16
Zimbabwe 0.3071 88 25 5 15 30
10. Online Service Index and its components (continued)
 222 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional and Economic Grouping
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Africa 0.2011 45.14 23.61 6.80 14.05 21.27
Americas 0.4216 68.21 42.73 24.52 27.56 39.57
Asia 0.4652 72.27 43.71 28.90 33.23 43.19
Europe 0.5695 81.32 58.25 33.32 39.26 51.85
Oceania 0.2621 51.79 26.30 16.45 14.92 26.33
World 0.3919 64.48 39.88 22.00 26.85 37.11
 
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
Small Island Developing States 0.2520 50.00 28.71 11.51 15/94 25.49
Land Locked developing Countries 0.2710 57.16 27.93 11.25 17.65 27.07
Least Developed Countries 0.1475 38.93 20.27 4.07 10.17 17.37
 
Country OSI
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Total
percentage
High Income 0.6503 82.10 61.49 46.13 48.29 58.55
Upper Middle Income 0.3709 67.75 39.94 16.78 22.48 35.36
Lower Middle Income 0.3076 9.71 31.14 14.25 2.96 30.11
Low Income 0.1523 39.64 18.70 5.05 9.58 17.22
   223 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
11. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and its components
Country TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Afghanistan 0.1472 5.45 0.05 60.35 0.00* 28.73
Albania 0.3548 54.66 9.87 110.69 5.06 18.79
Algeria 0.1989 15.23 8.32 97.95 2.89 0.00
Andorra 0.7671 86.43 49.77 82.95 34.58 66.75
Angola 0.0978 16.94 1.46 47.07 0.15 1.50
Antigua & Barbuda 0.5938 59.00 39.30 201.83 5.73 20.21
Argentina 0.4835 55.80 24.33 142.62 10.89 20.86
Armenia 0.3889 39.16 19.68 111.91 6.95 29.09
Australia 0.8041 82.35 45.43 105.59 24.91 102.07
Austria 0.7597 81.00 39.49 160.54 25.13 56.10
Azerbaijan 0.4605 54.20 18.62 108.77 13.97 34.84
Bahamas 0.4176 71.75 36.83 68.29 2.61 24.52
Bahrain 0.7055 88.00 22.01 161.17 13.14 78.42
Bangladesh 0.0941 6.30 0.62 62.82 0.33 0.47
Barbados 0.6730 73.33 50.84 122.52 23.09 36.01
Belarus 0.6069 46.91 46.86 113.52 26.91 33.28
Belgium 0.6988 82.00 41.87 116.45 33.27 33.01
Belize 0.1530 25.00 7.84 50.65 3.08 0.52
Benin 0.1196 3.80 1.56 83.65 0.05 0.37
Bhutan 0.1755 25.43 3.64 75.61 2.26 2.52
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.2324 34.19 8.39 90.45 1.05 6.62
Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.3998 65.36 22.91 87.44 10.54 12.07
Botswana 0.2969 11.50 8.01 153.79 0.80 17.80
Brazil 0.4668 49.85 22.30 125.00 9.15 37.22
Brunei Darussalam 0.3690 60.27 17.21 113.95 4.81 7.62
Bulgaria 0.5941 55.15 30.95 148.13 17.94 42.11
Burkina Faso 0.0842 3.73 0.86 60.61 0.09 0.00
Burundi 0.0233 1.22 0.18 22.81 0.00 0.00
Cambodia 0.2075 4.94 3.93 128.53 0.20 6.73
Cameroon 0.0958 5.70 3.40 60.41 0.01 0.00
Canada 0.7168 86.77 51.70 75.39 32.74 49.80
Cape Verde 0.2966 34.74 14.20 86.03 3.86 23.03
Central African Republic 0.0280 3.00 0.12 23.65 0.00 0.01
Chad 0.0415 2.10 0.24 33.73 0.16 0.00
Chile 0.4940 61.42 18.76 138.17 12.41 27.96
China 0.3554 42.30 20.25 79.88 12.75 16.95
Colombia 0.3297 48.98 13.19 102.85 8.33 5.05
Comoros 0.0604 5.98 3.34 34.84 0.03 0.00
Congo 0.1453 6.11 0.34 98.76 0.01 2.11
 224 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Costa Rica 0.4461 47.50 21.18 128.01 10.02 27.66
Côte d’Ivoire 0.1392 2.38 1.35 99.93 0.25 0.00
Croatia 0.6271 63.00 38.07 115.41 20.67 53.90
Cuba 0.0969 25.64 10.79 14.92 0.04 0.00
Cyprus 0.5320 61.00 33.06 98.40 19.23 34.08
Czech Republic 0.5753 75.00 19.70 121.70 16.45 52.09
Demo. People’s  
Republic of Korea
0.0173 0.00 4.77 6.87 0.00 1.82
Democratic Republic 
of Congo
0.0337 1.68 0.09 29.66 0.00 0.05
Denmark 0.8740 93.00 43.43 117.85 38.18 88.00
Djibouti 0.0556 8.27 2.09 24.31 1.85 0.00
Dominica 0.4424 55.18 20.34 152.47 11.86 0.00
Dominican Republic 0.2945 45.00 10.37 87.95 4.38 15.71
Ecuador 0.3318 35.13 14.90 106.23 5.20 21.62
Egypt 0.3571 44.07 10.60 119.92 2.83 27.93
El Salvador 0.3198 25.50 16.82 137.34 3.84 5.49
Equatorial Guinea 0.1200 13.94 2.02 68.05 0.20 0.00
Eritrea 0.0000 0.80 0.98 4.98 0.00 0.00
Estonia 0.7934 79.00 34.72 160.41 26.65 76.91
Ethiopia 0.0266 1.48 0.87 22.37 0.04 0.42
Fiji 0.2872 33.74 10.11 98.18 1.55 23.39
Finland 0.8594 91.00 16.46 172.32 30.42 106.41
France 0.8003 83.00 61.45 97.41 37.47 51.77
Gabon 0.2260 8.62 1.04 153.13 0.31 0.00
Gambia 0.1482 12.45 3.58 85.20 0.03 1.36
Georgia 0.4261 45.50 29.28 107.81 9.00 23.78
Germany 0.8038 84.00 61.23 130.02 33.70 40.66
Ghana 0.2444 17.11 1.12 100.99 0.25 33.92
Greece 0.6549 56.00 49.09 120.04 24.14 45.69
Grenada 0.4029 42.09 27.02 121.35 13.69 0.00
Guatemala 0.2713 16.00 11.56 137.82 1.80 4.50
Guinea 0.0504 1.49 0.16 41.75 0.01 0.00
Guinea-Bissau 0.0878 2.89 0.30 65.94 0.00 0.00
Guyana 0.2344 33.00 19.39 68.78 3.67 0.10
Haiti 0.0952 9.80 0.49 59.91 0.16** 0.16
Honduras 0.1951 18.12 7.69 92.87 0.77 4.76
Hungary 0.5654 72.00 29.68 116.07 22.87 24.14
Iceland 0.8591 96.21 58.00 106.18 34.71 72.24
India 0.1372 12.58 2.51 69.92 1.16 4.99
11. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and its components (continued)
   225 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Indonesia 0.3054 15.36 15.39 114.22 1.21 31.59
Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.2940 26.00 37.63 76.10 4.03 1.34
Iraq 0.2173 7.10 5.71 81.63 0.00 37.14
Ireland 0.7039 79.00 43.88 107.21 22.72 65.87
Israel 0.7200 73.37 47.02 120.68 22.38 65.97
Italy 0.6747 58.00 35.57 159.69 22.15 52.15
Jamaica 0.2753 46.50 9.55 96.27 4.32 1.57
Japan 0.8553 79.05 50.51 108.73 27.74 112.40
Jordan 0.3104 41.00 6.20 128.17 2.76 10.86
Kazakhstan 0.5749 53.32 26.67 176.58 9.78 42.27
Kenya 0.1612 32.10 0.58 71.17 0.10 2.22
Kiribati 0.0665 10.75 8.93 15.88 0.99 0.00
Kuwait 0.5862 79.18 15.69 156.90 1.45 71.73
Kyrgyzstan 0.3801 21.72 8.93 124.18 2.61 59.63
Lao People’s 
Democratic Republic
0.1618 10.75 1.69 97.69 1.40 0.74
Latvia 0.6237 74.00 24.32 112.11 23.35 58.24
Lebanon 0.4030 61.25 18.90 86.08 10.76 23.67
Lesotho 0.1179 4.59 2.10 63.94 0.14 10.45
Liberia 0.0763 3.79 0.00 57.12 0.00 0.03
Libya 0.3281 19.86 13.23 155.77 1.09 14.52
Liechtenstein 0.7468 89.41 50.39 97.35 32.95 48.40
Lithuania 0.5697 68.00 22.04 165.06 21.23 13.54
Luxembourg 0.8723 92.00 50.92 145.36 32.58 72.52
Madagascar 0.0488 2.05 0.64 38.41 0.04 0.06
Malawi 0.0484 4.35 1.43 27.78 0.01 3.46
Malaysia 0.4455 65.80 15.69 141.33 8.41 13.59
Maldives 0.3952 38.93 6.84 165.63 5.28 20.64
Mali 0.1350 2.17 0.75 98.38 0.01 0.73
Malta 0.7683 70.00 53.71 126.11 31.05 57.47
Marshall Islands 0.0448 10.00 10.60***** 1.27***** 0.00** 0.00
Mauritania 0.1626 5.37 1.71 106.00 0.17 3.64
Mauritius 0.4406 41.39 28.16 119.87 11.21 22.94
Mexico 0.3139 38.42 16.73 83.40 10.52 9.83
Micronesia 0.1099 25.97 8.12 26.69 0.90* 0.00
Monaco 1.0000 87.00 118.40 88.33 42.94 47.90
Mongolia 0.2714 16.40 6.32 120.69 3.75 18.37
Montenegro 0.5481 56.84 26.24 181.30 8.44 27.53
Morocco 0.3350 55.00 10.08 119.97 2.10 10.09
Mozambique 0.0545 4.85 0.35 36.24 0.08 1.78
11. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and its components (continued)
 226 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Myanmar 0.0084 1.07 1.05 10.30 0.01 0.03
Namibia 0.2719 12.94 7.58 107.79 2.91 30.22
Nauru 0.2159 54.00 0.00 67.78 0.00 9.97
Nepal 0.1684 11.15 3.08 59.62 0.45 28.01
Netherlands 0.8175 93.00 42.40 117.52 39.44 60.98
New Zealand 0.7506 89.51 42.15 110.36 27.80 65.94
Nicaragua 0.1692 13.50 5.34 89.22 1.65 1.01
Niger 0.0385 1.41 0.59 31.45 0.02 0.57
Nigeria 0.1905 32.88 0.25 66.80 0.01 18.37
Norway 0.8133 95.00 29.35 114.78 36.64 84.85
Oman 0.4873 60.00 9.19 159.25 2.15 50.94
Pakistan 0.1174 9.96 3.24 67.06 0.52 0.66
Palau 0.3592 26.97***** 35.08 82.64 2.95 32.31
Panama 0.4571 45.20 16.83 178.03 7.83 14.31
Papua New Guinea 0.0530 2.30 1.94 37.80 0.13 0.00
Paraguay 0.2236 27.08 5.62 101.59 1.11 6.06
Peru 0.2718 38.20 11.42 98.00 4.74 2.86
Philippines 0.2451 36.24 4.07 106.51 2.22 3.83
Poland 0.5618 65.00 16.03 133.05 16.68 52.90
Portugal 0.6094 64.00 42.98 116.11 22.55 32.76
Qatar 0.5879 88.10 15.95 126.80 7.75 68.28
Republic of Korea 0.9350 84.10 61.42 109.43 37.25 105.14
Republic of Moldova 0.4236 43.37 34.31 116.10 11.87 5.08
Romania 0.4385 50.00 21.51 104.35 15.63 23.40
Russian Federation 0.6413 53.27 29.97 182.92 14.43 52.80
Rwanda 0.0828 8.02 0.39 49.67 0.03 3.22
Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.6321 79.35 37.32 156.76 27.25 0.00
Saint Lucia 0.4000 48.63 20.37 125.50 13.59 0.00
Saint Vincent  
and the Grenadines
0.3810 47.52 17.72 123.87 12.45 0.00
Samoa 0.2672 12.92 10.82*** 91.43*** 0.11* 40.39
San Marino 0.6358 50.88 59.85 115.21 31.69 11.20
Sao Tomé & Principe 0.1398 21.57 4.25 64.86 0.48 0.00
Saudi Arabia 0.5523 54.00 16.97 187.40 6.95 45.38
Senegal 0.1644 19.20 2.46 83.57 0.70 3.58
Serbia 0.4681 48.10 31.16 95.66 10.49 42.05
Seychelles 0.4721 47.08 31.26 149.74 11.06 8.59
Sierra Leone 0.0821 1.30 0.30 36.96 0.00*** 17.51
Singapore 0.8793 74.18 37.51 152.04 25.85 123.76
Slovakia 0.5296 80.00 17.90 111.91 14.66 39.71
11. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and its components (continued)
   227 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Slovenia 0.6193 70.00 39.89 108.61 24.29 36.95
Solomon Islands 0.1008 7.00 1.47 54.98 0.39 6.54
Somalia 0.0259 1.38 0.98 22.56 0.00** 0.00
South Africa 0.3466 41.00 7.69 130.56 2.11 25.20
South Sudan 0.0141 0.00 0.00 18.45 0.00 0.00
Spain 0.6629 72.00 41.11 108.36 24.26 53.42
Sri Lanka 0.2341 18.29 16.35 96.33 2.01 4.47
Sudan 0.1847 21.00 1.14 74.36 0.07 20.52
Suriname 0.3968 34.68 15.53 182.77 5.74 0.37
Swaziland 0.1629 20.78 3.95 65.39 0.27 11.90
Sweden 0.8866 94.00 45.43 122.41 32.13 101.10
Switzerland 0.8199 85.20 54.79 130.79 40.48 40.06
Syrian Arab Republic 0.1992 24.30 20.21 59.06 1.73 1.78
Tajikistan 0.2306 14.51 4.91 81.51 0.07 37.41
Thailand 0.2843 26.50 9.57 125.89 6.52 0.15
The Former Yugoslav  
Republic of Macedonia
0.4521 63.15 19.37 106.17 14.36 22.27
Timor-Leste 0.0704 0.91 0.27 55.74 0.05 0.40
Togo 0.0836 4.00 3.39 52.96 0.08 0.65
Tonga 0.2348 34.86 28.59 53.36 1.43 0.10
Trinidad & Tobago 0.4543 59.52 21.43 140.84 13.75 2.79
Tunisia 0.3074 41.44 10.17 118.08 4.71 5.13
Turkey 0.3605 45.13 18.73 91.46 10.62 16.45
Turkmenistan 0.2189 7.20 11.12 76.42 0.03 33.05
Tuvalu 0.1761 35.00 14.71 28.40 5.58 0.00
Uganda 0.1011 14.69 0.87 45.00 0.11 7.41
Ukraine 0.3802 33.70 26.76 130.34 8.00 5.43
United Arab Emirates 0.5932 85.00 21.37 149.64 10.34 44.85
United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Island
0.8534 87.02 52.58 130.78 34.04 72.06
United Republic of Tanzania 0.0808 3.95 0.37 56.96 0.01 1.49
United States of America 0.7406 81.03 43.78 97.64 27.88 74.90
Uruguay 0.5607 55.11 29.78 147.13 16.59 32.46
Uzbekistan 0.2333 36.52 6.88 71.03 0.71 20.36
Vanuatu 0.1188 10.60 2.35 55.41 1.05 8.25
Venezuela  
(Bolivarian Republic of)
0.3495 44.05 25.53 101.88 6.72 4.83
Viet Nam 0.3792 39.49 11.22 147.66 4.90 18.77
Yemen 0.1249 17.45 4.63 58.28 0.70 0.20
Zambia 0.1247 13.47 0.59 74.78 0.11 0.65
Zimbabwe 0.2238 17.09 2.20 91.91 0.52 28.14
11. Telecommunication Infrastructure Index and its components (continued)
 228 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional and Economic Grouping
Country TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Africa 0.1478 13.41 3.77 71.41 1.00 6.70
Americas 0.3805 45.08 20.31 112.81 9.37 13.14
Asia 0.3584 37.63 15.25 103.75 6.66 29.44
Europe 0.6678 71.76 39.17 123.37 24.83 47.78
Oceania 0.2564 31.46 16.57 61.42 6.07 20.64
World 0.3650 39.40 18.40 98.02 9.74 23.57
TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Small Island Developing 
States
0.3033 36.20 16.47 90.64 6.09 13.18
Land Locked  
Developing Countries
0.2025 18.49 6.53 78.84 2.34 14.83
Least Developed  
Countries
0.0929 7.89 1.81 52.32 0.37 3.38
 
TII
Percentage 
of Individuals 
using 
the Internet
Fixed-
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
Fixed (wired)-
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100 
inhabitants
Wireless 
broadband 
subscriptions 
per 100  
inhabitants
High Income 0.6845 75.21 38.41 124.91 23.71 54.97
Upper Middle Income 0.3522 39.99 17.36 111.12 7.47 16.26
Lower Middle Income 0.2307 24.17 9.56 89.58 2.61 11.75
Low Income 0.0876 5.72 1.24 51.50 0.08 5.00
Sources:  International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Country profiles indicated in yellow.
Year: 2012 or most recent data available.
 * 2010
 ** 2008
 *** 2007
 **** 2005
 ***** 2004 
   229 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
12
. 
H
um
an
 C
ap
ita
l I
nd
ex
 a
nd
 it
s 
co
m
p
on
en
ts
C
ou
nt
ry
H
C
I
A
d
ul
t 
lit
er
ac
y 
(%
)
G
ro
ss
 e
nr
ol
m
en
t 
ra
tio
 (%
)
E
xp
ec
te
d
 y
ea
rs
 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
M
ea
n 
ye
ar
s 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
A
fg
ha
ni
st
an
0.
24
18
28
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
54
.1
8
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
15
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
10
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
lb
an
ia
 
0.
71
00
96
.8
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
67
.6
9
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.3
4
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
lg
er
ia
 
0.
65
43
72
.6
5
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
80
.8
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.0
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
nd
or
ra
 
0.
72
77
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
69
.0
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
ng
ol
a 
0.
49
41
70
.3
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
65
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.2
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
nt
ig
ua
 a
nd
 B
ar
b
ud
a 
0.
76
69
98
.9
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
80
.6
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.5
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
rg
en
tin
a 
0.
85
71
97
.8
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
95
.4
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.4
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
rm
en
ia
 
0.
76
60
99
.5
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
76
.7
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.1
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
us
tr
al
ia
 
0.
99
78
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
11
0.
21
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
19
.6
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.0
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
us
tr
ia
0.
86
60
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
93
.3
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.5
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
A
ze
rb
ai
ja
n 
0.
74
80
99
.7
6
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.2
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.2
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ah
am
as
 
0.
71
38
95
.8
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
74
.0
0
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.6
0
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ah
ra
in
 
0.
78
40
94
.5
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
85
.3
0
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.3
6
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
an
g
la
d
es
h 
0.
38
66
57
.7
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
56
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
10
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ar
b
ad
o
s 
0.
88
65
99
.7
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
2.
21
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.6
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
el
ar
us
 
0.
88
61
99
.6
2
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
97
.2
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.2
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.5
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
el
g
iu
m
 
0.
89
32
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
97
.2
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.4
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.9
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
el
iz
e 
0.
60
12
70
.3
0
19
91
U
N
ES
C
O
74
.1
2
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.1
0
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
00
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
en
in
 
0.
27
56
28
.7
0
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
57
.7
9
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
36
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
hu
ta
n 
0.
42
90
52
.8
1
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
67
.6
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.3
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ol
iv
ia
 (P
lu
rin
at
io
na
l S
ta
te
 o
f)
0.
74
24
91
.1
7
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
81
.2
5
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.4
8
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
o
sn
ia
 a
nd
 H
er
ze
g
ov
in
a 
0.
72
88
98
.0
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
72
.0
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.5
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ot
sw
an
a 
0.
65
55
85
.0
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
69
.8
4
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.8
4
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ra
zi
l 
0.
73
72
90
.3
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
87
.4
7
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.2
3
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ru
ne
i D
ar
us
sa
la
m
 
0.
78
15
95
.4
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
83
.5
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.1
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ul
g
ar
ia
 
0.
79
60
98
.3
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
79
.8
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.9
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ur
ki
na
 F
as
o 
0.
15
78
28
.7
3
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
41
.0
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
88
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
1.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
B
ur
un
d
i 
0.
53
93
86
.9
5
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
64
.3
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.3
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
 230 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
C
am
b
o
d
ia
 
0.
51
89
73
.9
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
61
.7
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.5
3
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
am
er
o
o
n 
0.
54
21
71
.2
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
67
.2
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.5
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
an
ad
a 
0.
89
52
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
93
.4
7
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.8
9
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ap
e 
Ve
rd
e 
0.
60
32
84
.9
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
75
.5
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.9
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
50
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
C
en
tr
al
 A
fr
ic
an
 R
ep
ub
lic
 
0.
30
99
56
.6
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
43
.0
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
21
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ha
d
 
0.
23
41
35
.3
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
50
.6
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
15
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
1.
50
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
C
hi
le
 
0.
82
36
98
.5
5
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
87
.6
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.1
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
hi
na
 
0.
67
34
95
.1
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.3
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.8
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ol
o
m
b
ia
 
0.
73
48
93
.5
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
85
.1
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.6
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
o
m
or
os
 
0.
46
62
75
.5
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
59
.6
6
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.2
1
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
80
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
C
o
ng
o 
0.
52
33
84
.7
0
20
11
U
N
D
P
54
.4
4
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
43
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
o
st
a 
Ri
ca
 
0.
75
82
96
.2
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
84
.2
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.5
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ôt
e 
d
’Iv
oi
re
0.
29
92
56
.8
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
39
.0
8
19
99
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
49
19
99
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ro
at
ia
 
0.
79
28
98
.8
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
81
.8
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.1
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ub
a 
0.
84
97
99
.8
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
90
.7
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.4
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.2
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
yp
ru
s 
0.
78
28
98
.6
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
79
.2
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.0
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
C
ze
ch
 R
ep
ub
lic
 
0.
87
55
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
86
.0
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.0
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
D
em
o
cr
at
ic
 P
eo
p
le
’s
 R
ep
ub
lic
 o
f 
K
or
ea
 
0.
80
07
10
0.
00
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
10
0.
00
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.0
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
0
A
ve
ra
g
e 
M
YS
  
cl
us
te
r*
D
em
o
cr
at
ic
 R
ep
ub
lic
  
of
 t
he
 C
o
ng
o 
0.
38
45
61
.2
1
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
55
.6
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
52
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
D
en
m
ar
k 
0.
91
32
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
99
.2
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.8
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
D
jib
o
ut
i 
0.
31
82
70
.3
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
34
.2
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
75
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
D
o
m
in
ic
a 
0.
67
01
88
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
73
.0
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.7
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
D
o
m
in
ic
an
 R
ep
ub
lic
 
0.
66
39
90
.1
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
73
.2
0
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.2
8
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ec
ua
d
or
 
0.
70
37
91
.5
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
75
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.7
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Eg
yp
t 
0.
59
12
73
.8
7
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
73
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.4
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
El
 S
al
va
d
or
 
0.
64
14
84
.4
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.4
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.2
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Eq
ua
to
ria
l G
ui
ne
a 
0.
52
88
94
.2
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
55
.0
6
20
02
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
89
20
02
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
. 
H
um
an
 C
ap
ita
l I
nd
ex
 a
nd
 it
s 
co
m
p
on
en
ts
 (c
on
tin
ue
d
)
C
ou
nt
ry
H
C
I
A
d
ul
t 
lit
er
ac
y 
(%
)
G
ro
ss
 e
nr
ol
m
en
t 
ra
tio
 (%
)
E
xp
ec
te
d
 y
ea
rs
 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
M
ea
n 
ye
ar
s 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
   231 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Er
itr
ea
 
0.
27
23
68
.9
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
28
.4
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
64
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
E
st
o
ni
a 
0.
88
89
99
.8
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
91
.2
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.0
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.0
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
E
th
io
p
ia
 
0.
29
34
39
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
57
.4
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
08
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
20
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
Fi
ji 
0.
83
22
94
.4
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
87
.5
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.7
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.7
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Fi
nl
an
d
 
0.
90
37
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
1.
18
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
17
.0
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Fr
an
ce
0.
88
12
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
95
.7
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.3
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
ab
o
n 
0.
66
77
88
.9
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
75
.3
7
19
99
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.0
8
19
99
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
am
b
ia
 
0.
33
26
51
.1
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
54
.1
3
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
65
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
eo
rg
ia
 
0.
78
95
99
.7
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.8
9
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.1
8
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
er
m
an
y 
0.
88
62
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
88
.1
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.4
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.2
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
ha
na
 
0.
56
13
71
.5
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
66
.8
7
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
2
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
00
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
re
ec
e 
0.
87
41
97
.3
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
98
.6
0
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.2
5
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
re
na
d
a 
0.
81
66
96
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
91
.1
1
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.8
1
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
ua
te
m
al
a 
0.
52
72
75
.8
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.6
5
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.6
6
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
10
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
ui
ne
a 
0.
23
59
25
.3
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
56
.7
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
47
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
1.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
ui
ne
a-
B
is
sa
u 
0.
38
69
55
.2
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
65
.4
0
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
52
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
G
uy
an
a 
0.
63
01
84
.9
9
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.4
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.5
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
H
ai
ti 
0.
33
72
48
.6
9
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
53
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
60
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
H
o
nd
ur
as
 
0.
62
81
85
.1
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
74
.5
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
H
un
g
ar
y 
0.
86
68
99
.0
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
89
.8
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.3
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ic
el
an
d
 
0.
91
78
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
97
.2
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
18
.5
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
In
d
ia
 
0.
46
98
62
.7
5
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
65
.0
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.9
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
In
d
o
ne
si
a 
0.
67
86
92
.8
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
77
.6
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.1
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ir
an
 (I
sl
am
ic
 R
ep
ub
lic
 o
f) 
0.
68
82
85
.0
2
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
76
.7
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.7
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ir
aq
 
0.
52
83
78
.4
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
62
.6
8
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.0
4
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ir
el
an
d
 
0.
96
19
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
5.
32
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
18
.6
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Is
ra
el
 
0.
85
45
91
.7
5
19
83
U
N
ES
C
O
92
.1
5
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.7
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.9
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
It
al
y 
0.
85
52
98
.9
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
90
.4
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.1
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ja
m
ai
ca
 
0.
72
62
87
.0
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
81
.8
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.9
4
2 0
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ja
p
an
 
0.
86
21
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
89
.1
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Jo
rd
an
 
0.
72
02
95
.9
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
75
.2
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.6
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
K
az
ak
hs
ta
n 
0.
86
19
99
.7
3
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
93
.9
5
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.4
4
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
K
en
ya
 
0.
55
52
72
.1
6
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
67
.0
3
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.0
5
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
00
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
K
iri
b
at
i 
0.
68
12
93
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
73
.3
4
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.0
4
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
 232 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
K
uw
ai
t 
0.
71
94
93
.9
1
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
83
.0
9
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.1
7
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
10
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ky
rg
yz
st
an
 
0.
74
13
99
.2
4
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
75
.0
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.5
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
La
o 
Pe
op
le
’s
 D
em
oc
ra
tic
 R
ep
ub
lic
 
0.
49
41
72
.7
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
61
.4
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.5
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
La
tv
ia
 
0.
82
88
99
.7
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
81
.3
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.5
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.5
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Le
b
an
o
n 
0.
73
74
89
.6
1
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
83
.8
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.3
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Le
so
th
o 
0.
51
35
75
.8
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
59
.7
3
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
98
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Li
b
er
ia
 
0.
37
54
42
.9
4
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
63
.1
9
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.5
5
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Li
b
ya
0.
78
21
89
.5
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
92
.7
5
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.2
0
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Li
ec
ht
en
st
ei
n
0.
83
61
99
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
88
.2
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.1
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Li
th
ua
ni
a 
0.
85
57
99
.7
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
88
.9
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.4
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.9
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Lu
xe
m
b
o
ur
g
0.
78
30
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
77
.8
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.8
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
ad
ag
as
ca
r 
0.
48
89
64
.4
8
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
67
.4
9
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
4
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
20
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
M
al
aw
i 
0.
47
46
61
.3
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.0
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
al
ay
si
a
0.
71
19
93
.1
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.3
3
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.6
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
al
d
iv
es
0.
68
65
98
.4
0
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
76
.1
1
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.5
9
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
al
i 
0.
22
12
33
.4
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
49
.5
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
51
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
00
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
al
ta
 
0.
78
55
92
.3
6
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
81
.8
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
ar
sh
al
l I
sl
an
d
s 
0.
70
02
94
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
69
.1
6
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
9
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
85
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
M
au
rit
an
ia
 
0.
35
81
58
.6
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
50
.6
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
17
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
au
rit
iu
s 
0.
68
82
88
.8
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
76
.0
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.6
0
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
ex
ic
o 
0.
74
45
93
.5
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
81
.2
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.7
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
ic
ro
ne
si
a 
(F
ed
er
at
ed
 S
ta
te
s 
of
) 
0.
70
23
95
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
 
75
.4
5
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.4
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
80
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
M
o
na
co
 
0.
79
40
99
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
99
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
10
.0
0
N
at
io
na
l 
So
ur
ce
10
.8
0
A
ve
ra
g
e 
 
M
YS
  
cl
us
te
r*
M
o
ng
ol
ia
 
0.
78
87
97
.3
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
88
.7
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.4
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
o
nt
en
eg
ro
0.
82
79
98
.4
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
85
.8
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.9
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.5
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
. 
H
um
an
 C
ap
ita
l I
nd
ex
 a
nd
 it
s 
co
m
p
on
en
ts
 (c
on
tin
ue
d
)
C
ou
nt
ry
H
C
I
A
d
ul
t 
lit
er
ac
y 
(%
)
G
ro
ss
 e
nr
ol
m
en
t 
ra
tio
 (%
)
E
xp
ec
te
d
 y
ea
rs
 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
M
ea
n 
ye
ar
s 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
   233 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
M
or
o
cc
o 
0.
49
01
67
.0
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
64
.9
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.1
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
oz
am
b
iq
ue
 
0.
34
57
50
.5
8
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
62
.2
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
74
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
1.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
M
ya
nm
ar
 
0.
52
88
92
.6
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
57
.3
6
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
35
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
am
ib
ia
 
0.
56
93
76
.4
9
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
69
.4
2
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.2
7
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
au
ru
 
0.
56
17
92
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
56
.1
3
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
35
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
34
A
ve
ra
g
e 
M
YS
 
cl
us
te
r*
N
ep
al
 
0.
37
74
57
.3
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
57
.6
3
20
02
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
93
20
02
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
et
he
rla
nd
s 
0.
92
24
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
0.
42
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
17
.0
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
ew
 Z
ea
la
nd
 
1.
00
00
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
7.
91
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
19
.6
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.5
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
ic
ar
ag
ua
 
0.
56
39
78
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.1
5
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
3
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
ig
er
 
0.
11
92
28
.6
7
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
36
.1
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
26
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
1.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
ig
er
ia
 
0.
38
11
51
.0
8
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
55
.8
5
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
98
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
N
or
w
ay
 
0.
93
80
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
97
.9
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
17
.4
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
O
m
an
 
0.
66
24
86
.9
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
77
.9
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.7
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Pa
ki
st
an
 
0.
33
37
54
.8
9
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
44
.2
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
49
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Pa
la
u 
0.
79
99
91
.9
2
19
80
U
N
ES
C
O
82
.3
7
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.7
0
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.2
0
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
Pa
na
m
a 
0.
74
55
94
.0
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
78
.7
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.2
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Pa
p
ua
 N
ew
 G
ui
ne
a 
0.
30
00
62
.4
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
36
.9
8
19
98
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
89
19
98
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Pa
ra
g
ua
y 
0.
67
00
93
.8
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
69
.5
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.9
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Pe
ru
 
0.
72
89
89
.5
9
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
82
.9
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.2
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ph
ili
p
p
in
es
 
0.
70
51
95
.4
2
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
76
.3
9
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.3
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Po
la
nd
 
0.
83
96
99
.7
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
88
.8
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.3
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.0
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Po
rt
ug
al
 
0.
82
27
95
.4
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
96
.9
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.1
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Q
at
ar
 
0.
66
71
96
.2
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
62
.1
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.9
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Re
p
ub
lic
 o
f K
or
ea
 
0.
92
73
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
1.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
17
.1
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Re
p
ub
lic
 o
f M
ol
d
ov
a 
0.
72
01
98
.9
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
69
.4
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.8
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ro
m
an
ia
 
0.
81
00
97
.7
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
83
.6
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.5
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ru
ss
ia
n 
Fe
d
er
at
io
n 
0.
83
88
99
.6
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
85
.3
4
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.2
6
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
R
w
an
d
a 
0.
48
20
65
.8
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.3
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.0
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sa
in
t 
K
it
ts
 a
nd
 N
ev
is
 
0.
72
79
97
.8
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
75
.2
5
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.8
8
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sa
in
t 
Lu
ci
a 
0.
71
33
94
.8
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
74
.5
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.9
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sa
in
t 
V
in
ce
nt
  
an
d
 t
he
 G
re
na
d
in
es
 
0.
70
88
88
.1
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
78
.2
6
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.2
5
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
 234 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Sa
m
oa
 
0.
74
99
98
.8
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
73
.8
3
20
01
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.3
6
20
01
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sa
n 
M
ar
in
o 
0.
83
54
99
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
86
.1
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.4
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.3
4
A
ve
ra
g
e 
M
YS
 
cl
us
te
r*
Sa
o 
To
m
e 
an
d
 P
rin
ci
p
e 
0.
51
77
69
.5
4
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.3
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
4
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
70
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
Sa
ud
i A
ra
b
ia
 
0.
74
61
87
.1
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
87
.7
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.9
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Se
ne
g
al
 
0.
32
83
49
.7
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
49
.7
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
80
20
08
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Se
rb
ia
0.
77
96
98
.0
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
78
.8
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.6
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.2
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Se
yc
he
lle
s 
0.
73
10
91
.8
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
77
.1
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.1
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Si
er
ra
 L
eo
ne
 
0.
26
92
43
.2
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
46
.7
4
20
01
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
37
20
01
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Si
ng
ap
or
e 
0.
85
15
95
.8
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
2.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.4
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.1
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sl
ov
ak
ia
 
0.
82
65
99
.0
0
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
80
.0
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.7
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sl
ov
en
ia
 
0.
90
72
99
.6
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
94
.5
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.8
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
So
lo
m
o
n 
Is
la
nd
s 
0.
47
02
76
.6
0
19
99
W
or
ld
 
B
an
k
55
.2
0
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
30
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
50
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
So
m
al
ia
 
0.
00
00
24
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
17
.0
0
20
11
U
N
D
P
2.
40
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
1.
35
A
ve
ra
g
e 
M
YS
 
cl
us
te
r*
So
ut
h 
A
fr
ic
a 
0.
72
82
92
.9
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
79
.9
3
19
99
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.1
0
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
So
ut
h 
Su
d
an
0.
40
35
70
.2
1
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
38
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
10
.4
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
83
A
ve
ra
g
e 
M
YS
 
cl
us
te
r*
Sp
ai
n 
0.
91
52
97
.7
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
10
5.
65
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
17
.1
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sr
i L
an
ka
 
0.
73
76
91
.1
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
77
.0
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.8
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Su
d
an
 
0.
30
59
71
.9
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
38
.6
5
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
48
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
3.
10
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Su
rin
am
e 
0.
67
49
94
.6
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
72
.2
3
20
02
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.0
5
20
02
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sw
az
ila
nd
 
0.
62
00
87
.8
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
66
.7
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.3
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
10
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sw
ed
en
 
0.
88
02
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
91
.7
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.8
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sw
it
ze
rla
nd
 
0.
85
62
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
87
.6
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.8
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.0
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Sy
ria
n 
A
ra
b
 R
ep
ub
lic
 
0.
58
35
84
.0
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
64
.8
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
12
. 
H
um
an
 C
ap
ita
l I
nd
ex
 a
nd
 it
s 
co
m
p
on
en
ts
 (c
on
tin
ue
d
)
C
ou
nt
ry
H
C
I
A
d
ul
t 
lit
er
ac
y 
(%
)
G
ro
ss
 e
nr
ol
m
en
t 
ra
tio
 (%
)
E
xp
ec
te
d
 y
ea
rs
 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
M
ea
n 
ye
ar
s 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
In
d
ex
 
Va
lu
e
Ye
ar
So
ur
ce
   235 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Ta
jik
is
ta
n 
0.
72
49
99
.7
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.5
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.5
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
80
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Th
ai
la
nd
 
0.
66
40
93
.5
1
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.9
2
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.3
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Th
e 
fo
rm
er
 Y
ug
o
sl
av
 R
ep
ub
lic
 
of
 M
ac
ed
o
ni
a 
0.
71
98
97
.3
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.2
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.4
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ti
m
or
-L
es
te
0.
48
31
58
.3
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
71
.0
4
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
2
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
40
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
To
g
o 
0.
54
01
60
.4
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
76
.2
7
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.9
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
30
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
To
ng
a 
0.
83
04
99
.0
2
20
06
U
N
ES
C
O
88
.5
3
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.7
2
20
03
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Tr
in
id
ad
 a
nd
 T
o
b
ag
o 
0.
69
45
98
.8
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
64
.1
0
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.7
5
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
20
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Tu
ni
si
a 
0.
67
17
79
.1
3
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
79
.7
4
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.9
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Tu
rk
ey
 
0.
71
33
94
.1
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
80
.7
9
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.7
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Tu
rk
m
en
is
ta
n 
0.
74
78
99
.6
1
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
73
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.6
0
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
90
20
10
W
B
-I
ID
D
Tu
va
lu
 
0.
70
22
98
.0
0
20
12
U
N
 E
-G
ov
 
Su
rv
ey
72
.3
3
20
01
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.8
0
20
01
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
33
A
ve
ra
g
e 
M
YS
 
cl
us
te
r*
U
g
an
d
a 
0.
52
71
73
.2
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
68
.5
4
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.0
7
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
4.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
kr
ai
ne
0.
86
16
99
.7
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
92
.4
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.7
9
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
ni
te
d
 A
ra
b
 E
m
ira
te
s 
0.
66
57
90
.0
3
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
66
.0
0
20
00
U
N
ES
C
O
12
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
90
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
ni
te
d
 K
in
g
d
o
m
 o
f G
re
at
  
B
rit
ai
n 
an
d
 N
or
th
er
n 
Ir
el
an
d
0.
85
74
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
91
.8
8
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.7
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
40
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
ni
te
d
 R
ep
ub
lic
 o
f T
an
za
ni
a 
0.
44
92
67
.8
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
56
.6
4
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
9.
22
20
12
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
10
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
ni
te
d
 S
ta
te
s 
of
 A
m
er
ic
a 
0.
93
90
99
.0
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
98
.3
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
16
.7
6
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
13
.3
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
ru
g
ua
y 
0.
81
48
98
.0
7
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
89
.9
5
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
15
.5
1
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
U
zb
ek
is
ta
n 
0.
72
64
99
.4
3
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
70
.7
5
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.6
0
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.0
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Va
nu
at
u 
0.
57
36
83
.2
2
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
63
.1
3
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.5
7
20
04
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ve
ne
zu
el
a 
(B
ol
iv
ar
ia
n 
Re
p
ub
lic
 o
f)
0.
76
85
95
.5
1
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
89
.1
8
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
14
.2
6
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
60
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
V
ie
t 
N
am
 
0.
61
48
93
.3
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
63
.4
0
19
98
U
N
ES
C
O
11
.9
0
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
5.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Ye
m
en
 
0.
38
40
65
.2
6
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
54
.6
7
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
70
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
2.
50
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Za
m
b
ia
 
0.
45
04
61
.4
3
20
07
U
N
ES
C
O
60
.5
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
8.
50
20
09
U
N
ES
C
O
6.
70
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
Zi
m
b
ab
w
e 
0.
54
45
83
.5
8
20
11
U
N
ES
C
O
52
.4
0
20
05
U
N
ES
C
O
10
.1
19
90
U
N
ES
C
O
7.
2
20
10
U
N
ES
C
O
* 
Re
fe
r 
to
 s
ec
tio
n 
A
.3
 H
um
an
 C
ap
it
al
 In
d
ex
: 
M
is
si
ng
 d
at
a 
fo
r 
m
ea
n 
ye
ar
s 
of
 s
ch
o
o
lin
g
.
 236 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional and economic groupings
HCI
Adult 
literacy (%)
Gross 
enrolment 
ratio (%)
Expected years of 
schooling
Mean years 
of schooling
Africa 0.4492 64.65 59.74 9.87 4.65
Americas 0.7202 90.83 79.85 13.29 8.33
Asia 0.6615 86.79 74.08 12.38 7.58
Europe 0.8434 98.63 88.54 15.25 10.67
Oceania 0.7073 91.20 75.15 12.63 8.94
World 0.6566 84.29 74.41 12.50 7.68
 
HCI
Adult 
literacy (%)
Gross 
enrolment 
ratio (%)
Expected years of 
schooling
Mean years 
of schooling
Small island developing States 0.6654 87.51 74.29 12.26 7.72
Land Locked Developing Countries 0.5368 73.86 64.92 10.74 6.14
Least Developed Countries 0.3960 59.98 56.26 9.04 3.87
 
HCI
Adult 
literacy (%)
Gross 
enrolment 
ratio (%)
Expected years of 
schooling
Mean years 
of schooling
High Income 0.8343 97.58 88.87 15.30 10.25
Upper Middle Income 0.7253 92.17 78.54 13.29 8.58
Lower Middle Income 0.5787 80.19 66.84 11.08 6.56
Low Income 0.3884 57.28 56.69 9.06 3.95
   237 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
13. E-Participation Index and its utilisation by stages
Rank 
2014* Country EPI Total (%) Stage 1 (%) Stage 2 (%) Stage 3 (%)
152 Afghanistan 0.1373 13.79 22.22 9.09 0.00
59 Albania 0.5294 48.28 85.19 22.73 0.00
172 Algeria 0.0784 8.62 18.52 0.00 0.00
77 Andorra 0.4314 39.66 74.07 13.64 0.00
129 Angola 0.2353 22.41 40.74 9.09 0.00
63 Antigua and Barbuda 0.5098 46.55 66.67 36.36 11.11
54 Argentina 0.5490 50.00 85.19 27.27 0.00
59 Armenia 0.5294 48.28 85.19 22.73 0.00
7 Australia 0.9412 84.48 92.59 77.27 77.78
40 Austria 0.6275 56.90 96.30 31.82 0.00
77 Azerbaijan 0.4314 39.66 81.48 4.55 0.00
137 Bahamas 0.1961 18.97 33.33 9.09 0.00
14 Bahrain 0.8235 74.14 85.19 81.82 22.22
84 Bangladesh 0.3922 36.21 62.96 18.18 0.00
164 Barbados 0.0980 10.34 18.52 4.55 0.00
92 Belarus 0.3529 32.76 70.37 0.00 0.00
40 Belgium 0.6275 56.90 92.59 36.36 0.00
110 Belize 0.2941 27.59 51.85 9.09 0.00
143 Benin 0.1765 17.24 29.63 9.09 0.00
92 Bhutan 0.3529 32.76 62.96 9.09 0.00
81 Bolivia 0.4118 37.93 66.67 18.18 0.00
129 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.2353 22.41 37.04 13.64 0.00
107 Botswana 0.3137 29.31 51.85 13.64 0.00
24 Brazil 0.7059 63.79 92.59 54.55 0.00
179 Brunei 0.0588 6.90 7.41 9.09 0.00
122 Bulgaria 0.2549 24.14 44.44 9.09 0.00
152 Burkina Faso 0.1373 13.79 18.52 13.64 0.00
179 Burundi 0.0588 6.90 14.81 0.00 0.00
137 Cambodia 0.1961 18.97 37.04 4.55 0.00
148 Cameroon 0.1569 15.52 33.33 0.00 0.00
14 Canada 0.8235 74.14 96.30 77.27 0.00
164 Cape Verde 0.0980 10.34 22.22 0.00 0.00
183 Central African Republic 0.0392 5.17 7.41 4.55 0.00
172 Chad 0.0784 8.62 14.81 4.55 0.00
7 Chile 0.9412 84.48 92.59 95.45 33.33
33 China 0.6471 58.62 85.19 50.00 0.00
11 Colombia 0.8824 79.31 74.07 81.82 88.89
183 Comoros 0.0392 5.17 11.11 0.00 0.00
164 Congo, Republic of 0.0980 10.34 14.81 9.09 0.00
14 Costa Rica 0.8235 74.14 92.59 77.27 11.11
 238 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank 
2014* Country EPI Total (%) Stage 1 (%) Stage 2 (%) Stage 3 (%)
143 Côte d’Ivoire 0.1765 17.24 22.22 18.18 0.00
97 Croatia 0.3333 31.03 44.44 27.27 0.00
92 Cuba 0.3529 32.76 62.96 9.09 0.00
107 Cyprus 0.3137 29.31 40.74 22.73 11.11
122 Czech Republic 0.2549 24.14 40.74 13.64 0.00
186 Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 0.0196 3.45 7.41 0.00 0.00
186 Democratic Republic of the Congo 0.0196 3.45 3.70 4.55 0.00
54 Denmark 0.5490 50.00 92.59 18.18 0.00
172 Djibouti 0.0784 8.62 18.52 0.00 0.00
158 Dominica 0.1176 12.07 25.93 0.00 0.00
97 Dominican Republic 0.3333 31.03 48.15 22.73 0.00
65 Ecuador 0.4902 44.83 77.78 22.73 0.00
54 Egypt 0.5490 50.00 70.37 40.91 11.11
45 El Salvador 0.6078 55.17 85.19 40.91 0.00
186 Equatorial Guinea 0.0196 3.45 7.41 0.00 0.00
192 Eritrea 0.0000 1.72 3.70 0.00 0.00
22 Estonia 0.7647 68.97 88.89 68.18 11.11
122 Ethiopia 0.2549 24.14 29.63 27.27 0.00
84 Fiji 0.3922 36.21 59.26 18.18 11.11
24 Finland 0.7059 63.79 92.59 45.45 22.22
4 France 0.9608 86.21 96.30 77.27 77.78
134 Gabon 0.2157 20.69 37.04 9.09 0.00
134 Gambia 0.2157 20.69 40.74 4.55 0.00
49 Georgia 0.5882 53.45 88.89 27.27 11.11
24 Germany 0.7059 63.79 96.30 45.45 11.11
84 Ghana 0.3922 36.21 66.67 13.64 0.00
17 Greece 0.8039 72.41 77.78 86.36 22.22
84 Grenada 0.3922 36.21 59.26 22.73 0.00
137 Guatemala 0.1961 18.97 22.22 22.73 0.00
186 Guinea 0.0196 3.45 7.41 0.00 0.00
186 Guinea-Bissau 0.0196 3.45 3.70 4.55 0.00
97 Guyana 0.3333 31.03 51.85 18.18 0.00
143 Haiti 0.1765 17.24 25.93 13.64 0.00
97 Honduras 0.3333 31.03 40.74 31.82 0.00
75 Hungary 0.4510 41.38 81.48 9.09 0.00
65 Iceland 0.4902 44.83 77.78 22.73 0.00
40 India 0.6275 56.90 92.59 36.36 0.00
110 Indonesia 0.2941 27.59 55.56 4.55 0.00
110 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.2941 27.59 55.56 4.55 0.00
152 Iraq 0.1373 13.79 22.22 9.09 0.00
13. E-Participation Index and its utilisation by stages (continued)
   239 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank 
2014* Country EPI Total (%) Stage 1 (%) Stage 2 (%) Stage 3 (%)
33 Ireland 0.6471 58.62 88.89 45.45 0.00
12 Israel 0.8627 77.59 96.30 86.36 0.00
19 Italy 0.7843 70.69 100.00 63.64 0.00
137 Jamaica 0.1961 18.97 29.63 13.64 0.00
4 Japan 0.9608 86.21 85.19 86.36 88.89
71 Jordan 0.4706 43.10 74.07 18.18 11.11
22 Kazakhstan 0.7647 68.97 88.89 68.18 11.11
33 Kenya 0.6471 58.62 92.59 40.91 0.00
110 Kiribati 0.2941 27.59 40.74 22.73 0.00
77 Kuwait 0.4314 39.66 70.37 18.18 0.00
81 Kyrgyzstan 0.4118 37.93 74.07 9.09 0.00
137 Lao 0.1961 18.97 40.74 0.00 0.00
24 Latvia 0.7059 63.79 81.48 59.09 22.22
110 Lebanon 0.2941 27.59 44.44 18.18 0.00
152 Lesotho 0.1373 13.79 25.93 4.55 0.00
158 Liberia 0.1176 12.07 14.81 13.64 0.00
179 Libya 0.0588 6.90 7.41 9.09 0.00
117 Liechtenstein 0.2745 25.86 40.74 18.18 0.00
33 Lithuania 0.6471 58.62 81.48 54.55 0.00
54 Luxembourg 0.5490 50.00 85.19 27.27 0.00
92 Madagascar 0.3529 32.76 62.96 9.09 0.00
129 Malawi 0.2353 22.41 44.44 4.55 0.00
59 Malaysia 0.5294 48.28 77.78 31.82 0.00
117 Maldives 0.2745 25.86 48.15 9.09 0.00
148 Mali 0.1569 15.52 33.33 0.00 0.00
71 Malta 0.4706 43.10 77.78 18.18 0.00
122 Marshall Islands 0.2549 24.14 51.85 0.00 0.00
172 Mauritania 0.0784 8.62 18.52 0.00 0.00
59 Mauritus 0.5294 48.28 81.48 27.27 0.00
45 Mexico 0.6078 55.17 100.00 22.73 0.00
122 Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.2549 24.14 51.85 0.00 0.00
164 Monaco 0.0980 10.34 14.81 9.09 0.00
30 Mongolia 0.6863 62.07 77.78 68.18 0.00
49 Montenegro 0.5882 53.45 74.07 40.91 22.22
17 Morocco 0.8039 72.41 85.19 72.73 33.33
97 Mozambique 0.3333 31.03 51.85 18.18 0.00
172 Myanmar (ex-Birma) 0.0784 8.62 14.81 4.55 0.00
97 Namibia 0.3333 31.03 55.56 9.09 11.11
172 Nauru 0.0784 8.62 14.81 4.55 0.00
110 Nepal 0.2941 27.59 48.15 13.64 0.00
13. E-Participation Index and its utilisation by stages (continued)
 240 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank 
2014* Country EPI Total (%) Stage 1 (%) Stage 2 (%) Stage 3 (%)
1 Netherlands 1.0000 89.66 96.30 86.36 77.78
19 New Zealand 0.7843 70.69 92.59 72.73 0.00
164 Nicaragua 0.0980 10.34 11.11 13.64 0.00
129 Niger 0.2353 22.41 48.15 0.00 0.00
97 Nigeria 0.3333 31.03 48.15 18.18 11.11
30 Norway 0.6863 62.07 92.59 45.45 11.11
24 Oman 0.7059 63.79 88.89 54.55 11.11
97 Pakistan 0.3333 31.03 62.96 4.55 0.00
129 Palau 0.2353 22.41 44.44 4.55 0.00
65 Panama 0.4902 44.83 81.48 18.18 0.00
192 Papau New Guinea 0.0000 1.72 3.70 0.00 0.00
122 Paraguay 0.2549 24.14 44.44 9.09 0.00
24 Peru 0.7059 63.79 85.19 45.45 44.44
51 Philippines 0.5686 51.72 81.48 36.36 0.00
65 Poland 0.4902 44.83 66.67 31.82 11.11
33 Portugal 0.6471 58.62 92.59 40.91 0.00
45 Qatar 0.6078 55.17 88.89 27.27 22.22
1 Republic of Korea 1.0000 89.66 96.30 81.82 88.89
40 Republic of Moldova 0.6275 56.90 81.48 36.36 33.33
71 Romania 0.4706 43.10 66.67 31.82 0.00
30 Russian Federation 0.6863 62.07 81.48 36.36 66.67
63 Rwanda 0.5098 46.55 77.78 27.27 0.00
158 Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.1176 12.07 22.22 4.55 0.00
117 Saint Lucia 0.2745 25.86 33.33 27.27 0.00
148 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 0.1569 15.52 29.63 4.55 0.00
84 Samoa 0.3922 36.21 74.07 4.55 0.00
137 San Marino 0.1961 18.97 37.04 4.55 0.00
186 São Tomé and Príncipe 0.0196 3.45 7.41 0.00 0.00
51 Saudi Arabia 0.5686 51.72 85.19 27.27 11.11
92 Senegal 0.3529 32.76 70.37 0.00 0.00
81 Serbia 0.4118 37.93 62.96 22.73 0.00
122 Seychelles 0.2549 24.14 40.74 9.09 11.11
164 Sierra Leone 0.0980 10.34 11.11 13.64 0.00
10 Singapore 0.9020 81.03 96.30 90.91 11.11
40 Slovakia 0.6275 56.90 74.07 50.00 22.22
84 Slovenia 0.3922 36.21 48.15 31.82 11.11
172 Solomon Islands 0.0784 8.62 14.81 4.55 0.00
183 Somalia 0.0392 5.17 7.41 4.55 0.00
97 South Africa 0.3333 31.03 55.56 13.64 0.00
13. E-Participation Index and its utilisation by stages (continued)
   241 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Rank 
2014* Country EPI Total (%) Stage 1 (%) Stage 2 (%) Stage 3 (%)
179 South Sudan 0.0588 6.90 11.11 4.55 0.00
19 Spain 0.7843 70.69 100.00 63.64 0.00
33 Sri Lanka 0.6471 58.62 85.19 50.00 0.00
117 Sudan 0.2745 25.86 51.85 4.55 0.00
152 Suriname 0.1373 13.79 29.63 0.00 0.00
148 Swaziland 0.1569 15.52 29.63 0.00 11.11
45 Sweden 0.6078 55.17 85.19 40.91 0.00
91 Switzerland 0.3725 34.48 37.04 27.27 44.44
164 Syria 0.0980 10.34 14.81 9.09 0.00
158 Tajikistan 0.1176 12.07 22.22 4.55 0.00
54 Thailand 0.5490 50.00 85.19 27.27 0.00
134 The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 0.2157 20.69 33.33 13.64 0.00
110 Timor-Leste 0.2941 27.59 48.15 13.64 0.00
164 Togo 0.0980 10.34 22.22 0.00 0.00
97 Tonga 0.3333 31.03 55.56 13.64 0.00
107 Trinidad and Tobago 0.3137 29.31 51.85 13.64 0.00
33 Tunisia 0.6471 58.62 81.48 54.55 0.00
65 Turkey 0.4902 44.83 70.37 27.27 11.11
158 Turkmenistan 0.1176 12.07 25.93 0.00 0.00
158 Tuvalu 0.1176 12.07 25.93 0.00 0.00
152 Uganda 0.1373 13.79 14.81 18.18 0.00
77 Ukraine 0.4314 39.66 62.96 27.27 0.00
13 United Arab Emirates 0.8431 75.86 92.59 72.73 33.33
4 United Kingdom 0.9608 86.21 96.30 77.27 77.78
84 United Republic  
of Tanzania
0.3922 36.21 74.07 4.55 0.00
9 United States 0.9216 82.76 96.30 63.64 88.89
3 Uruguay 0.9804 87.93 88.89 95.45 66.67
71 Uzbekistan 0.4706 43.10 77.78 18.18 0.00
143 Vanuatu 0.1765 17.24 33.33 4.55 0.00
51 Venezuela 0.5686 51.72 81.48 36.36 0.00
65 Vietnam 0.4902 44.83 70.37 31.82 0.00
117 Yemen 0.2745 25.86 51.85 4.55 0.00
143 Zambia 0.1765 17.24 33.33 4.55 0.00
75 Zimbabwe 0.4510 41.38 70.37 22.73 0.00
*  In 2014, the E-Participation ranking used was the “Standard Competition Ranking” (1224), as opposed to the “Dense Ranking” (1223).  
Refer to section A.6 The e-Participation Index.
13. E-Participation Index and its utilisation by stages (continued)
 242 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Regional and Economic Groupings
Country EPI Total (%)
Stage 1 
(%)
Stage 2 
(%)
Stage 3 
(%)
Africa 0.2190 20.98 35.53 11.03 1.65
Americas 0.4398 40.39 58.73 30.39 9.84
Asia 0.4506 41.34 63.36 28.24 7.33
Europe 0.5454 49.68 73.21 35.94 12.66
Oceania 0.3095 28.94 46.83 16.23 6.35
World 0.3947 36.43 55.73 24.66 7.31
 
EPI Total (%)
Stage 1 
(%)
Stage 2 
(%)
Stage 3 
(%)
Small Island Developing States 0.2595 24.55 40.94 13.76 1.75
Land Locked Developing Countries 0.2935 27.53 46.71 14.52 1.79
Least Developed Countries 0.1720 16.85 30.48 7.00 0.00
 
EPI Total (%)
Stage 1 
(%)
Stage 2 
(%)
Stage 3 
(%)
High Income 0.6001 54.64 74.07 45.29 19.19
Upper Middle Income 0.3824 35.34 58.07 20.21 4.17
Lower Middle Income 0.3218 31.73 51.69 18.47 4.26
Low Income 0.1815 17.68 30.37 9.35 0.00
   243 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
14. Regional and Economic Grouping
Country Region Sub-Region EGDI Level Level of Income GNI
Afghanistan Asia Southern Asia Low Low 690
Albania Europe Southern Europe High Upper Middle 4520
Algeria Africa Northern Africa Middle Upper Middle 4970
Andorra Europe Southern Europe High High 41122***
Angola Africa Middle Africa Middle Upper Middle 4510
Antigua and Barbuda Americas Caribbean High High 12720
Argentina Americas South America High Upper Middle 11363
Armenia Asia Western Asia High Lower Middle 3770
Australia Oceania Australia 
and New Zealand
Very High High 59790
Austria Europe Western Europe Very High High 47960
Azerbaijan Asia Western Asia High Upper Middle 6290
Bahamas Americas Caribbean Middle High 20600
Bahrain Asia Western Asia Very High High 19560
Bangladesh Asia Southern Asia Middle Low 830
Barbados Americas Caribbean High High 15080
Belarus Europe Eastern Europe High Upper Middle 6400
Belgium Europe Western Europe Very High High 44810
Belize Americas Central America Middle Upper Middle 4620
Benin Africa Western Africa Low Low 750
Bhutan Asia Southern Asia Middle Lower Middle 2420
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Americas South America Middle Lower Middle 2220
Bosnia and Herzegovina Europe Southern Europe Middle Upper Middle 4600
Botswana Africa Southern Africa Middle Upper Middle 7650
Brazil Americas South America High Upper Middle 11640
Brunei Darussalam Asia South-Eastern Asia High High 31590**
Bulgaria Europe Eastern Europe High Upper Middle 6850
Burkina Faso Africa Western Africa Low Low 670
Burundi Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 240
Cambodia Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Low 880
Cameroon Africa Middle Africa Middle Lower Middle 1190
Canada Americas North America Very High High 50650
Cape Verde Africa Western Africa Middle Lower Middle 3610
Central African Republic Africa Middle Africa Low Low 490
Chad Africa Middle Africa Low Low 970
Chile Americas South America High High 14290
China Asia Eastern Asia High Upper Middle 5720
Colombia Americas South America High Upper Middle 7010
Comoros Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 840
Congo Africa Middle Africa Middle Lower Middle 2550
Costa Rica Americas Central America High Upper Middle 8850
 244 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEX UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country Region Sub-Region EGDI Level Level of Income GNI
Côte d’Ivoire Africa Western Africa Low Lower Middle 1220
Croatia Europe Southern Europe High High 13260
Cuba Americas Caribbean Middle Upper Middle 5890*
Cyprus Asia Western Asia High High 26410
Czech Republic Europe Eastern Europe High High 18130
Democratic People's Republic of Korea Asia Eastern Asia Middle Low 583
Democratic Republic of the Congo Africa Middle Africa Low Low 370
Denmark Europe Northern Europe Very High High 59860
Djibouti Africa Eastern Africa Low Lower Middle 1690
Dominica Americas Caribbean Middle Upper Middle 6590
Dominican Republic Americas Caribbean Middle Upper Middle 5430
Ecuador Americas South America High Upper Middle 5170
Egypt Africa Northern Africa High Lower Middle 2980
El Salvador Americas Central America Middle Lower Middle 3600
Equatorial Guinea Africa Middle Africa Low High 14040
Eritrea Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 450
Estonia Europe Northern Europe Very High High 16360
Ethiopia Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 410
Fiji Oceania Melanesia High Lower Middle 4010
Finland Europe Northern Europe Very High High 46820
France Europe Western Europe Very High High 41860
Gabon Africa Middle Africa Middle Upper Middle 10020
Gambia Africa Western Africa Low Low 520
Georgia Asia Western Asia High Lower Middle 3290
Germany Europe Western Europe Very High High 45170
Ghana Africa Western Africa Middle Lower Middle 1580
Greece Europe Southern Europe High High 23670
Grenada Americas Caribbean High Upper Middle 7140
Guatemala Americas Central America Middle Lower Middle 3130
Guinea Africa Western Africa Low Low 440
Guinea-Bissau Africa Western Africa Low Low 530
Guyana Americas South America Middle Lower Middle 3410
Haiti Americas Caribbean Low Low 760
Honduras Americas Central America Middle Lower Middle 2140
Hungary Europe Eastern Europe High Upper Middle 12450
Iceland Europe Northern Europe Very High High 38370
India Asia Southern Asia Middle Lower Middle 1550
Indonesia Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Lower Middle 3420
Iran (Islamic Republic of) Asia Southern Asia Middle Upper Middle 6570
Iraq Asia Western Asia Middle Upper Middle 6130
Ireland Europe Northern Europe Very High High 39110
Israel Asia Western Asia Very High High 32030
14. Regional and Economic Grouping (continued)
   245 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country Region Sub-Region EGDI Level Level of Income GNI
Italy Europe Southern Europe Very High High 34810
Jamaica Americas Caribbean Middle Upper Middle 5190
Japan Asia Eastern Asia Very High High 47690
Jordan Asia Western Asia High Upper Middle 4660
Kazakhstan Asia Central Asia High Upper Middle 9780
Kenya Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 870
Kiribati Oceania Micronesia Middle Lower Middle 2520
Kuwait Asia Western Asia High High 44940*
Kyrgyzstan Asia Central Asia Middle Lower Middle 1040
Lao People's Democratic Republic Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Lower Middle 1270
Latvia Europe Northern Europe High High 14030
Lebanon Asia Western Asia Middle Upper Middle 9250
Lesotho Africa Southern Africa Middle Lower Middle 1480
Liberia Africa Western Africa Low Low 370
Libya Africa Northern Africa Middle High 12930**
Liechtenstein Europe Western Europe High High 136770**
Lithuania Europe Northern Europe High High 13910
Luxembourg Europe Western Europe Very High High 71810
Madagascar Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 420
Malawi Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 320
Malaysia Asia South-Eastern Asia High Upper Middle 9820
Maldives Asia Southern Asia Middle Upper Middle 5430
Mali Africa Western Africa Low Low 660
Malta Europe Southern Europe High High 19990
Marshall Islands Oceania Micronesia Middle Upper Middle 4130
Mauritania Africa Western Africa Low Lower Middle 1040
Mauritius Africa Eastern Africa High Upper Middle 8770
Mexico Americas Central America High Upper Middle 9720
Micronesia (Federated States of) Oceania Micronesia Middle Lower Middle 3230
Monaco Europe Western Europe High High 186950***
Mongolia Asia Eastern Asia High Lower Middle 3080
Montenegro Europe Southern Europe High Upper Middle 6950
Morocco Africa Northern Africa High Lower Middle 2910
Mozambique Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 510
Myanmar Asia South-Eastern Asia Low Lower Middle 1126
Namibia Africa Southern Africa Middle Upper Middle 5700
Nauru Oceania Micronesia Middle High 12577
Nepal Asia Southern Asia Low Low 700
Netherlands Europe Western Europe Very High High 48110
New Zealand Oceania Australia  
and New Zealand
Very High High 35550
14. Regional and Economic Grouping (continued)
 246 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEX UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country Region Sub-Region EGDI Level Level of Income GNI
Nicaragua Americas Central America Middle Lower Middle 1690
Niger Africa Western Africa Low Low 390
Nigeria Africa Western Africa Middle Lower Middle 2460
Norway Europe Northern Europe Very High High 98880
Oman Asia Western Asia High High 25250
Pakistan Asia Southern Asia Middle Lower Middle 1250
Palau Oceania Micronesia Middle Upper Middle 10550
Panama Americas Central America High Upper Middle 9030
Papua New Guinea Oceania Melanesia Low Lower Middle 1790
Paraguay Americas South America Middle Lower Middle 3320
Peru Americas South America High Upper Middle 5890
Philippines Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Lower Middle 2950
Poland Europe Eastern Europe High High 12660
Portugal Europe Southern Europe High High 20620
Qatar Asia Western Asia High High 78060
Republic of Korea Asia Eastern Asia Very High High 24640
Republic of Moldova Europe Eastern Europe High Lower Middle 2150
Romania Europe Eastern Europe High Upper Middle 8560
Russian Federation Europe Eastern Europe High High 12740
Rwanda Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 600
Saint Kitts and Nevis Americas Caribbean Middle High 13090
Saint Lucia Americas Caribbean Middle Upper Middle 7000
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Americas Caribbean Middle Upper Middle 6360
Samoa Oceania Polynesia Middle Lower Middle 3260
San Marino Europe Southern Europe High High 51470***
Sao Tome and Principe Africa Middle Africa Low Lower Middle 1310
Saudi Arabia Asia Western Asia High High 24660
Senegal Africa Western Africa Middle Lower Middle 1030
Serbia Europe Southern Europe High Upper Middle 5350
Seychelles Africa Eastern Africa High Upper Middle 11590
Sierra Leone Africa Western Africa Low Low 530
Singapore Asia South-Eastern Asia Very High High 51090
Slovakia Europe Eastern Europe High High 17070
Slovenia Europe Southern Europe High High 22780
Solomon Islands Oceania Melanesia Low Lower Middle 1480
Somalia Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 123
South Africa Africa Southern Africa Middle Upper Middle 7460
South Sudan Africa Eastern Africa Low Low 840
Spain Europe Southern Europe Very High High 29340
Sri Lanka Asia Southern Asia High Lower Middle 2910
Sudan Africa Northern Africa Middle Lower Middle 1460
14. Regional and Economic Grouping (continued)
   247 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Country Region Sub-Region EGDI Level Level of Income GNI
Suriname Americas South America Middle Upper Middle 8680
Swaziland Africa Southern Africa Middle Lower Middle 3100
Sweden Europe Northern Europe Very High High 56120
Switzerland Europe Western Europe High High 80950
Syrian Arab Republic Asia Western Asia Middle Lower Middle 2084
Tajikistan Asia Central Asia Middle Low 880
Thailand Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Upper Middle 5250
The former Yugoslav Republic  
of Macedonia
Europe Southern Europe Middle Upper Middle 4710
Timor-Leste Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Lower Middle 3980
Togo Africa Western Africa Low Low 490
Tonga Oceania Polynesia Middle Upper Middle 4220
Trinidad and Tobago Americas Caribbean Middle High 14780
Tunisia Africa Northern Africa High Upper Middle 4240
Turkey Asia Western Asia High Upper Middle 10810
Turkmenistan Asia Central Asia Middle Upper Middle 5410
Tuvalu Oceania Polynesia Middle Upper Middle 5650
Uganda Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 480
Ukraine Europe Eastern Europe High Lower Middle 3640
United Arab Emirates Asia Western Asia High High 38620
United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland
Europe Northern Europe Very High High 38300
United Republic of Tanzania Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 570
United States of America Americas North America Very High High 52350
Uruguay Americas South America High High 13670
Uzbekistan Asia Central Asia Middle Lower Middle 1700
Vanuatu Oceania Melanesia Middle Lower Middle 2990
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Americas South America High Upper Middle 12460
Viet Nam Asia South-Eastern Asia Middle Lower Middle 1550
Yemen Asia Western Asia Middle Lower Middle 1220
Zambia Africa Eastern Africa Low Lower Middle 1410
Zimbabwe Africa Eastern Africa Middle Low 800
Source for Level of Income and GNI: World Bank (2012), available at http://data.worldbank.org/ 
GNI in yellow: UNdata (2012), available at http://data.un.org/
 * Most recent year available on World Bank website (2011)
 ** Most recent year available on World Bank website (2009)
 *** Most recent year available on World Bank website (2008)
14. Regional and Economic Grouping (continued)
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
   249 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Notes
Chapter 1 
1 A joint project of the United Nations Division for Public Economics and Public Administration (UNDPEPA) and 
the American Society for Public Administration (ASPA).
2 This was referred as e-government readiness index in past editions of the Survey (2003, 2004, 2005, 2008).
3 An important caveat about EGDI is that the absolute values of different years are not comparable given the 
methodology employed (see section on Survey Methodology). For instance, it is not statistically correct to 
compare the absolute values of EGDI 2014 and EGDI 2012 for any one region. However, the EGDI’s rate of 
growth does present useful information.
4 Roelofsen, Occo and Sheng, Paul (2010).
5 Hosman, Laura and Elizabeth Fife (2012). 
6 World Bank, African Development Bank and African Union, 2012.
7 Agency for the Development of Electronic Government and Information Society and Knowledge of Uruguay 
(AGESIC). Available from: (http://www.agesic.gub.uy/innovaportal/v/127/1/agesic/si_en_uruguay.html).
8 The productive structure refers to Latin America and the Caribbean economical idiosyncrasies such as the 
high transportation costs, the lower than average tax revenues, the excessive concentration of their exports 
based on its natural resources, the emergence of “middle class” and the substitution of local goods for 
imports. (OECD/ECLAC/Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) (2013), Latin American Economic Out-
look 2014: Logistics and Competitiveness for Development, OECD Publishing. Available from: (http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/leo-2014-5-en).
9 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2014.
10 TTBizLink platform. Available from: (https://www.ttbizlink.gov.tt/).
11 OECD, Newsroom article. Available from: (http://goo.gl/gheJ9j).
12 World Bank. World Development Indicators database, 2013.
13 Japan’s e-Government Initiatives. Available from: (http://www.e-gov.go.jp/doc/e-government.html).
14 United Nations “Human Development Report”, 2013.
15 GNI per capita, PPP (current international $), World Development Indicators database, World Bank.
16 E-government Strategy Baharain. Available from: (http://goo.gl/x6iF8c).
17 Bahrain International e-Government Forum 2013. Available from: (http://www.egovforum.bh/topics&agenda.
php).
18 The Official Portal of the 3rd GCC. Available from: (www.gccegov.com).
19 Government of the United Kingdom, Cabinet Office, 2012, Government Digital Strategy. Available from: 
(http://www.publications.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/digital/strategy/).
20 Government of Spain, Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism, Avanza 2 Plan. Available from: (http://www.
ontsi.red.es/ontsi/en/informacion-y-recursos/plan-avanza-2).
21 Government of Ireland, Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, Supporting Public Service Reform: 
eGovernment 2012-2015. Available from: (http://egovstrategy.gov.ie/).
22 The UN Member SIDS are: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Cape Verde, Comoros, 
Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kiribati, Maldives, 
Marshall Islands, Federal States of Micronesia, Mauritius, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, São Tomé 
and Príncipe, Singapore, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Seychelles, Solomon Is-
lands, Suriname, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. Source: UN office of High 
Representative for Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Develop-
ing States (UN-OHRLLS). Available from: (http://www.unohrlls.org/en/sids/44/).
23 UN Conference on Small Island Developing States, Samoa 2014. Available from: (http://sids2014.org).
24 DRR consists of four phases—Mitigation, Preparedness, Response and Recovery.
25 Asian and Pacific Training Centre for Information and Communication Technology for Development (APCICT), 
2010, ICT for Disaster Risk Reduction, ICTD Case Study 2. Available from: (http://www.preventionweb.net/file
s/14338_14338ICTDCaseStudy21.pdf).
26 Ibid.
27 Government of Trinidad and Tobago, Office of Disaster Preparedness and Management, Situation Report, 
2010, Vol. 1, Issue 2. Available from: (http://www.odpm.gov.tt/pdf/SITuation%20REPort%20Vol%201%20
Issue%202.pdf).
28 Prutsalis, Mark et al, (2010) / De Silva, Chamindra and Prustalis, Mark (2010).
29 United Nations Sustainable Development Platform, Small Island Developing States. Available from: (http://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?menu=203).
 250 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
30 The LLDCs are: in Africa: Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Ethiopia, Lesotho, 
Malawi, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, Swaziland, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe; in Asia: Afghanistan, Bhutan, Kazakh-
stan, Kyrgystan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Nepal, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan; in 
Europe: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Republic of Moldova, FYR Macedonia and in South America: Bolivia and Para-
guay. Available from: (http://unctad.org/).
31 The LDCs are: in Africa: Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Dem-
ocratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, 
Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, 
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Togo, Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia; in Asia: Afghanistan, 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, Kiribati, Lao, Myanmar, Nepal, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, 
Vanuatu, Yemen; in South America and the Caribbean: Haiti. Source: UN Office of the High Representative 
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States 
(UNOHRLLS). Available from: (http://www.unohrlls.org/en/ldc/25/).
32 United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Develop-
ing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS). Available from: (http://www.unohrlls.org/en/
ldc/25/).
33 UN-OHRLLS, Factsheet, Least Developed Countries. Available from: (http://www.unohrlls.org/docs/ohrlls/
ldcs/UN_LDC_Factsheet_130517.pdf).
34 The Committee for Development Policy, subsidiary body of the UN Economic and Social Council, uses the 
criteria of low national income, weak human assets (health, nutrition and education) and high economic vul-
nerability, for identifying LDCs. These factors combined lead to a lack of infrastructure and skills, such as ICT 
literacy and go a long way in explaining the challenges of the LDC’s with regard to e-government.
35 Al-Wazir, Ali & Zheng, Zhao (2012) / Al-Hashmi, Asma & Suresha (2013).
Chapter 2 
1 France. Secretariat général du gouvernement. Direction interministerielle des systèmes d’information et de 
communication. September 2012. Official circular entitled Usage du logiciel libre dans l’administration.
2 The connection with telecommunication infrastructure is drawn from a comparison of UN Survey data and the 
ICT development index.
3 Rwanda (2011). National ICT Policy and Action Plan III, 2011–2015.
4 PriceWaterhouseCoopers (2010). E-government strategy and implementation plan report: January 2011. Pre-
pared for the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology of the Government of Ethiopia. 
5 The online creativity component of WIPO’s global innovation index includes number of generic and country 
code top-level domains, wikipedia monthly edits and video uploads on YouTube. WIPO (2013). Global In-
novation Index: The Local Dynamics of Innovation. Available from: (http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/
freepublications/en/economics/gii/gii_2013.pdf).
Chapter 3 
1 The United Nations Public Administration Studies (UNPACS) is internal research undertaken by the United Na-
tions Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Division for Public Administration and Development Man-
agement, forthcoming at: www.unpan.org/unpacs. The constitutions of United Nations Member States were 
reviewed for key words, serving as indicators of citizen engagement and freedom of information provisions.
2 See the UN’s 3-level model of e-participation presented in this chapter and the 5-stage model of the Inter-
national Association of Public Participation, cited in People Matter, Civic Engagement in Public Governance, 
World Public Sector Report 2008, United Nations. The latter defines participation into five categories of re-
lationships: inform, consult, involve, collaborate and empower (see p.71). The effectiveness of each of these 
participation relationships hinges upon governance enablers (i.e. full political rights, civil liberties, freedom 
of expression etc.).
3 Most questions related to open government data also fall under e-information stage of e-participation. See 
related chapter for more detailed analysis on open government data and its role on e-participation.
4 These are Cuba, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mozambique and Zimbabwe.
5 The process of participatory budgeting initially started in Porte Alegre, Brazil in 1989. The practice consisted 
in series of neighbourhood, regional and citywide assemblies, where residents and elected budget delegates 
would identify spending priorities and vote on which priorities to implement. The form of participatory budg-
eting has changed over time and the practice is now spreading more online.
6 Thurlow, James (2012). “Climate Change and Development Policy”. World Institute for Development Econom-
ics Research. Available from: (http://wider.unu.edu/publications/newsletter/articles-2012/en_GB/11-2012-JT/).
7 It is noteworthy that the rank order of sectors differs from the order for information provision, as shown in 
Figure.3.3.
   251 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
8 Among these 20 countries, 6 are from the Americas, 5 from Europe, 5 from Asia, 3 from Africa and 1 from Oce-
ania. From an income perspective, 11 are high income countries, 5 upper middle income countries, 3 lower 
middle income countries and 1 low income country.
9 Of the 10 countries committed to all five of the decision-making features of e-participation: three are from 
Europe, three from Asia, three from the Americas and one from Oceania. Seven are high income and three 
upper middle income countries.
10 United Nations (2013a).
Chapter 4 
1 World Health Organization, Technical Brief, n.1, May 2008.
2 Australia Government Portal and United Kingdom Government portal respectively. Available from: (http://
australia.gov.au/services/service-task/contact/contact-my-local-council) and (https://www.gov.uk/).
3 The Swedish Business Link. Available from: (http://www.verksamt.se/portal/en_GB/web/international/home).
4 Denmark citizen portal. Available from: (https://www.borger.dk).
5 Official site for the New Zealand Government ICT Functional Leader, the Government Chief Information Of-
ficer. Available from: (http://ict.govt.nz/).
6 Singapore Government Cloud (G-Cloud). Available from: (http://goo.gl/EqsVYo).
7 Pardo, Theresa A., Nam, Taewoo., & Burke, G Brian. (2012).
Chapter 5 
1 Vulnerable groups include older persons, the illiterate, persons with disabilities, immigrants, people living in 
poverty, women and youth.
2 ITU Data, 2013.
3 Ibid.
4 Definition of smart phone: A cellular phone that is able to perform many of the functions of a computer, 
typically having a relatively large touchscreen and an operating system capable of running general-purpose 
computer applications.
5 Definition of feature phones: A cellular phone that contains a fixed set of functions beyond voice calling and 
text messaging, but is not as extensive as a smartphone.
6 Gartner (2013). Available from: (http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2544115).
7 Ibid.
8 ITU Data, 2013.
9 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) (2012).
10 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) (2009).
11 Government of Denmark, 2013. eGovernment strategy 2011–2015. Available from: (http://www.digst.dk/Ser-
vicemenu/English/Policy-and-Strategy/eGOV-strategy).
12 United Kingdom Cabinet Office, 2013. Available from: (http://publications.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/digital/).
13 Greater Amman Municipality, Jordan, 2013. Available from: (http://www.ammancity.gov.jo/en/gam/index.asp).
14 South Africa Government, 2013. Available from: (http://www.home-affairs.gov.za/index.php/identity-docu-
ments2).
15 Singapore Police Force, 2013. Available from: (http://www.spf.gov.sg/sms70999/).
16 Meeker, Mary., Wu, Liang (2013). “Internet Trends D11 Conference”. Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers (KPCB), 
p41 , (5/29/2013).
17 Communications Commission of Kenya (CCK), 2013.
18 Deloitte (2013).
19 IDA, Singapore, 2013. Available from: (http://www.egov.gov.sg/egov-programmes/programmes-by-citizens/
citizen-connect).
20 World Bank (2009). Public-private partnerships in e-government: Knowledge map.
21 Philippines Government Portal. Available from: (http://ppp.gov.ph).
22 Tode, Chantal (2013). “Federal government boosts digital strategy with mobile apps, security programs” Mo-
bile Marketer News, 2013. Available from: (http://www.mobilemarketer.com/cms/news/content/15449.html)
23 Fu, Yaqin and Ke Xiao, (2012).
24 Reddick, Christopher G. and Michael Turner (2012).
25 Information and Communication Technology Agency of Sri Lanka, 2013. Available from: (http://goo.gl/5p4Ln6)
26 United Nations Public Service Award, 2012.
 252 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
27 European Union, 2013.
28 There were 5 stages in the first model (2003–2008) and it was changed to a 4-stage model starting from the 
2010 Survey.
29 Channel optimization is assessed through the accumulated score of Survey questions with an influence of 
anyone channel (as stated in earlier section) in accordance with the 2014 Survey.
30 United Nations E-Government Survey 2012.
31 European Commission (2004). 
32 Ibid.
33 Big data is a collection of data sets that is large and complex that it becomes difficult to process using normal 
database management tools or traditional data processing applications.
34 “Mohammed renames Dubai e-Government as m-Government”. The Gulf Today June 21 2013. Available from: 
(http://www.gulftoday.ae/portal/c3950ab6-1201-44b5-a161-75d01130b376.aspx).
35 OECD/International Telecommunication Union (2011).
36 Figure for 2016 is estimated using the least square fitting methodology.
37 Kevin Werbach (2012), Wharton School of Business. Gamification is described as “the use of game elements 
and game design techniques in non-game contexts”.
38 Opower website. Available from: (http://opower.com).
39 m.Paani initiative. Available from: (http://mpaani.com/).
40 IDA Singapore, 2013. Available from: (http://www.egov.gov.sg/egov-programmes/programmes-by-citizens/
oneinbox).
41 Department of Human Services, Australia, 2013. Available from: (http://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/
services/centrelink/mobile-service-centres).
Chapter 6 
1 United Nations (2013b).
2 Ibid.
3 G20 economies including the following 19 countries : Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Ger-
many, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, 
the United Kingdom, the United States of America plus the European Union. Available from: (http://www.g20.
org/docs/about/about_G20.html).
4 World Internet Project International report. 4th Edition. USC Annenberg School Center for the Digital Future. 
2012. Available from: (http://www.worldinternetproject.net/_files/_Published/_oldis/770_2012wip_report4th_
ed.pdf).
5 Digital Differences. Pew Internet & American Life Project, Pew research Center. 13 April 2012. Available from: 
(http://goo.gl/r2GeIQ.).
6 UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Available from: (http://www.un.org/disabilities/con-
vention/conventionfull.shtml).
7 A person is functionally literate who can engage in all those activities in which literacy is required for effective 
functioning of his group and community and also for enabling him to continue to use reading, writing and 
calculation for his own and the community’s development.’ (UNESCO, EFA Global Monitoring Report 2006) 
Available from: (http://goo.gl/1pvfTH).
8 Internet World Statistics. Available from: (http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm#asia).
9 Census of India. 2011. Available from: (http://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-results/indiaatglance.html).
Chapter 7 
1 E-government uptake, defined as “the percentage of individuals (aged 16–74) who have used the Internet to 
interact with public authorities” (e.g. as per OECD’s definition). It is important to note that the usage rate of 
countries in EU and beyond does not necessarily reflect the actual level of usage, as seen in the case of the 
UK, of which e-government uptake is lower than expected. This is due to availability of services such as citizen 
self-service in some countries like Belgium, Denmark and Ireland. Services like automatic payment of child al-
lowance (triggered by birth registration or automatic start) and payment of pension (triggered by age, or many 
other cross-silo services) reduces frequency of citizens’ interactions with public authorities both via offline and 
online. It thereby reduces citizens’ (active) use of such public services, with countries showing lower usage rate 
than the actual rate of usage. At the most fundamental level sometimes, lack of and/or a reduction in “use” 
can result in increased benefits to the stakeholders, depending on the types of service, etc.
2 European Commission (2013).
3 European Commission/Capgemini Group (2013).
   253 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
4 Statistics Norway CT (2013), Usage in households, 2013, 2nd quarter. Available from: (http://www.ssb.no/en/
ikthus/).
5 OECD (2013a).
6 Turkish statistical institute (2013), News Release: ICT usage survey on households and individuals, 22 August 
2013. Available from: (http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=13569).
7 OECD (2013b).
8 Nasr, J. (2013), Implementing electronic tax filing and payments in Malaysia.
9 New York Times (2013), “Most of U.S. Is Wired, but Millions Aren’t Plugged In”, August 18, 2013.
10 Nielsen Norman-Group (2013), Seniors as web users. Available from: (http://www.nngroup.com/articles/usa-
bility-for-senior-citizens/).
11 United Kingdom Government Digital Services: Design Principles. Available from: (https://www.gov.uk/design-
principles).
12 Copenhagen city: E-government change agent, in: Asia Pacific futuregov, 10 January 2013.
13 The subdivisions are based on one or more user characteristics. The segments are then “targeted” in the most 
suitable way over the most appropriate channels.
14 It is also important to know what types of devices are being used by their citizens, see: ITU and OECD (2011), 
M-government: Mobile technologies for responsive governments and connected societies.
15 United States General Services Administration (2013), Mobile ubiquity. Available from (http://www.gsa.gov/
portal/content/289089).
16 Global marketing: Georgetown university (2011), Chilean Business + Social Media = An economic purpose.
17 Inter-American dialogue (2013), Can Technology Help Quell Citizens’ Anger at Their Governments?
18 Digital Communities (2009), San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom Announces 311 Twitter Service, June 4, 2009.
19 Press release, May 28, 2013, The European Commission eGovernment Benchmark: Further Uptake Required 
To Meet Growing Citizens’ Expectations For Public Services.
20 Broadband Commission working group on education (2013), Advancing the education for all agenda—A 
report by the Broadband Commission.
21 Pakistan gender news (2013), SMS-based literacy programme: Education may be just a text message away. 
Available from: (http://goo.gl/eq1P1t).
22 OECD (2012).
23 Federal communications commission (2010), Connecting America: the national broadband plan.
24 Sci, Dev (2012), “African e-health ‘moving in direction”, Net 02/12/11.
25 Ministry of Health, Uganda (2013), mTrac is Changing the Face of Health Operations in Uganda. Available 
from: (http://www.unicef.org/uganda/mTrac_article(1).pdf).
26 UNICEF (2012).
27 Hearing before the Subcommittee on oversight, investigation and management of the Committee on Home-
land Security, House of Representatives (2012), “America is under cyber-attack: why urgent action is needed“, 
One hundred twelfth congress second session, April 24, 2012. Available from: (http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
pkg/CHRG-112hhrg77380/html/CHRG-112hhrg77380.htm).
28 R. Craig Lefebvre and Bornkessel, A.S. (2013).
29 Lauren Dawes, Revital Marom (2013).
30 GSMA (2012), Shaping the Future—Realizing the potential of informal learning through mobile, 2012.
31 Copenhagen city: E-government change agent, in: Future Gov (10 January, 2013).
32 European Digital Competitiveness Report 2010/secondary ref.
33 National Telecommunications and Information Administration and Economics and Statistics Administration in 
the Department of Commerce (2013), Exploring the digital nation—America’s emerging online experience.
34 Ehrbeck, Tilman. Lochan. Rajiv. Sinha, Supriyo. Zainulbhai, Adil (2010).
35 Using Technology to Track How Citizens Experience Water Service Delivery in India. Available from: (http://
goo.gl/3qP8jv).
36 Around the world, a number of countries provide online user feedback opportunities to enhance the govern-
ments’ ability to receive and take on board feedback from citizens, so as to better tailor their services to meet 
the actual needs and priorities of users. For example, a few countries’ national portals provide web statistics 
on citizen usage (in 47 countries), features on seeking comments from citizens to improve its online services (in 
68 countries) and section for “hot topics” or mostly used features (in 80 countries) and a much smaller number 
of countries (20 countries) provide outcome on feedback received from citizens concerning the improvement 
of its online services.
37 O’Reilly (2009).
 254 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Chapter 8 
1 Open Government Data Working Group, 8 Open Government Data Principles, 2008, Sebastopol, USA.
2 National statistics portals are not considered as dedicated data portals during the assessment. Instead, re-
searchers checked the existence of a data catalogue, usually called open government data portal, such as 
data.gov or data.gov.uk.
3 Refer to OpenSpending.org.
4 International Budget Partnership (2012). Open Budget Survey 2012. Available from (http://internationalbudg-
et.org/what-we-do/open-budget-Survey/).
5 United Nations Public Administration Country Studies (UNPACS) (2014). “Research and Analysis on Regulatory 
Frameworks”, DPADM.
6 New Zealand (2011). “New Zealand Data and information Management Principles”. Government ICT Strategy 
and Action Plan to 2017. 
7 Tauberer, Joshua (2012).
8 Republic of Korea (2013). Act on Provision and Active Use of Public Data. Available from: (http://www.law.
go.kr/lsEfInfoP.do?lsiSeq=142444#0000).
9 White House, the (2013). Executive Order—Making Open and Machines Readable the New Default for Gov-
ernment Information. Office of the Press Secretary (9 May 2013). Available from: (http://goo.gl/U7PxAb).
10 Open Data in Russia (2013). Implementing Russian Open Data Conception: Public and Local Government Bod-
ies Progress Report 2013. Available from: (http://goo.gl/emIdeC).
11 Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported (CC by 3.0). Available from: (http://creativecommons.org/licens-
es/by/3.0/).
12 Australia Official Data Portal.Available from: (http://data-au.govspace.gov.au/about).
13 Austria Open Data Portal. Available from: (http://data.gv.at/kontakt).
14 Isreal Government Portal. Available from: (http://www.gov.il/FirstGov/BottomNavEng/abouteng/about-
goveng).
15 Colombia Data Portal. Available from: (http://datosabiertoscolombia.cloudapp.net/frm/Acerca/frmAcercaDe.
aspx).
16 Ghana Open Data Initiative.Available from: (http://data.gov.gh/about-us).
17 Singapore Data Portal. Available from: (http://data.gov.sg).
18 Spain Open Data Portal. Available from: (http://datos.gob.es).
19 France Official Data Portal. Available from: (http://www.data.gouv.fr/A-propos).
20 Woodie, Alex (2013).
21 Chong, Rachelle (2013).
22 The Gazette of India (2012). New Delhi, India (17-23 March 2012). Available from: http://www.dst.gov.in/nsdi_
gazette.pdf.
23 White House (2013). Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Department and Agencies: Open Data Policy—
Managing Information as an Asset. Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget (9 
May 2013). 
24 All Africa (2013). Liberia: Finance, UNDP Launch (27 September 2013). Available from: http://allafrica.com/
stories/201309271088.html.
25 Cambodia Open Development. Available from: (http://www.opendevelopmentcambodia.net/).
26 Sarpam. Southern African Regional Programme on Access to Medicines and Diagnostics. Available from: 
(http://www.sarpam.net/).
27 Kenya Open Data Portal. Available from (http://opendata.go.ke).
28 Banisar, David (2011). 
29 Internews in Kenya. Available from: (http://www.internewskenya.org/dataportal/content?page=about).
30 Kronrnburg, Tom (2011). 
31 Jalote, Sumedha (2013). 
32 Deloitte (2012).
33 Capgemini Consulting. The Open Data Economy: Unlocking Economic Value by Opening Government and 
Public Data. Available from: (http://www.capgemini-consulting.com/the-open-data-economy-0).
34 Koski, Heli (2011). 
35 Howard, Alexander B. (2011).
   255 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
Annex
1 ITU (2012b). 
2 Ibid.
3 The International Telecommunication Union is the primary source of data for computation of TII.
4 United Nations (2013c).
5 Expected years of education is also known as “School life expectancy”. Available from: (http://www.uis.un-
esco.org/Library/Documents/eiguide09-en.pdf).
6 Mean years of schooling (MYS) methodology. Available from: (http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Pages/
mean-years-of-schooling.aspx).
7 Barro Lee methodology. Available from: (http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Pages/mean-years-of-school-
ing.aspx and http://www.barrolee.com/).
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
   257 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
References
Adamson, Claire (2013). “Building lasting bridges: Good and bad eGovernment strategies in Af-
rica.” eLearning Africa News, April 12, 2013. Available from: (http://goo.gl/nESnT8).
Al-Hashmi, Asma & Suresha, (2013). “Evaluating the Awareness of EGovernment in the Republic 
of Yemen”. International Journal of Computer Applications Vo. 67 No. 16, Available from: 
(http://research.ijcaonline.org/volume67/number16/pxc3887185.pdf).
Al-Wazir, Ali & Zheng, Zhao, (2012). “EGovernment Development in Yemen: Assessments and 
Solutions”. Journal of Emerging Trends in Computing and Information Sciences Vol.3 No.4 
Available from: (http://cisjournal.org/journalofcomputing/archive/vol3no4/vol3no4_7.pdf).
Banisar, David (2011). “The Right to Information and Privacy: Balancing Rights and Managing Con-
flicts”. World Bank Institute Governance Working Paper (10 March, 2011).
Biztech Africa (2012) “Bandwidth a constraint to e-learning”. BiztechAfrica—May 27, 2012. Avail-
able from: (http://goo.gl/gBIry3).
Bourgon, Jocelyne (2001). “Technology broadband and education: Advancing education for all 
agenda.”A New Synthesis of Public Administration, Broadband Commission Working Group 
on Education (2013). Broadband Commission. 
Capgemini (2013). “The European Commission eGovernment Benchmark: Further Uptake Re-
quired To Meet Growing Citizens” Expectations For Public Services,” May 28, 2013, Press 
release.
Centro Latinoamericano y Caribeño de Demografía (CELADE) (2013). “DEPUALC: Distribución Es-
pacial De La Población Y Urbanización En América Latina Y El Caribe.” División de población 
CELADE de la Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe. Available from: (http://
www.eclac.cl/celade/depualc/).
CGAP and DFID (2009). “Banking the Poor via G2P Payments.” Focus Note, December 2009.
Chong, Rachelle (2013). “SF Mayor Signs Landmark Open Data Policy and Procedures Legisla-
tion”. Government Technology: Solution for State and Local Government (1 May 2013).
Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL) (2013). “Estrategias de TLC ante el 
desafío del cambio estructural en América Latina y el Caribe.” CEPAL—Colección Documen-
tos de proyectos; Naciones Unidas; marzo 2013.
De Silva, Chamindra and Prustalis, Mark, The Sahana (2010). “Free and Open Source Disaster 
Management System in Haiti in Asian and Pacific Training”.Centre for Information and Com-
munication Technology for Development (APCICT), ICT for Disaster Risk Reduction, ICTD 
Case Study 2. Available from: (http://unapcict.org/ecohub/ict-for-disaster-riskreduction-1).
Deloitte (2012). “Open Data: Driving Grown, Ingenuity and Innovation”. Deloitte Analytics (June 
2012). 
- (2013). “Enterprise Social Networks: Useful Tool, Not a Panacea”. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu 
Limited.
Dunta Times (2013), “Report says FATÍH Project effective, but content needs revision.” Dunta 
Times Available from: (http://goo.gl/BX5rgy)
Ehrbeck, Tilman. Lochan. Rajiv. Sinha, Supriyo. Zainulbhai, Adil (2010). “Inclusive growth and fi-
nancial security—the benefits of e-payments to Indian society”. McKinsey & Company, Inc. 
October 2010.
eMarketer (2013). “Worldwide Social Network Users: 2013 Forecast and Comparative Estimates.” 
News 2013.
Eszter Hargittai (2002). “Second-Level Digital Divide: Differences in People’s Online Skills.” First 
Monday 7, n. 4 (April 2002). Available from: (http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_4/hargittai/
index.html).
 258 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
European Commission (2004). “Multi-channel delivery of eGovernment services”. European 
Commission and Interchange of Data between Administrations (IDA). Available from: (http://
ec.europa.eu/idabc/servlets/Doc282e.pdf?id=16867).
- (2006). “Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: i2010 eGov-
ernment Action Plan: Accelerating eGovernment in Europe for the Benefit of All”. 
- (2010). “Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: i2010 eGov-
ernment Action Plan 2011–2015: Harnessing ICT to promote smart, sustainable & innovative 
Government.” Available from: (http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:
2010:0743:FIN:EN:PDF).
- (2011). “Digital Agenda For Europe and European eGovernment Action Plan 2011–2014.” 
Available from: (http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/digital-agenda-europe).
- (2012a). “eHealth Action Plan 2012–2020: Frequently Asked Questions, European Commis-
sion—MEMO/12/959 07/12/2012”.
- (2012b), Public Services Online. “‘Digital by Default or by Detour?’ Assessing User Centric 
eGovernment performance in Europe—eGovernment Benchmark 2012”.
- (2013) “Digital Agenda Scoreboard 2013”, Staff Working Document, Brussels.
European Commission/Capgemini Group (2013). “Public Services Online—‘Digital by Default or 
by Detour?’, Assessing User Centric eGovernment performance in Europe—eGovernment 
Benchmark 2012.” Press Release Database, eGovernment improving but citizens ask for 
more, European Commission- IP/13/466 28/05/2013.
European Commission Directorate General (2013). “Communications Networks, Content and 
Technology (2013), Public services: eGovernment Action Plan.” Available from: (http://
ec.europa.eu/dgs/connect/en/content/public-services-egovernment-action-plan).
EUROSTAT (2013). “Individuals using Internet for interaction with public authorities Individuals us-
ing Internet for interaction with public authorities.” Last update: 18-12-2013. Available from: 
(http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?wai=true&dataset=isoc_pibi_igov).
Fox, S. and Duggan, M. (2012). “Mobile Health 2012, Half of smartphone owners use their devices 
to get health information.” Pew Internet Project Pew Research, November 8, 2012.
Fu, Yaqin and Ke Xiao, (2012). “Promoting sustainable e-government with multichannel service 
delivery: A case study.” Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), 2012 IEEE 3rd 
International Conference. Available from: (http://goo.gl/7ZdDG9).
GSMA (2012), “Shaping the Future—Realizing the potential of informal learning through mobile” 
GSM Association,2012.
Haiyan Qian, (2012). “Commonwealth Finance Ministers Report 2012”. Commonwealth & Global 
Affairs, Economic Affairs: Trade, Economic Development.
Hesbon O. Nyagowa, Dennis N. Ocholla and Stephen M. Mutula (2012). “Evaluation of Success of 
NEPAD’s Pilot e-Schools in Kenya: An overview.” Information Studies Programme, University 
of Kwa-Zulu Natal South Africa. Available from: (http://goo.gl/mLiSsZ).
Hosman, Laura and Elizabeth Fife (2012). “The Use of Mobile Phones for Development in Af-
rica: Top-Down-Meets-Bottom-Up Partnering.” The Journal of Community Informatics 8, n. 
3 (2012).
Howard, Alexander B. (2011). “Congress Weighs Deep Cuts to Funding for Federal Open Govern-
ment Data Platforms”. Govfresh (1 April 2011). 
ICT works (2012). “We need affordable broadband for mLearning.” May 04 2012 by Guest Writer. 
Available from: (http://goo.gl/9xeAlJ).
Informatics (2013). “The Promise of Mobile: Connecting to Underserved Populations.” July 29, 
2013.
IRIN (2013). “Analysis: Sending the right message on mHealth”, 8 May 2013.
   259 
A
nnexes
UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) (2011), “The Role of ICT in Advancing Growth in 
Least Developed Countries—Trends, Challenges and Opportunities 2011”.
- (2012a). “Measuring the Information Society. ICT development index 2011”. Available from: 
(http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/idi/).
- (2012b). “Impact of Broadband in the Economy”. Broadband Series. Telecommunication De-
velopment Sector (April 2012).
Jalote, Sumedha (2013). “Moldova Builds E-Government: Open Data”. Asia Pacific FutureGov (26 
July 2013). Available from: (http://goo.gl/Mf7EoA).
Koski, Heli (2011). “Does Marginal Cost Pricing of Public Sector Information Spur Firm Growth”. 
EILA, Elinkeinoelaman Tutkimuslaitos, the Research Institute of the Finnish Economy. Kes-
kusteluaiheita Discussion Papers (28 September 2011). no. 1260. Available from: (http://www.
etla.fi/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/dp1260.pdf).
Kronrnburg, Tom (2011). “Data Journalism Fuelling PSI Re-use”. European Public Sector Informa-
tion Platform, Topic Report No. 2011/2 (October 2011). Available from: (http://epsiplatform.
eu/sites/default/files/Topic%20Report%20Data%20Journalism.pdf).
Lauren Dawes, Revital Marom (2013), “Mobile Services for Youth Employment”, GSM Association, 
Alcatel-Lucent.
Millard, J (2013) “ICT-enabled public sector innovation: trends and prospects”. Proceedings of 
the 7th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance (ICE-
GOV2012), Seoul, Republic of Korea, 22 – 25 October 2013, the ACM Press.
Montagnier, P. and A. Wirthmann (2011), “Digital Divide:From Computer Access to Online Ac-
tivities— A Micro Data Analysis”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 189, OECD. Available 
from: (http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kg0lk60rr30-en).
Morgan Stanley (2011). “Tablet Demand and Disruption”. Morgan Stanley Research, February 
2011.
New York Times (2013). “Most of U.S. Is Wired, but Millions Aren’t Plugged In,” August 18, 2013.
O’Reilly, Tim (2009). “Gov 2.0: It is all about platform.” September 4, 2009, Techcrunch. Available 
from: (http://techcrunch.com/2009/09/04/gov-20-its-all-about-the-platform/).
OECD (2012), OECD Internet Economy Outlook 2012—Highlights.
- (2013a). “OECD Public Governance Reviews Colombia: Implementing Good Governance”. 
Paris.
- (2013b). “e-Government Studies: Egypt 2012”. Paris.
- (2013c). “Government at a Glance 2013—Preliminary Version.”
OECD/International Telecommunication Union (2011), “M-Government: Mobile Technologies 
for Responsive Governments and Connected Societies”, OECD Publishing. Available from: 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264118706-en).
OECD Newsroom (2012). “New SME policies needed to boost Latin America’s growth, say OECD 
and ECLAC. OECD Development Center Newsroom”. November 16 2012. Available from: 
(http://goo.gl/zSjdT0).
Ozburn, M. (2011). “Reaping the Trust Dividend: Federal Agencies Can Move Services Online now 
with an Identity Button (Like Facebook)—and Save Billions.”Booz,Allen,Hamilton Ink 2011 
Available from: (http://www.boozallen.com/media/file/Trust-Dividend-Booklet.pdf).
Pardo, Theresa A., Nam, Taewoo., & Burke, G Brian. (2012).“E-Government Interoperability: In-
teraction of Policy, Management, and Technology Dimensions”. Social Science Computer 
Review, February 2012 30: 7-23, first published on January 12, 2011.
Porrua, Miguel A (2013). “E-Government in Latin America: A Review of the Success in Colombia, 
Uruguay and Panama”, Organization for American States (2013), in the Global Information 
Technology Report 2013. World Economic Forum. 
 260 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) (2009). “Champion for Digital Inclusion: The Economic Case for 
Digital Inclusion”. 2009 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. Available from: (http://www.parliamen-
tandinternet.org.uk/uploads/Final_report.pdf).
Prutsalis, Mark et al, (2010). “The Sahana Software Foundation Response to the 2010 Haiti Earth-
quake: A New Standard for Free and Open Source Disaster Management Systems”. Pro-
ceedings of the 7 International ISCRAM Conference, Seattle, USA Available from: (http://wiki.
sahanafoundation.org/lib/exe/fetch.php/iscram_2010_sahana_haiti.pdf).
R. Craig Lefebvre and Bornkessel, A.S. (2013). “Social Media as a Tool in Medicine - Digital Social 
Networks and Health”.
Reddick, Christopher G. and Michael Turner (2012). “Channel choice and public service delivery 
in Canada: Comparing e-government to traditional service delivery” Government Informa-
tion Quarterly, Volume 29, Issue 1, January 2012, Pages 1–11. Available from: (http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X11001080).
Regional School of Public Administration (ReSPA) (2013). “ReSPA Regional Comparative eGov-
ernment Study and East Management.” ReSPAAvailable from: (http://www.respaweb.eu/11/ 
library#respa-publications-and-research-18).
Roelofsen, Occo and Sheng, Paul (2010). “Oil and gas: New sources of growth”. Africa’s path to 
growth: Sector by sector. McKinsey and Company Publications, June 2010.Available from: 
(http://goo.gl/1IhT3y).
Shkabatur, Jennifer (2012). “Towards Open Government for Enhanced Social Accountability.” A 
collaboration of Open Development Technology Alliance, GAC in Projects and Social Devel-
opment. World Bank 2012. 
Smith, Craig Warren (2013). “Nine Digital Divide Truths.” Digital Divide Institute. Available from: 
(http://www.digitaldivide.org/digital-divide-topics/nine-digital-divide-truths.html).
Stanford Social Innovation (2013). “Scale Can Happen: The MOTECH Experience.” February 20, 
2013.
Tauberer, Joshua (2012). “Open Government Data Definition: The 8 Principles of Open Govern-
ment Data”. Open Government Data (2012). 
The Centre for International Governance Innovation and the Korea Development Institute (2012). 
“Post-2015 Development Agenda: Goals, Targets And Indicators—Special Report.” The Cen-
tre for International Governance Innovation and the Korea Development Institute 2012. Avail-
able from: (https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/MDG_Post_2015v3.pdf).
Turkish statistical institute (2013). “News Release: ICT usage Survey on households and indi-
viduals.” 22 August 2013. Available from: (http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.
do?id=13569).
Ubaldi, Barbara (2011). “E-Government for the Economic Crisis.” European Journal of ePractice 
11.
United Nations (2013a). “Global Thematic Consultation on Governance and the Post-2015 Devel-
opment Framework”, p. 24. Available from: (http://www.beyond2015.org/sites/default/files/
Governance.pdf).
- (2013b). “A new global partnership: The Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons 
on the Post-2015 Development Agenda”. Available from: (http://www.post2015hlp.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/UN-Report.pdf).
- (2013c) “A life of dignity for all: accelerating progress towards the Millennium Development 
Goals and advancing the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015”. Report of the 
Secretary-General. 26 July 2013. A/68/202. Page 13. Para 84.
- (2013d). “Committee for Development Policy, Report of the 15th Session E/2013/33.” Eco-
nomic and Social Council Official Records. Available from: (http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/
doc/UNDOC/GEN/N13/290/69/PDF/N1329069.pdf?OpenElement).
   261 
A
nnexes
United Nations, 4th United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries (2011). “Pro-
gramme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020.” Available 
from: (http://www.un.org/wcm/webdav/site/ldc/shared/documents/IPoA.pdf).
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (2012), “Project Mwana: Using mobile technology to 
improve early infant diagnosis of HIV”, Zambia.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) and ASPA (2001). “Bench-
marking E-government: A Global Perspective”. UNDESA/ASPA.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) (2008) . “People Matter, 
Civic Engagement in Public Governance”, World Public Sector Report 2008, United Nations.
- (2012) “United Nations E-Government Survey 2012.” UNDESA 2012.
United Nations Development Group (UNDG) (2010a).”Thematic paper on MDG 3: Promote gen-
der equality and empower women,” March 2010. Available from: (http://www.oecd.org/so-
cial/gender-development/45341361.pdf).
- (2010b). “Thematic paper on MDG 7: Environment sustainability,” 2010. Available from: 
(http://www.undg.org/docs/11421/MDG7_1954-UNDGMDG7-LR.pdf).
- (2013). “The global conversation begins: Emerging views for a new development agenda.” 
2013. Available from: (http://goo.gl/SMNVFy).
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN ESCAP) (2010). E/
ESCAP/CICT(2)/L.2.
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) 
(2012). “Estrategias de TLC ante el desafío del cambio estructural en América Latina y el Car-
ibe; Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL).” Colección Documentos 
de proyectos; Naciones Unidas; Marzo 2013.
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (2013). “Citizen Engagement 
and the Post-2015 Development Agenda”. Report of the Expert Group Meeting. ST/ESA/
PAD/SER.E/191, E/ESCWA/ECRI/2013/WG.1/Report, p. 1.
United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) Resolutions: E/RES/2005/3; E/
RES/2006/47; E/RES/2007/38; E/RES/2008/32; E/RES/2009/18; E/RES/2011/2; E/RES/2011/22; 
E/RES/2012/28; E/RES/2013/2.
United Nations, General Assembly (1966). “International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights”. 
16 December 1966, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 999, p. 171. Available from: (http://
www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3ae6b3aa0.html).
- (2000). “United Nations Millennium Declaration”. 8 September 2000, United Nations, 55/2. 
Available from: (http://www.un.org/millennium/declaration/ares552e.htm).
- (2010). A/RES/65/2. Outcome Document of the High-Level Review Meeting on the Imple-
mentation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of 
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States. Available from: 
(http://goo.gl/inlHYF).
- (2012). “The Future We Want”. A/RES/66/288. Available from: (http://www.un.org/ga/search/
view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/66/288&Lang=E).
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948). Available from: (http://www.un.org/en/docu-
ments/udhr/).
WIPO (2013). “Global Innovation Index: The Local Dynamics of Innovation.” Johnson Cornell 
University, INSEAD,WIPO 2013. Available from: (http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/
freepublications/en/economics/gii/gii_2013.pdf).
Woodie, Alex (2013). “The Chief Data Officer’s Time Has Come”. Datanami (2 September 2013).
World Bank (2012). “Governments Can Save Up to 75% with Electronic Payment Program.” August 
2, 2012. Washington, D.C.
- (2012). “Information and Communication for Development: Extending Reach and Increasing 
Impact.” Washington, D.C.
 262 
A
nn
ex
es
ANNEx UNITED NATIONS E-GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014
World Bank, African Development Bank and African Union (2012). “The Transformational Use of 
Information and Communication Technologies in Africa”. Information and Communication 
Technologies, World Bank Group Available from: (http://go.worldbank.org/CXS4GFJDE0).
World Health Organization (2011). “New horizons for health through mobile technologies.” Global 
Observatory for eHealth series 3. Geneva. 
World Internet Project (2012). “International Report Fourth Edition”. USC Annenberg School 
Center for the Digital Future. 2012. Available from: (http://goo.gl/9bgaUr).
Map 9.1 Regional groupings
Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
Central America
Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama 
Northern America
Canada
United States of America
South America
Argentina
Bolivia (Plurinational State of )
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of )
Eastern Africa
Burundi
Comoros
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Kenya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Rwanda
Seychelles
Somalia
South Sudan
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Middle Africa
Angola
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
São Tomé and Príncipe
Northern Africa
Algeria
Egypt
Libya
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
Southern Africa
Botswana
Lesotho
Namibia
South Africa
Swaziland
Western Africa
Benin
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Côte d’Ivoire
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo
Central Asia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Eastern Asia
China
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Japan
Mongolia
Republic of Korea
Southern Asia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Iran (Islamic Republic of )
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
South-Eastern Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
Indonesia
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Viet Nam
Western Asia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Cyprus
Georgia
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syrian Arab Republic
Turkey
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Australia and New Zealand
Australia
New Zealand
Melanesia
Fiji
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Micronesia
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia (Federated States of )
Nauru
Palau
Polynesia
Samoa
Tonga
Tuvalu
Eastern Europe
Belarus
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Republic of Moldova
Romania
Russian Federation
Slovakia
Ukraine
Northern Europe
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
Iceland
Ireland
Latvia
Lithuania
Norway
Sweden
United Kingdom of Great Britain 
 and Northern Ireland
Southern Europe
Albania
Andorra
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Greece
Italy
Malta
Montenegro
Portugal
San Marino
Serbia
Slovenia
Spain
TFYRO Macedonia
Western Europe
Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Monaco
Netherlands
Switzerland 
AfricaAmericas Asia OceaniaEurope
Disclaimer: The designations nations 
employed and the presentation of 
material on this map do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the Secretariat of the United 
Nations concerning the legal status of 
any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation 
of its frontiers or boundaries.
ISBN 978-92-1-123198-4
13
-4
74
18
The United Nations E-Government Survey pres-ents a systematic assessment of the use and potential of information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) to transform the public sector by 
enhancing its efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, 
accountability, as well as access to public services and 
citizen participation. By studying broad patterns of e-
government around the world, the Survey assesses the 
e-government development status of the 193 United 
Nations Member States. It serves as a tool for decision-
makers to identify their areas of strength and challeng-
es in e-government to inform policies and strategies.
The 2014 Survey entitled “E-Government for the 
Future We Want” examines the global trends and 
emerging issues in e-government development. It 
also highlights the global progress in online service 
delivery and focuses on how to empower citizens 
through e-participation. In addition, it makes a case 
for the need of collaborative governance at all levels 
to promote sustainable development and underlines 
the importance of reaching out to citizens through mo-
bile, social media and inclusive multichannel service 
strategies. The Survey also dwells on the challenge of 
the digital divide; posits that usage is central to deliv-
ering development impacts and suggests that open 
government data is a new development resource. 
The Report argues that Governments across the 
globe need to undertake a process of transformative 
change for the future we want. This, in turn, requires 
a transformation of government’s role, functions, in-
stitutional frameworks and processes supported by 
the adoption of innovation and ICTs. E-government 
can thus contribute to a holistic transformation of the 
public sector in support of the post-2015 develop-
ment agenda. 
The United Nations E-Government Survey is produced 
by the United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs. The Department, through its Division 
for Public Administration and Development Manage-
ment, has published this global report on e-govern-
ment since 2003 and is regularly called upon to advise 
national administrations in all regions of the world on 
how to expand the use of ICTs in government to ad-
vance the internationally agreed development goals.
UNITED NATIONS
E-GOVERNMENT 
SURVEY 2014
E-GOVERNMENT FOR THE FUTURE WE WANT

