     
 
Information & Communication Technology for Development 
tism.msu.edu/ict4d 
 
 
An Analysis of e-Learning 
Impacts & Best Practices in 
Developing Countries 
 
With Reference to Secondary School Education in Tanzania 
 
 
 
 
 
Jennifer Olson urt deMaagd1, 
Eric Tarkleson3, Julie Sinclair2, Suengyun Yook1 and 
Rhonda Egidio2 
1, Joseph Codde2, K
October 2011
 
 
1The College of Communication Arts and Sciences, 
ng 
2The College of Education, 3The College of Engineering 
The ICT4D Program, 209 Communication Arts & Sciences Buildi
© 2011 Michigan State University. East Lansing, MI 48824 USA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Analysis of e-Learning Impacts & Best Practices  
in Developing Countries 
With Reference to Secondary School Education in Tanzania 
 
 
 
 
Jennifer Olson, Joseph Codde, Kurt deMaagd, 
Eric Tarkelson, Julie Sinclair, Suengyun Yook and Rhonda Egidio 
Michigan State University 
 
 
 
October 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ICT4D Program 
209 Communication Arts & Sciences Building 
Michigan State University. East Lansing, MI 48824 USA 
http://tism.msu.edu/ict4d 
+1 517.355.8372 
 
© 2011 Michigan State University Board of Trustees 
 
 
 
 
The Information & Communications Technology for Development (ICT4D) Program at Michigan 
State University (MSU) conducts research, teaching and outreach related to the role of ICTs in 
fostering economic, social and environmental change. Since 2008, it has been partnering with the 
University of Dodoma and the University of Dar es Salaam to build a sustainable broadband network 
and solar powered computer systems in schools in Tanzania. It is also conducting research and 
outreach programs in India, Malawi and other African countries, and in underserved communities in 
rural and urban Michigan. The ICT4D program offers undergraduate and graduate level courses, an 
undergraduate specialization, a study abroad program in Tanzania, and research and outreach 
opportunities in engineering and telecommunications. http://tism.msu.edu/ict4d 
 
The ICT4D program gratefully acknowledges the support of the Tanzania Education Trust/ 
MasterCard Foundation, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, IDRC, the National Science 
Foundation, the Dow Chemical Company, the Lenovo Corporation and MSU.  
 
The College of Education at MSU offers several graduate programs focused on the use of technology 
in education, including the Educational Technology Certificate Program, the Teacher Endorsement 
Program, a Masters of Arts in Educational Technology, and a PhD program in Educational 
Psychology and Educational Technology. These prepare teachers, administrators and other 
educational professionals for the use of technologies to support teaching and learning drawing on 
current theories of learning and development. http://edutech.msu.edu/ 
ii 
Analysis of e-Learning 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Table of Contents ....................................................................................................................... i 
 
Executive Summary.................................................................................................................. iii 
 
I. Introduction ...................................................................................................................1 
II. E-Learning solutions......................................................................................................2 
A. Pedagogical principles and e-learning .....................................................................2 
1.Conceptualizing technology in relation to teaching.....................................2 
2.ICT as a tool to foster learning ....................................................................3 
B. e-Learning Solutions ...............................................................................................5 
1.Approaches to using technologies in e-learning classrooms .......................5 
2.e-Learning technologies and configurations in schools...............................6 
C. Transition towards e-learning in developing countries............................................9 
1.Growth in Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) .............9 
2.Transitions in educational systems ............................................................10 
3.Physical factors affecting e-learning technologies in schools ..................12 
III. The impact of e-learning .............................................................................................14 
A. Educational impacts of e-learning .........................................................................14 
1.Impact of e-learning on students................................................................15 
2.Impact of e-learning technologies on the teacher and classroom ..............17 
B. Economic benefits of e-learning ...........................................................................19 
1.The economic benefits of education .........................................................20 
2.The economic benefits of a high tech workforce ......................................21 
3.Assessment of the benefits of e-learning ..................................................23 
C. Societal impacts .....................................................................................................24 
1.The rural-urban divide ...............................................................................26 
2.Culture and language ................................................................................27 
3.Gender and e-learning................................................................................29 
IV. Best practices ...............................................................................................................31 
A. Case studies............................................................................................................31 
1.Algeria........................................................................................................31 
2.Lebanon......................................................................................................33 
3.Pakistan ......................................................................................................34 
4.Chile...........................................................................................................35 
5.Malaysia.....................................................................................................35 
6.South Africa ...............................................................................................35 
B. Key components of successful programs...............................................................37 
1.Teacher training and professional development ........................................37 
2.Standards – What teachers need to know and be able to do ......................38 
3.Community of practice – Connecting the educational community ...........39 
V. Conclusion ...................................................................................................................40 
i 
 
 
References ......................................................................................................................................42 
 
Annexes 
1: Internet availability by continent. ........................................................................................48 
2: Enabling and constraining features of ICT in the Tanzanian educational system.................... 49 
3. Tanzania secondary school education graphs ......................................................................50 
4: International e-learning actors in developing countries.......................................................51 
5. Technology standards for teachers ......................................................................................53 
 
Tables  
1. Traditional and new learning environments ..........................................................................5 
2. Secondary school education enrollment and performance in Tanzania, 2004-2008 ...........11 
 
ii 
Analysis of e-Learning 
Executive Summary 
 
Objectives of the Study 
This study has been conducted under a contract with the Tanzanian Education Trust (prime) and 
the MasterCard Foundation (sponsor) to provide information regarding the potential of e-
learning to impact learning, society and the economy in developing countries with a particular 
reference to secondary schools in Tanzania. This paper also discusses e-learning solutions and 
challenges, and presents case studies and best practices of e-learning programs.  
Approach 
This study consists of a review of studies undertaken over the past fifteen years on education, e-
learning and Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in Africa, in other developing 
countries and, to provide additional context, in the U.S. In the study, we seek to provide a global 
and regional context to address the above objectives. Where ever possible, publications 
presenting results of empirical research are consulted. Research documenting the impact of e-
learning in developing countries is, however, in its infancy due to the newness of programs. The 
study is informed by the authors’ over ten years experience implementing e-learning programs 
and conducting teaching training programs in East and North Africa, and in the Middle East. 
This study presents aspects related to e-learning solutions including the educational context of e-
learning and pedagogical principles which inform e-learning approaches, examples of e-learning 
approaches and technologies, and the rapid changes being experienced in educational systems. It 
then provides a summary of what is known about the impacts of e-learning on education, the 
economy and society. Issues such as gender, the impact of e-learning on the workforce, and 
impacts on educational attainment are discussed. Finally, case studies and key best practices are 
provided.  
Main Findings 
Improving secondary education in Africa and other developing countries had until recently been 
overshadowed by programs focusing on national economic and infrastructure development. 
Recently, however, important investments by governments and donors are being made to expand 
the number of schools and student enrollment including in secondary education. In conjunction 
with this, the modernization of secondary education to produce a workforce capable of leading 
countries into globalized, knowledge-based economies has become a key goal. Many new 
policies and projects have begun to introduce information and communications technologies and 
related teaching approaches, known collectively as electronic or e-learning, into schools.  
The expectations for these projects to affect student achievement and national economic 
development are often high. They are being introduced into educational systems that are 
experiencing critical challenges such as poor infrastructure, a lack of teachers and learning 
material, and poorly prepared students. The key question is how e-learning approaches can help 
address these challenges, and provide students a leap forward in their school learning and in their 
future employment opportunities. e-Learning programs in Africa and in other developing 
countries are still often small, experiential pilot projects with little documented history of their 
successes and impacts. Nevertheless, a body of literature is emerging that analyzes e-learning 
programs.  
iii 
 
Integrating e-learning into existing educational systems 
Educational systems are thus looking to e-learning programs to help address these challenges and 
to substantially improve the quality and content of their education. Integrating e-learning into 
existing secondary educational system can, however, be a major challenge. Secondary 
educational systems in developing countries are undergoing rapid change, particularly an 
increase in the number of schools and rise of student enrollment related to the recent emphasis of 
universal primary education. A consequence of this development, being experienced in Tanzania 
and elsewhere, is a significant shortfall in the number of teachers, particularly subject-specialty 
teachers, a declining student/teacher ratio, a lack of learning materials, and declining or 
stagnating test scores. Infusing technology into this context could be powerful method to 
partially address these shortfalls (see below).  
Investment in e-learning is, however, not an alternative to investment in education generally; the 
two should be seen as being complementary. Integrating e-learning programs into existing 
educational systems can promote, however, a transformation. Implementing a comprehensive e-
learning program would mean changes to the curriculum, infrastructure, teacher professional 
development, textbooks, and exams. A major benefit of integrating e-learning into governmental 
educational systems would be, however, a long-term commitment to growing and maintaining 
the program, with fewer e-learning initiatives ending when donor funding stops. 
Many studies of e-learning programs have concluded that the key to ensuring successful 
outcomes is to blend more traditional classroom approaches with those that use technology. e-
Learning approaches should be treated as a powerful tool that teachers can use, but teachers need 
to learn how student learning changes with e-learning, and how to alter their teaching 
methodologies with pedagogical approaches that take advantage of the opportunities afforded by 
e-learning. A blended approach mixing face-to-face classroom methods with technology-
mediated activities seems to provide the highest learning outcomes. In African countries where 
secondary teachers have little prior experience with computers or similar technologies, all this 
can be a significant undertaking. In-service and pre-service e-learning teacher training programs 
have been designed and tested, however, with these goals in mind. 
The potential of e-learning  
e-Learning is a broad term that encompasses many teaching approaches, types of technologies 
and administrative practices. A challenge in analyzing e-learning is that the technologies and 
their educational applications are developing extremely rapidly. An additional challenge is that 
its newness and the excitement around their utility are leading to many suggestions for how to 
use technologies in and outside of the classroom. Nevertheless, the paper summarizes some e-
learning solutions that have been applied and tested in developing countries. Some of the 
important potential contributions of e-learning programs in such educational systems include: 
1. Addresses the shortage of teachers, especially science and other specialty teachers. It can 
do this by providing high quality teaching materials, such as videos, interactive software 
or information from a “cloud” on the Internet or a local computer. In a distant classroom 
or video conferencing approach, the number of students who receive live instruction from 
teachers in specialty subjects can be much larger.  
iv 
Analysis of e-Learning 
2. Addresses the shortage of learning material such as textbooks for students. The material 
could be made available on hand-held devices such as e-readers or mobile phones. 
Interactive features such as quizzes or games could improve the level of learning and 
understanding.  
3. Improves the quality of education by providing improved informational content and 
learning approaches. Interactive, communicative e-learning may promote the 
development of skills in students (so called “21st Century Skills”) such as critical thinking 
and problem solving, communication, collaboration and creativity. 
4. Provides students information and communications technology skills. The graduates will 
be better equipped to contribute to the knowledge-centered globalized economy of their 
counties.  
The impact of e-learning 
The potential of e-learning to significantly affect education in developing countries is thus 
significant. Identifying the actual impact that e-learning programs have had on students, schools 
and their countries is, however, difficult. Because of the newness and diversity of the programs 
and the complexity of factors affecting outcome, measuring e-learning’s impact is an emerging 
science. Nevertheless, some direct and indirect outcomes can be discerned. They are presented 
below by e-learning’s impacts on students, teaching, the economy and lastly on society. 
1. The impact of e-learning on student achievement is complex and mediated by a range of 
other factors affecting achievement. It is clear, however, that: 
a. Their effectiveness is closely related to how the technology is used as an 
educational tool. Students learn best with e-learning when interactively engaged 
in the content. Using technology can motivate students, particularly under-
achieving students, to learn. 
b. Teachers report that tutorials in subjects such as math and science significantly 
improve student performance. Word processing software improves writing skills. 
c. Providing technology on its own has little impact on achievement. Substantial 
effort must be put into infrastructure, teacher training, curriculum development, 
assessment reform, and formative evaluation. 
2. The effect of e-learning on teachers and teaching parallels that of students. It includes: 
a. The pedagogy often shifts from a teacher - centered classroom environment to a 
more learner - centered environment, allowing more effective use of technologies. 
b. Teachers report that they gain confidence, self-esteem and renewed motivation in 
e-learning environments. 
c. There are significant barriers to teachers in developing countries that need to be 
overcome including their lack of ICT skills and ICT-related pedagogical skills.  
v 
 
3. The economic impact of e-learning can be examined by first, identifying the impact of e-
learning and improvements in education on the workforce and employment, and second, 
the effect of a high tech workforce on the national economy. 
a. An improvement in education positively affects economic growth, both in terms 
of an increase in GDP and an increase in income for workers. This is clear in both 
developed and developing countries.  
b. As technology and knowledge spillovers are the foundations of modern economic 
growth, it is important to ensure that the workforce has the skills to meet the need 
of these 21st Century jobs.  
c. The average increase in annual income for each additional year of schooling, 
especially secondary education, for an individual is 10%. The affect is stronger in 
developing countries than in developed countries.  
4. The impact on society of e-learning programs is similarly difficult to separate out from 
the multitude of other factors affecting society. The potential impacts of e-learning—
providing underserved-groups access to quality education, for example, can be important. 
What is known about the impacts in developing countries include: 
a. The “digital divide” between those people and countries with access to digital 
technologies and those without, is narrowing as information and communications 
technologies become increasingly available and less expensive. African countries 
are catching up fast, but from a lower base than other developing countries. Some 
of the widest digital divides are within countries: between rural and urban centers, 
and between rich and poor communities. This is unfortunately parallel to statistics 
of student enrollment in secondary schools. e-Learning has the potential to 
address this gap by bringing quality education to rural and other underserved 
schools, but poor infrastructure and other challenges are greater in those areas 
than in the better served urban areas, and experience to date is that these areas are 
underserved with e-learning as well. e-Learning programs that overcome these 
challenges thus have the potential to have large impacts on learning. 
b. e-Learning technologies could potentially play an important role in reducing the 
gap in access to education and in achievement by girls and other underserved 
communities in developing countries. Currently, the gap in access to education of 
girls and underserved students is mirrored by a gap of them using the Internet and 
other ICT technologies, partly due to societal norms and partly due to their 
economic situation. Introducing e-learning technologies into schools can assist 
girl and other underserved students improve their ability to participate and thrive 
in schools. Governments and international organizations are designing e-learning 
programs to deliberately address the gender gap.  
c. Language proficiency can be an impediment for students and teachers to take full 
advantage of e-learning’s benefits. Off-the-shelf educational software and most 
websites are in English or another global language, and students in Tanzania and 
vi 
Analysis of e-Learning 
elsewhere whose main language is not a global language may need to become 
proficient a second (or third) language. The ubiquity of English on the Internet 
has been found to be a strong motivator for young people in many countries to 
learn English. In schools where a global language is not the language of 
instruction, however, it is important to customize educational software.  
d. The prevailing pedagogical culture in countries mediates how e-learning is 
adopted. In Eastern countries, for example, e-learning approaches run against 
educators’ preferences for expositive teaching and authoritative delivery, in which 
case computers are simply used to deliver content. The potential transformative 
role of e-learning to develop 21st century skills in many countries may require, 
thus, integrating e-learning into the system from curriculum development to 
teacher professional development.  
Taking advantage of e-learning’s potential 
Despite the numerous e-learning models and technologies available, a few key, common 
elements in successful e-learning programs have emerged. Case studies and the literature provide 
clues to what has and has not been successful. For example, countries that successfully integrated 
a sustainable e-learning have executed a multi-level program from the national policy level to the 
classroom that included developing e-learning related curriculum, teacher standards, and 
infrastructure.  
Case studies and the authors’ experience indicate that there are some particular activities in e-
learning programs that are remarkably successful and encourage educators to sustain and expand 
their use of e-learning. The activities that have been found to work well include: 
1) the full integration of e-learning into the curriculum, textbooks and tests 
2) a strong program of training teachers to both use and teach with technologies,  
3) the establishment of a pedagogical foundation for e-learning to assist teachers in 
integrating it into their teaching 
4) providing ongoing support for teachers 
5) educators joining a community of practice. 
 
  Concluding remarks 
The goal of improving the educational quality and economic impact of secondary school 
education is coming to the front in many developing countries as their efforts to expand the 
number of schools and students are bearing fruit. Improving quality and gaining impact is, 
however, perhaps more difficult as it may require a transformation of the educational system 
itself. Many countries in Africa and elsewhere are turning to e-learning programs to assist with 
this transformation, and to fill some immediate gaps in their schools such as a lack of teachers 
and learning materials.  
 
This report represents a collation of informational resources that document the potential of e-
learning in developing countries, factors affecting its impact on education, the economy and 
society, and what experience has shown to lead to a successful integration of e-learning into 
educational systems. It discusses the non-insubstantial challenges related to introducing e-
vii 
 
learning into classrooms in developing countries, and issues related to change management in the 
institutions. Despite the complexities, however, the authors feel that enough has been learned 
from a pedagogical, technical and socioeconomic perspective to be able to design a successful e-
learning program that methodically addresses the challenges, and that provides a platform for e-
learning’s transformative effect. 
 
viii 
Analysis of e-Learning 
I. Introduction 
Improved, modern education in developing countries provides the promise of meaningful 
employment for graduates, movement towards a knowledge-based economy, and rapid national 
economic growth. For this reason, parents, governments and donors are investing heavily in 
education. This building of the physical infrastructure as well as the knowledge infrastructure 
base such as teacher training, teaching materials and Internet facilities are necessary before the 
full benefits of the educational investments can be realized. Meanwhile, African countries lag 
behind other developing countries in educational attainment and other aspects of the human 
capital development required in our knowledge-based, global economy. Secondary school 
enrolment rates are, for example, 50 percentage points below other developing country averages. 
New programs in Africa promoting universal primary school enrollment are leading to increased 
demand for secondary schools, and a rapid expansion of secondary schools and students. The 
time to equip these secondary school students and schools with a strong knowledge infrastructure 
base for a knowledge-based economy is thus now. 
 
Indeed, Africa has recently been leapfrogging communications technologies at a level and 
pace unlike any other continent. This rapid adoption may be partly responsible for the “African 
renaissance” and recent rise in economic growth rates. The rapid rate of adoption of cell phone 
technology among even rural and poor regions, for example, has been a surprise. It is providing 
new prospects for rural and other disadvantaged areas and people. 
 
This phenomenon brings hope to the possibility of schools being able to use new 
technologies to leapfrog over many of their problems such as a shortage of teachers, school 
books and low achievement levels, and to train their students in technologies and to have “21st 
century skills” such as creative thinking and problem solving. e-Learning may assist with this 
transformation. The term “e-learning” originates from electronically-assisted learning, or 
learning with and through the use of technologies. Other commonly used terms include online 
learning, computer-assisted learning or ICT in education. e-Learning incorporates both content 
(curriculum) and instruction (pedagogy). e-Learning has become a term representing a new 
model of education  that may incorporate an “ecosystem” of networked communities and a 
variety of learning resources.1 In education, it involves revised curriculum, infrastructure, 
teacher professional development, textbooks, and exams (e.g., Uden, Wangsa & Damiani, 2007). 
 
This paper discusses these issues in developing countries with a focus on Africa. It provides 
examples with information from Tanzania, a country that is at the cusp of transforming its 
secondary school educational system including incorporating e-learning. The situation of 
Tanzania reflects many countries in Africa and elsewhere that are changing rapidly, and where 
the government, citizens and international institutions see opportunities to help shape its future in 
exciting directions. 
 
This report provides a summary of e-learning solutions available, and discusses the potential 
and challenges of teaching and learning with these approaches in a developing country context. It 
then summarizes what is known about the effect of e-learning on education, economics, and 
                                                 
1 “A digital ecosystem is a self-organizing digital infrastructure aimed at creating a digital environment for 
networked organizations that supports the cooperation, the knowledge sharing, the development of open and 
adaptive technologies and evolutionary business models” (p. 114, Uden, Wangsa & Damiani, 2007). 
1 
 
society. Finally, it provides some case studies and summarizes what has been found to be key 
components of successful programs. 
 
II. E-Learning Solutions 
A. Pedagogical Principles and e-Learning  
 
“Research suggests that simply putting computers into schools is not enough to 
impact student learning. That said, specific applications of ICT can positively 
impact student knowledge, skills and attitudes, as well as teaching practices, 
school innovation, and community services (pg. 1, Kozma, 2005).”  
 
The concept of e-learning integration into an educational system begins with the teacher and 
the ways in which teachers teach. This section thus starts with pedagogy – the art and science of 
teaching children. The academic approach to this subject discusses the theoretical perspectives of 
behaviorism versus constructivism and, for the purposes of this paper, how they apply to a 
technological secondary school classroom. A simplistic description of the view is that of “chalk 
and talk” and the teacher as the ultimate authority and purveyor of knowledge – the “sage on the 
stage”. This compares to the constructivist model or method where students work collaboratively 
and socially construct new knowledge. In a technological classroom there will most likely be 
elements of both perspectives blended in a way that makes teaching comfortable for the teacher 
and takes advantage of new tools and opportunities. 
 
The challenge for many if not most teachers, particularly in developing countries, is changing 
their practice of teaching in ways that accommodate the use of technology. Blending how they 
have traditionally practiced teaching with the use of technology beings to create e-learning 
solutions. In e-learning, technology is simply a tool that educators may use in a number of ways 
within the new environment that can impact student learning and outcomes.  
 
A teacher deciding to use technology needs to consider how it may provide a solution to a 
particular problem of practice they have within their learning environment. An example of 
addressing a problem of practice could be the use of e-readers to address a lack of textbooks. 
Another could be how to help children understand “big ideas” or concepts in science education. 
A third could be helping students, working alone or in groups, to use computer simulations to 
manipulate the environment and immediately see the outcomes. Rather than just being told about 
a certain theory, they can experience the theory, which enhances their learning and enables them 
to retain the concepts for longer. 
 
1. Conceptualizing Technology in Relation to Teaching 
In this blending of technology, pedagogy, content and knowledge, a theoretical principle has 
evolved known as TPACK which reflects the intersection among three domains of teacher 
knowledge: content, pedagogy and technology (Mishra & Koehler, 2006, 2008)2. Research has 
shown that teachers can move from seeing content, pedagogy, and technology as independent 
                                                 
2 This conceptualization draws heavily on the work of MSU faculty Mishra and Koehler, for example, as published as the keynote chapter of the 
2008 AACTE Handbook of Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Educators. For additional resources on TPACK, see 
http://tpack.org and http://www.mendeley.com/groups/522011/tpack/. 
 
2 
Analysis of e-Learning 
domains of knowledge to recognizing the transformative potential of the interdependence among 
the three domains. In this framework, the starting point is an analysis of both the complexities of 
teaching and the nature of technology. The framework was developed as an extension of 
Shulman’s influential conceptualization of pedagogical content knowledge. The 
conceptualization highlights what good teachers know about how to teach a particular subject 
matter in addition to their knowledge of what to teach.  
.  
In considering the relationship between technologies, pedagogy, and content, it is important 
to explore how teaching and learning can change as the result of using a particular technology. 
For example, the use of inexpensive digital cameras or cell phones with integrated cameras can 
shape decisions about content and pedagogy. Students can use these cameras to build their own 
bridges between content within the school environment and their daily lives. Students can 
explore the presence of geometric shapes in places that teachers would not have anticipated, thus 
creating their own applications of the ideas being taught in the classroom. Inevitably students 
will find new connections that teachers (and project designers) did not anticipate, connections 
that feed their natural curiosity and honor their contributions to the learning environment.. 
.  
Communities of Practice. Experience suggests that teachers most readily adopt and adapt 
technology when they join a community of practice under the guidance of mentors. This involves 
them in inquiry and problem solving, anticipating the complexities with which teachers and 
learners are faced and the need to enable teachers and students to respond flexibly and creatively. 
Participants learn about technologies when and only when they need these technologies to 
complete their projects rather than being taught technologies in case they may someday have 
opportunity to use them.  
 
A central strategy is thus to create communities of practice among educators. The importance 
of a grassroots approach has been repeatedly shown by research. It builds on collaboration and 
community building at all levels, and lowers the levels of resistance compared to when 
authorities simply mandate ICT use. When teachers and other educators work within their peer 
groups, the rate of adoption is much higher.  
 
Teacher Networking. Mobile or internet-based networks will provide a critical impetus for 
teachers and mentors to use the computers in a creative and thoughtful mode, to try new 
approaches, and to communicate their successes and challenges. These networks have the dual 
advantage of 1) promoting information exchange among teachers and mentors that is interactive 
and tailored to individuals' needs, and 2) stimulating the use of ICT by teachers for purposes that 
go beyond simple cookbook applications. Research indicates that teacher networking 
significantly increases the interest in and use of new technology and other pedagogical 
approaches.  
 
2. ICT as a Tool to Foster Learning 
To foster learning through the use of technology, it is useful to examine the pedagogical 
principles behind teaching and learning with ICT. Technology is a powerful and effective tool, 
but if teachers use it only as a delivery vehicle, the outcomes will be less than its potential. The 
challenge is to make full use of technology so that it doesn’t become simply a substitute teacher. 
Indeed, instructional content can be embedded in the technology and then delivered to the 
3 
 
student with the assumption that if you deliver content the students will learn. But by blending 
the use of technology with teaching by the teacher, students have been shown to have much 
higher learning outcomes.  
 
Technology should thus be used as an engager and facilitator of thinking and knowledge 
construction. Useful roles for technology to support effective pedagogy include (Jonassen, Peck, 
Wilson 1999): 
• Technology as tools to support knowledge construction: 
o For representing learners’ ideas, understandings, and beliefs 
o For producing organized, multimedia knowledge bases by learners. 
 
• Support learning-by-constructing: 
o For accessing needed information 
o For comparing perspectives, beliefs, and world views. 
 
• Technology as context to support learning-by-doing: 
o For representing and simulating meaningful real-world problems, situations and 
contexts 
o For representing beliefs, perspectives, arguments, and stories of others for 
defining a safe, controllable problems space for student thinking. 
 
• Technology as social medium to support learning by conversing: 
o For collaboration with others 
o For discussing, arguing, and building consensus among members of a community 
o For supporting discourse among knowledge-building communities. 
 
• Technology as intellectual partner to support learning-by-reflecting: 
o For helping learners to articulate and represent what they know for reflecting on 
what they have learned and how they came to know it 
o For supporting learners’ internal negotiations and meaning making 
o For constructing personal representations of meaning for supporting mindful 
thinking. 
 
• Technology as information vehicles for exploring knowledge. 
 
The US Department of Education (1998) developed a simple visual that has become standard 
of the basic changes that occur in a shift from traditional to e-learning (Table 1). These are the 
basics behind teaching students what has become known as 21st Century learning and innovation 
skills (critical thinking and problem solving, communication, collaboration and creativity) 
(Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2009).  
 
4 
Analysis of e-Learning 
Table 1. Traditional and New Learning Environments. Source: DOE 1998. 
 
Traditional Learning Environments New Learning Environments 
• Teacher centered instruction 
• Single sense stimulation 
• Single path progression 
• Single media 
• Student centered instruction 
• Multisensory stimulation 
• Multipath progression 
• Multimedia 
• Isolated work 
• Information delivery 
• Passive learning 
• Factual, knowledge-based 
• Reactive response 
• Isolated, artificial context 
• Collaborative work 
• Information Exchange 
• Active/exploratory/inquiry based 
learning 
• Critical thinking and informed 
decisions 
• Proactive / planned action 
• Authentic, real-world context 
 
 Considering the relationship between technology and pedagogy thus leads to understanding 
how teaching can change as the result of using a particular technology. As such, new 
technologies encourage teachers to confront basic educational issues in new ways. The range of 
e-learning technologies and their uses are described in the following section. 
 
B. e-Learning Solutions  
1.   Approaches to using Technologies in e-Learning Classrooms  
e-Learning is a thus broad term that covers teaching, learning and the enabling educational 
environment. It can use a range of pedagogical approaches and electronically supported 
technologies. Some examples of using technologies in e-learning classrooms are below:  
 
• One-to-Many (communication between the teacher and the class as a whole): 
o Online classes. Content can include lecture notes, assignments, message boards, 
linked bibliographies of readings and websites, quizzes, and chats  
o The viewing of TV shows, videos or other previously prepared material at a 
central location  
o The teacher in a multi-media classroom projecting content using a projector or 
screen, or using an interactive whiteboard. The content can range from 
PowerPoint slides, news broadcasts, interactive websites, the teacher drawing 
graphics, to educational software demonstrating a virtual chemistry experiment.  
o Distant learning classroom or video-conferencing, in which a teacher is broadcast 
live to a single or to multiple remote classrooms. The distant rooms can 
communicate to the teacher and others through text or audio chatting, or video.  
• One-to-One (student and teacher communicate) 
o Teachers monitors individual student activity and progress using a feedback 
program 
o Teacher reviews assignments, questions, has office hours. 
 
5 
 
• One-Alone (student alone with course content, self-paced)  
o E-reading devices with textbook or other reading material 
o Interactive lessons, exercises, quizzes, games or other software that a student 
accesses through a computer, mobile phone, tablet or other. Applications may 
predict and suggest content based on student behavior and progress. 
o Student conducted research, writing and other homework preparation on a laptop 
or other computer. 
• Many-to-Many (students communicate among themselves) 
o Students communicate in a class discussion group, share information or 
communicate with people outside the classroom 
o Student group presentations. 
• Teacher Training 
o Teachers access training materials, exercises and take tests using online or hosted 
material and software 
o Teachers form a “community of practice” to share experiences, get ideas in a 
social media type of environment. 
• School Administration 
o Learning management system  
o Computer aided assessments (tests, grades). 
 
This list of possible approaches using technology in learning and teaching must, again, be 
placed into an educational context (Koory, 2003). There are no conclusive research results for 
the US much less developing countries indicating that one type of e-learning approach is more 
effective than another, or that strictly online learning is more effective than strictly face-to-face 
learning. However, recent large, meta-analyses have found that learning outcomes are somewhat 
improved with a “blend” or hybrid of face-to-face learning with a teacher combined with 
technology-mediated learning (e.g., Means et al., 2010; Roblyer and Doering, 2009). A 
combination of approaches and content type is best. Pedagogical principles also impact the 
effectiveness of e-learning especially for K-12 students—e-learning is enhanced by giving 
students control of their interactions with the media, by embedding feedback mechanisms. When 
the software triggers student activity such as reflection or self-monitoring, there is a positive 
impact on learning. This holds true when students are working as individuals but not necessarily 
when in groups (Means et al., 2010). 
  
Each of the approaches described above could be accomplished using various e-learning 
settings in schools, and using different technologies. Below is a summary of these school 
settings, followed by a brief description of technologies available.  
 
2. e-Learning Technologies and Configurations in Schools 
There are many e-learning settings and technologies available to use in schools, each with 
their own advantages and applications. Often the best solution is a combination of technologies 
depending on the particular need and learning environment. 
 
6 
Analysis of e-Learning 
Multimedia Classroom 
In a multi-media classroom, educational content is delivered to students in a one-to-many 
approach. This is cost efficient per pupil, and can provide a large amount of educational 
resources to students. Classrooms would be equipped with a projector, screen (or large LCD), 
speakers and a classroom computer. The teacher could display various types of content that is 
housed either on the classroom computer or on the teacher’s laptop or other device. The teacher 
would be able to adapt and project various content (e.g., videos, Powerpoint slides, augmented 
reality, multimedia presentations, the teacher drawing a graph, etc.). A connected classroom 
would have wireless or wired communications to a “cloud” of resources. The teacher would thus 
have access to a wide range of content from the library on the cloud. The computer housing the 
content could be locally based at the school (which would obviate the need for inter-school 
communications, and be reliable), at a district or national educational headquarters, or elsewhere. 
 
Connected multi-media classrooms would permit distant classroom teaching, in which a 
teacher in one school or from a studio could deliver live, interactive lectures to classrooms in 
other schools. The distant classrooms would need to be outfitted with video cameras and 
microphones, as well as projectors and speakers, to communicate with the distant teacher. 
 
Computer Lab 
A computer lab is among the most recognizable form of e-learning technologies. A computer 
lab usually consists of many single personal computer stations. This is a common arrangement 
found in schools throughout the world. There are many educational software packages available 
that could be installed for student use. Separate stations permit individual students to move at 
their own pace through material. Teachers can also lead students or student teams through guided 
exercises, with each following on their own station. Free computer time itself is a valuable 
educational resource. 
 
Installing separate computers is an easy to set up, since it is simply single stations behaving 
independently. Computer labs can be, however, more expensive per student due to the individual 
computers and software licenses. They may also have higher power consumption demands, 
depending on the computer or device, necessitating low-cost power solutions. 
 
Multi-seat computing consists of using one powerful personal computer with extra video 
cards to support up to eight independent “seats” (each with its own monitor, keyboard and mouse 
running separately). They can be put in a computer lab for students or teachers to use, or in 
classrooms. There are several commercially available multi-seat operating system software 
options including by Microsoft and Linux. This system has the advantage of using much less 
power than other options. It is usually the least expensive per user as well. 
 
Single Station, Personal Computers 
 A variety of types of single station devices are available.  
1) Personal computer (PC). A PC is a common approach for using computers in homes and 
offices. It consists minimally of a computer, one or two monitors, a keyboard and mouse. 
Each computer has its own operating system and software programs. From a setup and 
maintenance standpoint this type of system is advantageous. It is easy to maintain and 
does not generally require a specially trained computer technician to fix most hardware 
7 
 
and software problems. However, if each student were to have a computer, this would be 
among the more costly options to implement, particularly in rural areas reliant on solar 
power. This would be useful particularly for teacher stations or single stations in the back 
of classrooms. 
 
2) Micro Computer. A microcomputer is similar to a standard single station except that is 
uses a small form factor case with a generally slower processor. Power consumption can 
be much lower than a single station, and thus suitable when power is limited. The 
computers are, however, difficult to repair and may be prone to theft and overheating; the 
lifespan of these devices is not yet known. Software maintenance is similar to a standard 
single station. 
 
3) Laptop or notebook. Laptops and notebooks are among the easiest educational solution to 
set up. They usually come with software preinstalled and only a power outlet is needed to 
begin using the system. The power consumption is low compared to a personal computer. 
Hardware maintenance can be difficult, but software maintenance is standard. One of the 
disadvantages is product lifespan; they are easy to steal and are prone to accidents (a spill 
on the keyboard can easily destroy it; new rugged laptops reduce this risk). New design 
and battery technologies are lengthening battery life in some machines. Laptops may be 
an excellent solution for teachers. Teachers could bring a laptop to work from home, and 
then connect it to the classroom projector. 
 
Small, Personal Devices 
Small, personal devices such as tablets, smart phones and e-readers are similar in that they 
are all relatively new technologies. They are rapidly gaining popularity due to their declining 
price, large number of web-based software applications, powerful graphics, and enjoyment of 
use. Educational uses could include listening to audio lessons or audio books, gaming, watching 
videos, and reading. Writing is more difficult if the device doesn’t have a keyboard. Schools and 
teachers can develop teaching material applications for mobile devices using existing software. 
An example of how rapidly this is occurring is that over 10,000 pieces of content (learning 
materials) for U.S. schools are already available from one education company (Study by App). 
As discussed in the ICT section above, penetration of mobile cellular Internet is rising rapidly in 
Africa and other developing countries because of the availability and relatively low cost of 
Internet access, text and voice through cellular networks, especially compared to broadband 
Internet. Because of this, the World Bank, USAID and other donors are actively investigating the 
potential role of mobile phones and e-learning devices in education in Africa (World Bank 2011; 
USAID 2011). 
 
Nevertheless, the maintenance requirements and lifespan of smart phone and other small 
devices in difficult environments are not yet known. Similar to laptops, they can be easily lost or 
stolen, and are prone to accidents. A difficulty in adapting educational software is that the 
various brands and styles have different operating systems and screens, and each may require 
separate configuration. Their batteries need to be frequently recharged, but individual external 
solar panels could be used. The cost of Internet or telecommunications time for teachers, students 
or schools may also be a limiting factor. Some of these challenges are being addressed by private 
companies and others who are designing engineering solutions and new software for the devices.  
8 
Analysis of e-Learning 
 
1. Tablet. A tablet personal computer is similar to a laptop but with a touch screen, and 
often a smaller hard drive and screen. Tablets may or may not have a keyboard. A touch 
screen permits a new form of human-machine interaction, the uses for which are 
becoming increasingly apparent. As educational software is developed to take advantage 
of touch screens, tablets may become useful for e-learning.  
 
2. Mobile Phone/Smart Phone. Today, cellular Internet coverage is often available, even in 
rural areas (especially compared to broadband). With the rapidly declining cost and 
increasing features of mobile phones, there is potential to use mobile phones as a web-
based e-learning technology. They can also, for example, be used by students in the 
classroom as a virtual clicker (to answer questions teachers ask in class), or for games or 
quizzes by using text messaging interfaced to an instructor’s computer or phone. They 
may be used as an e-reader, or for communicating with other students or teachers.  
 
3. E-Readers. E-Readers are becoming popular as a relatively low-power, inexpensive 
replacement for traditional textbooks. Their purchase price is declining. One e-reader 
could contain multiple textbooks or other readings, and the content could be easily 
updated. E-readers often have high resolution, monochrome screens making them good 
for reading text but not for multimedia applications. Where books are expensive, hard to 
find or need to be frequently updated, e-readers may be very useful. It would be easy to 
upload in-class “handouts” to student e-readers as well. Copyright agreements and 
revenue sharing would need to be arranged with the book’s publisher. 
 
C. Transition Towards e-Learning in Developing Countries 
To meet the promises and potential of e-learning in developing countries, many challenges 
must be addressed in its implementation. These include underlying economic, governance and 
infrastructure problems, and difficulties faced by the educational systems themselves. At the 
individual country level, investments in primary and tertiary education in developing countries 
continue to be low relative to the need. Only a few African countries allocate more than five per 
cent of their budgets to education (ITU 2011b). However, many countries are now implementing 
ambitious strategic frameworks to support their human capital initiatives. These are often 
focused on areas such as social inclusion, the health of school age children, nutritional support, 
programs to support girl education, and modernization of the curriculum including technology 
skills. If not addressed, the challenges existing in schools, however, could restrict the e-learning 
technologies’ effectiveness and particularly their sustainability in schools over the long term. 
The following section briefly describes the challenges that many educational programs are facing 
and how e-learning and ICT initiatives are expanding despite these. Indeed, e-learning and ICT 
are being employed in some cases to address these challenges.  
 
1.Growth in Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) 
e-Learning and information-based technologies are all based on the sharing of information 
and knowledge through the Internet or other communications systems, collectively known as 
Information and Communications Technologies. Access to communications technologies is, thus 
critical for e-learning and related educational and economic success. African countries, however, 
have a comparably weak physical and knowledge infrastructure base, exacerbated by poor 
9 
 
computer, telecommunications and Internet facilities (Annex 1). The lag in the development of 
computer and ICT infrastructure within Africa and between Africa and other developing 
countries has the danger of increasing their exclusion from the global economy. The reasons for 
the low levels of facilities and skills are often attributed to: 1) low per capita income levels, and 
2) low levels of knowledge and physical infrastructure (Oyelaran-Oyeyinka and Lal 2005). 
 
However, Africa has recently been leapfrogging communications technologies at a level and 
pace unlike any other continent. This rapid adoption may be partly responsible for the “African 
renaissance” and recent rise in economic growth rates. The rapid rate of adoption of cell phone 
technology among even rural and poor regions, for example, has been a surprise. African 
countries are among the leaders in developing innovative uses of the cell phone, such as the 
current use of cell phones in East Africa for banking, wireless Internet and other informational 
services. Approximately half of the population in Tanzania, for example, already owns a cell 
phone, and voice network covers most of the country. This is providing new prospects for rural 
and other disadvantaged areas and people. It provides a growing opportunity for new educational 
approaches that have direct economic and social development impacts to meet the requirements 
of an increasingly globalized society (UNCTAD 2007). 
 
Although the mobile sector is important, other communications technologies, such as 
broadband Internet, computers and the host of related information products and services 
commonly available in developed countries, have thus far lagged. 
 
2. Transitions in Educational Systems 
African countries lag far behind other developing countries in educational attainment and 
other aspects of human capital development required in an increasingly knowledge-based global 
economy. Data indicate that secondary school enrolment in African countries averages only 
about 30%, compared to 65% for developing countries worldwide, and close to 100% in East 
Asia. Education quality in most cases is not where it needs to be, either, with outdated curricula. 
Meanwhile, in middle-income economies, quality and quantity of secondary and tertiary 
graduates are among the driving factors behind economic and social performance (Verspoor 
2008). The indicators suggest that African countries are falling behind other developing 
countries in spite of the significant progress in access to education made since independence. 
The vast majority of the population is either rural based, or recent migrants to urban areas. The 
degree of economic retrogression in these countries during the past few decades, and the lag 
between these countries and other developing countries in terms of the stock of human capital, is 
likely to widen in the face of the rapid advances in science and technology in the more developed 
societies (Oyelaran-Oyeyinka and Lal, 2005). 
 
Tanzania can be used as an example of how governments have responded to the need to 
improve educational attainment of their citizens by transitioning their educational system. The 
Government of Tanzania is currently implementing an ambitious policy to rapidly increase the 
number of secondary schools throughout the country (Table 1 and Annex 3). This increase, 
almost a doubling from between 2004 and 2008 to now around 4,000, has occurred without 
sufficient numbers of new teachers or other educational resources. A declining teacher to student 
ratio, from 1:23 to 1:37, occurred in only four years. Schools have reacted by having larger class 
sizes, by rotating teachers (having classes work without teachers), and by sharing trained 
10 
Analysis of e-Learning 
specialty teachers between schools (teachers travel between schools). Shortages of trained 
specialty teacher are particularly severe in subjects such as math, physics, chemistry, science and 
English, all vital subjects for Tanzania’s economic growth.  
 
Table 2. Secondary School Education Enrollment and Performance in Tanzania, 2004-2008. 
Source: Ministry of Education and Vocational Training. 
 
Table 2.1: Difference in Tanzania Secondary Schools Statistical Data from 2004 to 2008 
Description 2004 2008 Difference %Increase 
Enrolment (Form I-IV) 401,598 1,164,250 762,652 190 
Enrolment (Form V-VI) 31,001 58,153 27,152 88 
Total Enrolment (Form I-VI) 432,599 1,222,403 789,804 183 
Enrolment (Teaching Staff) 18,754 32,835 14,081 75 
Number of Registered Secondary 
Schools 
1,291 3,798 2,507 194 
Govt. 1:23 1:37 14 Students More Teacher-to-
Student Ratio Non-Govt. 1:23 1:41 18 Students More 
Source: Basic Education Statistics in Tanzania (BEST) of 2008 from Ministry of Education and Vocational Training 
(MoEVT) 
 
Table 2.2: Situation of Form IV O-Level Performance from 2003 to 2007 
Year Division Obtained 
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
I-III in % 38 38 34 36 36 
IV and 0 in % 62 62 66 64 64 
Total Number of Students Examined 62,359 63,487 85,292 85,865 125,288 
Source: Basic Education Statistics in Tanzania (BEST) of 2008 from Ministry of Education and Vocational Training 
(MoEVT) 
 
Table2.3: Form VI National Examination (ACSEE) Performance 
Year Subject Pass Grade 
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 
Grades A, B, and C in % 30 14 14 19 17 19 
Grades D, E, and F in % 70 86 86 81 83 81 
Physics 
Total Number of Students 
Examined 
2,480 2,580 2,954 3,154 3,300 3,534 
Grades A, B, and C in % 24 21 22 19 23 39 
Grades D, E, and F in % 76 79 78 81 77 61 
Advanced 
Mathemati
cs Total Number of Students 
Examined 
1,547 2,065 2,102 2,288 2,499  
Source: Basic Education Statistics in Tanzania (BEST) of 1995-2004 from Ministry of Education and Culture 
(MoEC) 
 
 
A summary of e-learning challenges secondary schools in Tanzania and in many other 
developing countries thus face include (Hennessy, 2010; ITU 2011b; Alemneh and Hastings 
2006): 
• Severe shortage of teachers, particularly in specialty science and other subjects 
• Teachers insufficiently trained in their own subjects, and have little to no computer 
experience 
• Large class sizes (average 60 students but often higher) 
• Poorly equipped classrooms, dormitories and kitchens. Lack of teacher housing, 
especially in rural areas. Most rural schools are not on the electrical grid.  
11 
 
• Expensive and slow Internet connections. Very few schools have an Internet connection. 
Most schools with computers are not using them as a medium of instruction. 
• Shortage of text books for students, and extremely limited teaching materials for teachers 
• Reference books, labs, teaching and learning aids are in short supply 
• Outdated curricula 
• Students are often ill-prepared for the switch from learning in Kiswahili in primary 
schools to English as the language of instruction in secondary schools 
• Declining enrollment of girls in each year of secondary school due to early marriage, 
safety concerns and family or social obligations 
• School fees are often beyond the reach of poor and particularly rural parents 
• Pass rates for the national exam are low and stagnant or declining 
• Insufficient funding.  
 
In response to these challenges and with the goal of improving educational outcomes and 
educating a workforce, the Tanzanian government is looking to the potential role of ICT. ICT 
along with other interventions is seen as providing an opportunity to enhance and improve 
quality of delivery of education, as stipulated in the National ICT Policy of 2003 and the 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Policy for Basic Education in 2007 which 
incorporates the integration of ICTs in pre-primary, primary, secondary and teacher education, as 
well as non-formal and adult education (Hare 2007). The Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) Policy for Basic Education addresses strategic use of ICT in teaching and 
learning as well as administration and management of schools. The Government, through the 
Ministry of Education and Vocational Training is thus implementing projects introducing ICT in 
government teachers’ colleges, secondary and primary schools and its agencies. Integration of 
ICT technologies in schools would require significant pre-service and in-service teacher training 
in basic computer literacy as well as how to teach with e-learning technologies (Calder 2009). 
Meanwhile, in-service teacher ICT skills are low. A survey of teachers in secondary schools in 
northern Tanzania that the authors (DeMaagd and Olson) conducted showed that less than 10% 
had ever touched a computer. A table summarizing the enabling and constraining factors of ICT 
integration in Tanzanian schools is provided in Annex 2.  
 
Although Tanzania is used as an example, its experience is common in other African and 
many other developing countries. Governments in many countries have ambitious plans to 
increase the percentage of children in schools, to improve the quality of education and rise 
achievement levels, and to modernize the system including with e-learning approaches. 
 
3. Physical Factors Affecting e-Learning Technologies in Schools  
In addition to educational system challenges, difficult physical environments and electrical 
power conditions in developing countries can exacerbate the implementation of successful e-
leaning programs and reduce the lifespan of technological devices. These conditions may 
include: 
 
• Extreme heat, humidity, and dust. Materials corrode and equipment ages rapidly. Fine 
dust enters the inner workings of machines, and covers solar panels.  
• School buildings: roof leaks, no ceilings, no glass in windows, lack of student desks, 
insecure.  
12 
Analysis of e-Learning 
• Pest problems—rodents chewing through Ethernet wires, insects entering computer 
housing, bees taking residence in the classroom, to cattle scratching themselves on 
communications towers 
• Theft of and non-malicious (curious) tampering with equipment 
• Relative isolation of many rural schools due to long distances and poor roads 
• Electrical power: the electrical grid may be over-extended, and have frequent black outs. 
The power itself is fluctuating with frequent spikes and dips that can destroy computer 
and other equipment. Solar systems may be expensive to initially purchase, so low power 
draw by the system is critical. 
• Broadband connectivity may be increasing in the near future to major towns and cities. In 
the meantime and outside urban centers, Internet can be accessed only through expensive 
satellite systems or cellular networks 
• Computer viruses are often rampant, software is often pirated  
• Shortage of trained ICT professionals particularly in rural areas to conduct the required, 
continual maintenance 
• High cost of imported equipment and tools; repair and replacement costs can be high. 
 
Some private and non-profit computer manufacturing companies and international 
institutions are addressing some of these environmental and educational challenges with the 
design of rugged and low-power technologies, and educational software (Annex 4). The 
environmental and technical problems are often a common cause of the breakdown and eventual 
abandonment of technologies in schools.  
 
The authors (deMaagd, Olson and Tarkelson) as part of a team of faculty and students at 
Michigan State University, USA and University of Dodoma, Tanzania have been designing, 
installing and testing e-learning solutions in primary and secondary schools in northern Tanzania 
since 2008 to learn how to address these environmental and other challenges. The environmental 
challenges in northern Tanzania are common to those across other rural areas and towns. They 
include extreme heat and dust, no Internet connectivity, no or unreliable electrical power, pests 
and poor infrastructure.  
 
To address these, a low-power, rugged and flexible system was designed and has been 
refined based on a solar-powered, multi-seat computer system. One personal computer serves six 
independent seats, reducing power consumption while permitting full PC software applications. 
Internet is provided by a solar powered central satellite dish and is linked to the other schools via 
a system of point-to-point Wi-Fi and Wi-Max, wireless technologies. In the schools on solar 
power, the system monitors and manages energy generation to maintain optimal efficiency. 
Mobile phones can be recharged on the solar system as well. In the schools on the electrical grid, 
power is regulated to guard the safety of the equipment and work of the users. Additional e-
learning approaches, including tablet-style laptops and classroom projectors, are being tested. 
Teacher training, student involvement and content development have been a key part of the 
program. The systems are being used for various activities including social and professional 
networking, research, class preparation, class and school administration, tutorials and educational 
games. Computer clubs in the secondary schools have been extremely popular.  
 
13 
 
 Lessons learned by the project include those related to addressing the environmental 
challenges such as energy efficient design, reducing the risk related to dust, heat and pests, the 
use of wireless technologies for medium-distance internet connectivity, and maintenance 
approaches. A critical aspect of the process ensuring continuity and growth, however, has been 
the involvement of district and school administrators, teachers, students, and community leaders 
and members in all stages of the project from initial planning decisions, to digging trenches for 
cables, to attaining computer training.  
 
 
III. The Impact of e-Learning on Education, the Economy and Society 
The necessity to become proficient in modern communications and information technologies, 
and the need to improve the quality of their education sector, have driven many African and 
other developing countries and donors to sharply increase their investments in e-learning. The 
impact of these investments on learning, on the economy and on society has yet to be 
quantifiably documented, partly due to the recent nature of the programs, and partly due to the 
newness of the ICT4D research field. Most literature consists of what could be expected from e-
learning programs, or are small case studies that are difficult to compare. There have been 
important efforts to compare the rare empirical studies in meta analyses but the authors caution 
that there is as yet insufficient data or clear trends to make solid conclusions about the impact of 
e-learning on learning or societal factors (Hennessy et al. 2010; Means et al. 2010; Farrell and 
Isaacs, 2007; Hare, 2007). Nevertheless, this section will summarize the information that exists 
to describe some developments that e-learning is influencing.  
 
A. Educational Impacts of e-Learning  
This section reviews what has been found of the impact of e-learning on educational systems, 
and on students and the teaching practices.  
 
From an analysis of several international ICT integration plans (IETE, 2011), the long run 
adoption of ICT into education systems has been successful when done as an integral and holistic 
component of education. Technology plans, whether they are at a national level or local level, 
need to address policy, curriculum integration, professional development, community 
engagement, infrastructure, and access. Today the approach is no longer simply putting 
computers in the classroom and connecting to the Internet. Indeed, a critical area at the system 
level to highlight is the pedagogical aspects of technology as a tool for learning, integrated into 
all aspects teaching and learning. Technology should become a student’s intellectual partner, and 
the focus should be on how students learn with technology (Peck et al. p.12). Understanding how 
students learn with technology emphasizes the process of how teachers teach with technology. 
 
Before investing in new ICT programs, it is key to decide on the main goals of the program. 
Authors of the SITES report on South Africa (Howie, Muller, & Patterson, 2005) noted that 
secondary school principals reported the following goals for their ICT programs: 
• To prepare students for future jobs 
• To improve student achievement 
• To promote active learning strategies 
• To individualize student learning experiences 
• To encourage more co-operative and project-based learning 
14 
Analysis of e-Learning 
• To develop student independence and responsibility for own learning 
• To give students drill and practice exercises 
• To make the learning process more interesting and engaging. 
 
These goals include using e-learning for more traditional efforts to improve student academic 
performance as well as newer objectives related to the development of technical and social skills 
important in the marketplace. Thus e-learning programs are expected to influence a broad array 
of skills, and due to their potential to affect the educational system—from pedagogy to 
curriculum—their integration needs to be done at multiple levels of the educational system. 
 
1. Impact of e-Learning on Students 
It is expected that the most direct impact of e-learning would be on the learning achievement 
of students. The results of large, cross-national studies show that the effects on learning are 
complex and closely related to how the technology is used as an educational tool, and other 
factors. Putting technology into a school is not the simple solution to improving learning. Kozma 
(2005) notes “the most pronounced finding of empirical studies on ICT impact is that there is no 
consistent relationship between the mere availability of ICT and student learning”. 
 
Another author, Kulik (2003) conducted a meta analysis of studies to identify the impact of 
e-learning on student outcomes. He identified the following trends: 
• Students who used computer tutorials in mathematics, natural science, and social 
science score significantly higher on tests in these subjects compared to students who 
did not use computers. Similarly, students who used simulation software in science 
also scored higher. However, the use of computer- based laboratories alone did not 
result in higher scores.  
• Primary school students who used tutorial software in reading scored significantly 
higher on reading scores. Very young students who used computers to write their own 
stories scored significantly higher on measures of reading skills 
• Students who used word processor or otherwise used the computer for writing scored 
higher on measures of writing skill. 
 
These are similar to the conclusions of Means et al. (2010) who noted, albeit with many 
caveats as to the statistical strength of the relationship, that their meta-analysis showed that e-
learning is enhanced by giving students control of their interactions with the device, by for 
example embedding feedback mechanisms. When the software triggers student activity such as 
reflection or self-monitoring, there is a positive impact on learning. They found that this effect 
holds true when students are working as individuals but that the impact is not clear when 
students work in a many-to-many group situation. 
 
Indeed, an increasing body of literature shows that students learn best when they are actively 
engaged with the curriculum and content (McGraw Hill, 2011). Teachers are challenged to 
develop curricula of an exploratory nature that engages students with hands-on, inquiry-based 
learning. The results are students with higher levels of motivation and engagement. Computer 
based strategies help students develop higher-order thinking and problem-solving skills. 
Participation in real-life applications allows students to draw analogies, infer relationships, 
predict outcomes and analyze data.  
15 
 
 
From these and other studies, it is interesting to note that e-learning can also have a positive 
impact on less tangible aspects of learning, particularly student motivation. e-Learning affects 
student attitudes towards technology, instruction, and subject matter. Codde, an author of this 
white paper, made an interesting observation in a three-year program in Algeria that linked 
Algerian high schools with US high schools. He noted that lower achieving students were 
becoming more engaged in their learning. Their teachers reported improvements in other 
subjects as well. Similar observations were made in a study in Kenya in which two randomly 
assigned physics classes used computer-based instruction, whereas a third equivalent group did 
not. At the end of the lessons, students in the computer sections had learned physics concepts 
better and expressed more positive attitudes about their physics learning (Kulik, 2003). 
 
One widely-promoted e-learning initiative in the US and globally is the one-to-one laptop 
program. Research on its effectiveness, although limited, is growing. Factors related to its 
success include teacher professional development, access to technology support, and positive 
teacher attitudes towards the use of technology and laptops in the classroom (Penuel, 2006). Not 
all the research is favorable, however. The most notable laptop projects is Nick Negroponte’s 
One Laptop Per Child (OLPC). For a project of this nature to succeed, whether it be in 
developing or developed countries, a substantial effort should be put into infrastructure, teacher 
training, curriculum development, assessment reform, and formative evaluation (Warschauer & 
Ames, 2010). Negroponte’s approach has been to give every child a laptop, and then assume that 
students will learn even without the project implementing other elements shown to be important 
for successful e-learning programs. Although the project has succeeded in placing the topic of 
ICT in education and the needs of developing countries in the news, it has failed to accomplish 
its goal of putting laptops into the hands of millions of children around the world, including 
those in the most impoverished nations.  
 
Positive elements of laptop programs in general are highlighted in research done by Gulek 
and Demirtas (2005) in their evaluation of Microsoft’s Anywhere Learning Project. Their 
research demonstrated positive results on student learning and curriculum delivery. The 
evaluation of student and teacher outcomes are summarized below: 
 
Student Outcomes: 
• laptops lead to more student writing and to writing of higher quality 
• laptops increase access to information and improve research analysis skills. 
Laptop Students… 
• spend more time engaging in collaborative work than non-laptop students 
• participate in more project-based instruction 
• become collaborators (interact with each other about their work) 
• direct their own learning 
• report a greater reliance on active learning strategies 
• readily engage in problem solving and critical thinking 
• consistently show deeper and more flexible uses of technology 
• spend more time doing homework on computers. 
 
16 
Analysis of e-Learning 
Teacher Outcomes: 
• Teachers who use laptops use a more constructivist approach to teaching 
• Teachers who use laptops feel more empowered in their classrooms 
• Teachers who use laptops spend less time lecturing. 
 
According to Gulek and Demirtas (2005 pg. 6) and as reported by Rockman et al. (1997, 1998, 
2000),  
“…laptop use not only reinforces the utilization of successful learning strategies 
but also enables students to transfer the knowledge across disciplines. This is 
believed to occur because laptop students are involved in: (1) highly engaged and 
focused activities (spending more time on their work and completing larger 
projects); (2) frequently apply active learning strategies; (3) interact with each 
other about their work; (4) problem solve through project-based activities, which 
usually involve more critical thinking; and (5) regularly find information, make 
sense of it, and communicate it. Research provides evidence that students who 
engage in collaborative work, participating in more project-based learning, have 
higher levels of motivation (Wigfield et al., 1998; Guthrie and Wigfield, 2000). 
When students are motivated, they demonstrate improved achievement (White, 
1989; Roth & Paris,1991; Roderick & Engel, 2001; Haydel and Roeser, 2002; 
Gulek, 2003).”  
 
The findings of Fuchs and Woessmann (2004) provide a good summary of research into the 
impact of e-learning on students. They published a statistical analysis of the relationship between 
technology and student achievement for the Program for International Student Assessment 
(PISA). The 2000 PISA was the first in a series of triennial international assessments of 15-year-
olds conducted by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The 
assessment included problems in reading, math, and science, as well as questions about student 
background, school characteristics, and information on the use of computers and the Internet at 
home and at school. Fuchs and Woessmann analyzed data from 31 countries: 96,855 students 
tested in math and 174,227 students tested in reading. Their report concluded that: (1) the 
presence of technology is not, by itself, related to student achievement; and (2) the use of 
technology may help or hinder academic learning, depending on the nature of the use (Bielefeldt, 
2000). 
 
Thus, although technology is here to stay and is being rapidly infused into all aspects of 
education globally, the presence of technology must be coupled with a wider transformation 
effort to improve student outcomes. The integration of technology into an educational system is a 
complex process with implications for policy, curriculum, infrastructure, support and training 
(students, teachers, tech support staff, administrators, and others).  
 
2.  Impact of e-Learning Technologies on the Teacher and their Classroom 
Practice 
In order to better understand how e-learning technologies in a classroom setting affects 
student learning, one must also examine how they might affect their teachers, their classroom 
practice, and their schools. This section briefly reviews the impacts that have been shown to 
occur when e-learning technologies are introduced. 
17 
 
 
Research by Haddad and Draxler (2002) conducted in the UK and Africa (Ghana, Rwanda, 
South Africa, Tanzania) identified two main reasons why teachers use ICT in the classroom. 
First, teachers felt that their own use of computers benefited their learners, and second, teachers 
felt learners benefited from using computers themselves. The learners were seen to gain 
confidence, self-esteem and renewed motivation. The authors categorize technology use in the 
classroom at five levels: presentation, demonstration, drill and practice, interaction and 
collaboration. They noted that when the pedagogy shifted from a teacher - centered classroom 
environment to a more learner - centered environment, the effectiveness of ICT was enhanced.  
 
Similarly, Harrision, Thijus et al. (2001) explain that technology use creates a learner-
centered environment by: 
• Motivating learners by combining text, sound, color, and moving images that enhance 
content for easier learning 
• Facilitating acquisition of basic skills through drill and practice 
• Enhancing teacher training by improving access to and the quality of teacher training. 
The use of ICT by teachers has brought about significant changes in classroom practice. 
Kozma (2003, 2004) reports that this was evident from a series of case studies conducted in 27 
countries in Europe, Asia, North America, South America, and Africa. These studies show that 
innovative classroom use of computers depends on administrative support, teacher training, and 
supportive plans and policies. 
There are thus significant challenges to the effective use of technology in a classroom. A 
2006 study in South Africa noted the following change management obstacles experienced by 
teachers (Howie, Muller, & Patterson, 2005): 
 
• Perceived school related obstacles 
o ICT is not considered useful in my school 
o My school does not have the required ICT-infrastructure 
o My school lacks digital learning resources 
o I do not have the flexibility to make my own decisions when planning lessons 
with ICT 
o I do not have access to ICT outside of the school. 
 
• Teacher related obstacles 
o Lack of ICT-related skills 
o Lack of ICT-related pedagogical skills 
o Insufficient confidence to try new approaches alone 
o Lack of time to develop and implement ICT-using activities 
o Unable to identify which ICT tools will be useful. 
 
• Student related obstacles 
o Students do not possess the required ICT-skills 
o Students do not have access to the required ICT-related tools outside of the school 
premises. 
 
18 
Analysis of e-Learning 
It is useful to recognize the need for an effective change transformation program coupled 
with e-learning implementation to address perceived barriers to ICT use.  
 
It follows that  many impacts on the teacher are related to change management. Professional 
development alone is not sufficient to effect change in any significant way. Teachers often face 
challenges when beginning to use e-learning such as the lack of support by administrators, 
technical support problems, technology breakdowns, and a lack of the necessary technological 
tools. When the culture within a school does not support e-learning, the culture usually wins out 
(Fullan,1999). However, when there is a collaborative and supportive work culture the 
opportunities to make a difference in both teacher and student learning are high. A supportive 
work culture for teachers can be enhanced by the creation of learning communities (discussed 
below).  
 
B. Economic Benefits of e-Learning  
The potential economic benefits of e-learning can be classified into two categories: 1) e-
learning improving general education, which in turn has economic benefits; and 2) e-learning 
creating a technology-immersed population with 21st century job skills, which in turn create 
economic returns for a country investing in e-learning. The previous sections have identified the 
first step in showing these benefits from e-learning, namely that these technologies will result in 
better educational outcomes. This section looks at the next step in the value chain, examining the 
long term economic reward of those educational investments. In particular, it will explore the 
mechanisms through which this will result in a higher quality and more productive workforce. 
 
It must be noted that although e-learning can enhance economic outcomes through multiple 
mechanisms, it is difficult to measure the benefits. First, there is a significant time lag between 
the learning process and its effects on the student’s employment or the society at large. Panel 
data following individual students over a long time frame is nearly impossible to find. The 
second difficulty is measuring the impact of the diversity of learning goals and outcomes. 
Workforce development is a one such goal, but other initiatives may focus on health, good 
citizenship, or the arts. Third, e-learning is only one component where technology and learning 
meet; e-learning as such is a relatively recent phenomenon yet a technological savvy workforce 
has been a foundation of many developed economies for several years. It is difficult to 
disentangle informal learning about and through technology from traditional and formal e-
learning processes. A fourth confounding factor is the diversity in how ICT is used in schools. 
Technology can be used to deliver lectures, perform assessments, track progress, deliver 
educational games, etc. Not only do each of these methods have different costs and benefits, but 
each requires different efforts to integrate them into the pedagogical processes. The revision to 
the mode of teaching is often a larger challenge than the basic engineering challenges of 
installing new technologies. Finally, different geographies, income levels and histories will affect 
the benefits of the learning outcomes. In the United States, for example, a culture of computer 
gaming has generated substantial interest in educational games. Yet in developing counties, the 
widespread absence of TVs, computers and other electronic devices in the home and school 
mean that teachers and students need to learn the basics first.  
 
In sum, e-learning is key component of the large challenge of educating the next generation 
of workers for a new, knowledge-centered economy. Once graduates are prepared for such jobs, 
19 
 
the positive effect of their education on the national economy will be apparent after the economy 
has generated employment opportunities for them. This is often the challenge in developing 
countries facing the chicken-and-egg situation of needing to create jobs while educating a 
workforce to fill those positions. 
 
1. The Economic Benefits of Education 
It is now canonically accepted in the economics literature that a more educated workforce 
will create greater economic output (Kozma, 2005; Sianesi & Reenen, 2005). The new focus is 
on the exact mechanisms for why this link occurs. In general, two approaches have been used to 
model this relationship. The first is to treat labor as just one of many inputs into an economic 
production function, and then study whether an educated worker creates more production than an 
uneducated worker. The second is a two stage process that initially examines the effect of an 
educated laborer innovating and making the production function more efficient, and then 
examines if production has increased as a result of these more innovative processes. These two 
approaches are articulated in greater detail below. 
  
Historically the first approach described above was the most popular for modeling education 
and economics: classify the worker as yet another input into a production process. For example, 
a country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) could be measured as a function of its total 
workforce, number of factories, available natural resources, etc. Then a researcher could study 
the benefits of education by examining whether an educated workforce, when plugged into this 
production function, results in greater GDP. Although it may be conceptually crass to model 
“human capital” just like any other form of capital, it does show positive results in the benefits of 
education. Krueger and Lindahl (2000) showed that the change in education positively affects 
economic growth, both in terms of an increase in GDP and an increase in income for workers.  
Many of the previous studies focus on developed countries only, given the higher quality and 
more accessible data, but some research as attempted to specifically address this question from 
the perspective of developing countries. Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2002) examined data from 
98 countries and they found that the average return to an additional year of schooling for an 
individual is 10%, and that people in the low-and middle- income countries benefited relatively 
more from an additional year of schooling than those in high income countries. As a general rule, 
the maximum marginal rate of return is found at the secondary school level, but the returns 
continue to accrue through college (Dedrick, Kraemer, & Shih, 2011). Based on these numbers, 
an e-learning tool implemented today in Tanzania that would incentivize and successfully guide 
students through secondary and college should create $45,000 in economic value per student, 
measured at Purchasing Power Parity3.  
  
The alternative model for examining human capital unpacks the role of human capital to 
better understand how education workers are more innovative and hence have a greater effect on 
output. For example, a well educated worker will presumably discover more efficient production 
means or create entirely new categories of production. Some studies such as that performed by 
Marvel and Lumpkinv (2007) showed from a sample of 145 technology entrepreneurs that 
innovativeness is positively related to formal education. In contrast to the traditional method 
which merely treats human capital as a generic input that is transformed into output through the 
                                                 
3 Based on the average GDP per person measure at Purchase Power Parity, time an estimated 40 years of work, and 
a 10% increase in income per additional year of school. 
20 
Analysis of e-Learning 
industrial machine, this new approach attempts to model the uniquely human ability to transform 
the production process. Finding a link between education at this level and productivity, however, 
is more challenging. For example, Benhabib and Springel (1994) concluded that the effects of 
educational attainment are not related to economic growth using this form of economic 
modeling. This is likely due to the challenges of creating economic models to capture the full 
complexity of human activities in economic processes. A much broader range of issues dealing 
with creativity, collaboration methods, social norms, other economic infrastructure, and public 
policy initiatives make it difficult to link these fine grained human activities with aggregated 
economic outputs. Although economists generally accept that education improves economic 
output, existing studies have not yet been able to rigorously link specific educational activities to 
broader trends. 
 
2. The Economic Benefits of a High Tech Workforce 
Beyond the basic challenges of creating an educated workforce, it is important to align the 
educational outcomes with the demand for future jobs. In a globalized, knowledge-based 
economy, this requires a workforce that has a strong background in the sciences, engineering, 
and information technology. A large and growing body of research shows that such a high 
technology (high tech) workforce will create substantial economic benefits. For example, 
Lichtenberg (1995) reported that one Information Technology (IT) worker can be substituted for 
six non-IT workers. 
 
When examining the linkage between technology and economics, the first question is why a 
high tech worker creates greater economic outcomes. In general, technology has been found to 
contribute to economic growth in three ways (Oyelaran-Oyeyinka and Lal 2005): 
1) Technology creates new types of goods to be produced. This means that the actual act of 
producing technology goods and services is an increase in GDP, in much the same way 
that producing any good or service affects GDP. This requires greater employment 
generating greater economic output to satisfy the consumer and business demand for 
technology equipment. However, in this way, there is technically nothing special about 
technology compared to other types of production.  
2) Technology goods and services are more efficient substitutes for other types of goods and 
services. A classic example is market discovery mechanisms using mobile technologies. 
If a Tanzanian herder can use the mobile phone to discover which regional marketplaces 
are offering the best prices, he would be saving the labor time of personally visiting 
several markets to gather information. Furthermore, since the herder may drive the cattle 
from market to market, the IT solution may reduce strain on the cattle. Hence, the 
technology becomes a substitute for the labor intensive processes, making the system 
more efficient and freeing the herder to focus on more economically efficient activities. 
3) Technology is a special capital input, producing economic spillovers (UNCTAD, 2007). 
Information technology in particular exhibits properties of non-excludability, where 
knowledge learned by one individual or firm can create benefits for non-participating 
third parties. For example, the herder described above in Item #2 could tell a fellow 
herder about the economic benefits of using mobile phones to find the best prices for 
cattle. The herder is essentially no worse off from teaching other herders about this 
technology, but the other herders become better off. In fact, these knowledge spillovers 
21 
 
have been identified as the primary driver of economic growth in Paul Romer’s Nobel 
Prize winning research (Romer, 1986).  
In sum, a knowledge-based economy is a growing economy. Technology investment results 
in greater GDP. Greater GDP results in more technology investment. This results in a virtuous 
feedback loop. This result tends to hold for a variety of different definitions of ICT, including 
traditional land-line telecommunication, mobile phone investments, and broadband Internet 
access.  
 
The above framework describes why we would theoretically expect growth from an economy 
built upon technology workers. The next logical question is whether the empirical evidence finds 
any corresponding benefits. Because of issues of availability and data quality at the sub-national 
level in developing countries, most of this research has focused on the country level and how 
technology affects overall economic output. Usually, this productivity is broken down into two 
factors: ICT capital and ICT labor. The capital portion represents the productivity improvement 
attributable to investments in computer hardware and software. Although this is not directly 
attributable to jobs and human resources, these capital resources require trained technology 
workers to maintain. The more direct factor is the benefits of ICT labor, which represents 
technology trained individuals and the benefits they bring to the economy. Dewan and Kraemer 
(2000) show that productivity increases by approximately 17% as a result of ICT investment. 
Developed countries average in increase of 14%, though that result was not statistically 
significant, indicating a large amount of variability in the actual returns from investment, 
depending on the country. 
 
ICTs in education can reduce the costs of education per student by increasing the relative 
economic benefit of investment in education. ICTs can have differential economic benefits by 
improving how instructional methods are delivered. ICTs can deliver instruction in a more 
efficient, less expensive, or more accessible way (Clark, 1983). For example, e-readers can allow 
African children to access to thousands of books at relatively cheap price once the reader has 
been purchased. In addition to direct economic benefits, some believe ICT can even enhance the 
quality of education by supporting student understanding as well as helping them to develop 
skills needed to create knowledge (Kozma, 2005) although some scholars such as Clark (1994) 
believe that ICTs never directly influence learning itself.  
 
Beyond the broad benefits to economic output, technology investment can also create 
benefits for the worker through higher wages and more prestigious employment. Most of the 
studies in this area focus specifically on the benefits of knowing about ITCs: “By learning ICT 
skills, students become better prepared for work that increasingly involves the use of ICT” 
(Kozma, 2005, p.142). ICT workers can be examined in several ways (Romani, 2009). For 
example, the OECD (2005) compared ICT specialists, advanced users, and basic users. ICTs 
constitutes the main part of their job for the ICT specialists who can develop, operate and 
maintain ICT systems, while ICTs are a tool for both advanced users who can use advanced and 
often sector-specific software tools and basic users who can use generic tools such as Word, 
Excel and PowerPoint.  
 
As ICTs become a vital element in the working lives of people and for the competitiveness of 
enterprises in many countries, the smooth supply of ICT workers in the labor market becomes 
22 
Analysis of e-Learning 
important for the industrial efficiency and economic gains. A mismatch of supply and demand of 
IT workers is a global issue (Bailey & Stefaniek, 2002). Frinking, Ligtvoet, Lundin, and 
Oortwijn (2005) analyzed the current situation relating to the supply and demand of ICT 
practitioner skills in the European Union and its member states and concluded that there is no 
indication of a general practitioner skills shortage at the EU level. However, the decline of 
supply of highly-skilled ICT practitioners and persistence of digital illiteracy still raises concerns 
for EU policy makers (Commission of the European Communities, 2007). They call for 
additional attention to be paid to ICT workforce development for the future.  
 
In both developed and developing countries, ICTs affect employment and wages for the 
evolution of the composition of the labor force: the unskilled workers are the main losers in 
sectors where investment in technology and greater productivity are high (UNCTAD, 2007). 
Computer-based networks are changing how people work and are paid. The rewards for multi-
tasking are increasing and employers seem to prefer employees with broad-based education and 
conceptual and problem-solving skills. Skills can also be acquired on the job through on site-
training. The returns to higher learning are increasingly being recognized. 
 
At the individual level, the effects of ICT skills may vary in different social contexts because 
what are considered advanced ICT skills vary depending on the local context. Walton, Putnam, 
Johnson, and Kolko (2009) examined the relationship between ICT skills and employability in 
the context of a transitioning economy by examining the Kazakhstan case. According to them, 
“skills that are considered as basic computer literacy in the developed world are, in many 
developing and transitioning countries, considered sophisticated skill sets held by small segments 
of population” (p.1). Especially when ICT skills in those countries are combined with other 
factors such as higher education, these skill sets are found to be associated with prestige jobs.  
 
Although the benefits of a high tech workforce are great, it must be acknowledged that a 
more productive workforce also may result in a short term loss of some jobs. This Schumpeterian 
creative destruction is a fundamental element of the long term restructuring of the economy to 
achieve greater total economic benefits. If all Tanzanian cattle herders were to continue their 
work as cattle herders, it would not be possible to transform the workforce to meet the needs of a 
modern economy. Instead, some cattle herders will discover how to use technology to more 
efficiently manage larger herds, reducing the total number of potential herder jobs, but freeing up 
a larger portion of the total labor force to purse 21st century jobs in science and engineering. The 
short-term cost of this economic transition will be offset by the long-term benefits in the 
economic transition. 
 
3. Assessment of the Benefits of e-Learning 
The literature referenced above also provides some guidance on how to properly assess the 
benefits of an e-learning initiative and the economic outputs. One of the great challenges of 
performing any economic impact, especially with technology interventions, is dealing with the 
time lag between interventions and outcomes. To take a related example, assessment of 
Information Technology for businesses in the mid-1990 was plagued by the productivity 
paradox, where economists could not find any economic benefits from computer investments in 
spite of their great potential. As Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert Solow quipped, “We see 
23 
 
computers everywhere except in the productivity statistics” (Solow, 1987).  e-Learning 
interventions could run afoul of the same issues. 
 
The solution to the productivity paradox was a simple improvement in the assessment 
methodology. As Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1996) discovered in their ground breaking research in 
1996, the problem was with time lags. It was unreasonable to expect that a technology 
investment would instantly yield an increase in business productivity. Instead, it takes time for 
firms to integrate the technology into their business processes. By integrating time lags, these 
two researchers were able to find productivity improvements from technology investments 
approximately two years after the initial investment. This finding was replicated in broader 
contexts as well. A one or two year lag following investment in ICTs has been found in several 
studies (e.g., Kelly &Petrazzini, 1997; Hargittai, 1999; Oyelaran-Oyeyinka & Lal, 2005).  
 
This reflects the need to adapt educational and economic processes to take advantage of the 
new tech-savvy population. For example, it should not be surprising that simply handing a 
computer to a person will suddenly cause them to be more productive. In fact, the process of 
teaching individuals how to effectively use the technology can result in a short term diversion of 
resources, resulting in a short-term decrease in the productive use of the technology. 
 
Likewise, in the e-learning environment, it is important not to fall into the trap of expecting 
immediate returns from the intervention. For example, a secondary student that participates in an 
e-learning program to enhance her knowledge of physics will not contemporaneously cause jobs 
to be created. However, this improved physics education will hopefully inspire her to complete 
her secondary education, pursue a college degree in engineering, and eventually become a well-
paid member of the 21st Century workforce and an active citizen interested in good governance 
and an efficiently operating economy. This time lag means that an effective assessment program 
either needs to focus on more immediate metrics—e.g., an intent to pursue a college degree and 
become an engineer—or to recognize that any assessment must include a long term panel to 
follow student through the extended transformative process between intervention and economic 
outcomes.  
 
C.  Societal Impacts of e-Learning 
The impact of access to education on different members of society can be significant. 
Beyond the improved skills, income and employment effects on graduates as described above, 
other impacts of education include improved health and wellbeing, particularly among girls and 
women. This section on societal impacts briefly considers these types of impacts of education 
generally on society in developing countries, and then considers more closely the relationship 
between e-learning and society—particularly how the societal context can affect the ability of e-
learning programs to provide their potential benefits among all students. Societal aspects such as 
being in a rural location, a female student or speaking a different language can all affect access to 
and use of e-learning programs, and their success.   
 
One of the most well documented impacts of education on society is that of improved health. 
Indeed, because of this, one of targets of Millennium Development Goal Five regarding 
improving maternal health is to promote girls going school, especially primary school. As stated 
in the Goal (UNICEF 2011),  
24 
Analysis of e-Learning 
“Educating girls for six years or more drastically and consistently improves their 
prenatal care, postnatal care and childbirth survival rates.  Educating mothers also 
greatly cuts the death rate of children under five. Educated girls have higher self-
esteem, are more likely to avoid HIV infection, violence and exploitation, and to 
spread good health and sanitation practices to their families and throughout their 
communities. And an educated mother is more likely to send her children to 
school.”  
 
Both primary and secondary education has also been shown to be key components of an 
effective program to prevent HIV/AIDS transmission. Educated women are more likely to know 
how to prevent HIV infection, to delay sexual activity and to take measures to protect 
themselves. Education also makes young men more receptive to prevention messages. In many 
developing countries, the more educated and skilled young people are, the more likely they are to 
protect themselves and the less likely they are to engage in risky sexual behavior. The benefits of 
education come from actual knowledge that students gain about HIV, from training in 
negotiation and life skills and from their increased ability to think critically and analyze 
situations before acting. Women with post-primary education are five times more likely than 
illiterate women to know facts about HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS, UNFPA & UNIFEM, 2005; 
Vandermoortele & Delamonica, 2000). 
 
Additional impacts that particularly post-primary education has been shown to have include 
reducing poverty, delaying marriage of girls, and increasing decision making power. Secondary 
education plays a crucial role in preparing for a life-long learning perspective. These are all 
important reasons why governments in Africa have recently been heavily investing in universal 
primary school education and in expanded secondary school education.  
 
The education provided by these secondary schools however, may not be accessible to all 
segments of society or all regions of a country. Access to e-learning has been found to reflect this 
access to education and to ICT generally in the wider society. Research has shown that a gap in 
access to ICT exists between countries, and an even larger gap exists within countries between 
urban and rural areas, between men and women, and between rich and poor. This has been 
termed the digital divide, defined as “the gap between those with regular, effective access to 
digital technologies, in particular the Internet, and those without.”  
 
Access to secondary school education within countries follows a similar pattern. Figure 4 in 
Annex 3, for example, illustrates student attendance in Tanzanian secondary schools. The 
statistics reflect large differences in access to education between urban and rural schools, rich 
and poor areas, and male and female students. Thus physical access as well as socioeconomic 
factors, such as age, wealth, health status, physical mobility and cultural practices, are often 
barriers to access and use of e-learning (Naseem, 2010; Sutherland-Addy, 2008).  
 
Expanding e-learning in developing countries may lead to two opposing outcomes—it can 
either widen these existing inequalities in access to ICT and education, or it can reduce 
inequalities by providing information and educational opportunities that would otherwise not be 
available. Ensuring the second outcome requires understanding the current distribution of access 
25 
 
to education, ICT and other technologies, and the reasons for the inequitable distribution. This 
section describes some of the current patterns and implications for impacts on e-learning.  
 
1. The Rural-Urban Divide 
The global digital divide is a term used to describe the gap between well connected and 
poorly connected nations, while at the national level, there is often a strong urban-rural divide. In 
developing countries, most Internet users gain access through public access points like Internet 
cafes. The divide is thus closely related to geographic proximity of venues with technology to 
access the Internet.  
 
A statistical analysis analyzing the factors behind digital inequality within and between 
African countries found that differences of access and use could explained by five factors: 1) 
differences in the technical devices that people use to access the Internet, 2) location of access, 3) 
the extent of one’s social support network, 4) the type of activities the device is used for, and 5) 
one’s level of skill (Oyelaran-Oyeyinka and Lal 2005). It concluded that although infrastructure 
is a critical factor, the social context, education and technical knowledge of the individual user 
are also key. The study also found a strong correlation between Internet access and national 
economic development, although the causal link (whether the Internet led to development or vice 
versa) was not clear.  
 
These conclusions are mirrored in a study conducted in Tanzania. Furuholt and Kristiansen 
(2007) found that Internet users and usage at different sites are surprisingly uniform. Most users, 
particularly in rural areas, are young people, especially students. Also, most users are well 
educated (one-third actually have university education). 
  
The use of mobile phones illustrates possible future trends of ICT technologies in urban and 
rural areas. Mobile penetration in African urban centers is near the average penetration of all 
developing countries, whereas access in African rural areas has lagged because of difficulties 
caused by the lack of distribution channels, education and poverty (Anderson 2006). However, 
the growth rate of teledensity penetration in Africa has become the fastest in the world as the 
cost of handsets, calls and connection charges have declined, and as teledensity coverage has 
grown. Indeed, the mobile cellular growth rate has started to decline in developing countries as 
the market becomes more satisfied. The growth rate declined from around 32% annual growth in 
2005/06 to 18% in 2009/10. The mobile penetration rate in Africa was 41% at the end of 2010 
(compared to 76% globally) reflecting continued potential for growth, but also continued digital 
divide between Africa and other parts of the world, and between rural and urban areas of Africa 
(ITU 2009).  
 
In contrast to mobile telephones, Internet penetration, particularly in rural Africa, is growing 
more slowly (Annex 1). The percentage of people using the Internet in Africa, for example, is 
currently only 10.8% compared to a global average of 27.9%. Africa has by far the lowest 
penetration rate of broadband Internet of anywhere, with a penetration rate of less than 1% (ITU 
2009). The low levels of access are in a large degree due to cost. Although prices are declining as 
undersea’s cables reach coastal cities in Africa, the cost of Internet is much higher in Africa than 
elsewhere. Ethernet cables currently serve only urban centers across much of Africa. Rural areas 
and smaller urban centers in Africa can access Internet only through satellite systems or through 
26 
Analysis of e-Learning 
cellular networks. The satellite systems often require expensive installation and high monthly 
fees, whereas the cellular networks require little installation costs. Their data transfer speeds can 
be slow (insufficient for sharing large amounts of data or conducting video conferencing, for 
example) and are relatively expensive per byte. The result is that most rural areas have little 
access to the Internet, and that providing Internet to rural schools can be a continuing, expensive 
cost. Different solutions include using a Local Area Network (LAN) type approach to share 
Internet among schools, or providing ample software and content on resident servers in schools 
to be shared among users using wireless or wired communications. 
 
Another technical challenge that has prevented e-learning from being offered in rural areas 
has been the lack of reliable electrical power. In Africa and many other developing areas, the 
electrical grid does not yet reach more isolated rural areas, and the grid itself does not provide a 
steady or reliable source of power. Many governments do not have sufficient funding to pay 
electrical bills for all schools, either. Meanwhile, e-learning technologies, whether small hand-
held devices or projectors, require electrical power. In these situations, it is critical to design an 
efficient, low-power e-learning system. Different solutions to provide power off the grid include 
solar panels, diesel generators, and geo-thermal and wind energy. Solar is often used. 
Commercial and specially designed systems are now available for recharging small batteries to 
large systems that power a computer lab or an entire school. Initial costs for solar can be high, 
though they are declining. Like the Internet, providing electrical power to underserved areas can 
require a significant initial investment and some continuing costs.  
 
Despite these challenges, e-learning technologies have the potential to significantly improve 
access particularly to science and math education for rural or otherwise disadvantaged schools. 
These schools often are not able to attract or retain science and math teachers because the 
schools are in undesirable, isolated rural locations. e-Learning would provide these teachers and 
students otherwise unavailable access to ICT knowledge and skills, as well as improved 
educational content. Currently, however, most e-learning opportunities tend to be in urban areas 
due to the infrastructural and other challenges of rural areas. 
 
2. Culture and Language  
e-Learning has the potential to play a transformative role in a society. Culture, however, can 
play an important mediating role affecting how technology and e-learning approaches are 
adopted and adapted, and how successful they are in actually improving learning. The potential 
transformative role of e-learning often runs against educators’ preferences for teaching in 
familiar ways that do not affect life in classrooms. Educators tend to use e-learning approaches in 
culturally familiar ways that may reduce their effectiveness.  
 
Educators from different societies are incorporating and using e-learning technologies in 
different pedagogical cultures. Although the cultural differences can be subtle, understanding 
them can help explain the constraints and alternatives for e-learning. Zhang (2007, 2010) 
conducted analyses comparing Eastern, especially Chinese, and Western pedagogical cultures 
and how they affected their e-learning preferences. His findings are summarized below. 
Although there are major differences between Eastern cultures and African cultures, there are 
several similarities in their educational systems and teaching styles. Adapting e-learning for an 
African pedagogical culture may lead to similar experiences to those in Eastern countries. 
27 
 
Zhang’s work provides insights into what cultural factors affect e-learning approaches, and what 
to consider in designing e-learning programs.  
 
He found that Western learning culture tends to be more learner-centered, activity-focused, 
and individualized. Western students and educators tend to attach importance to questioning and 
criticizing information presented by an instructor. Technology is more likely to be content-open 
and used as a productivity tool (e.g. word processing, simulations, Internet research, graphics and 
spreadsheets).  
 
Easterners tend to favor collectivism. This cultural tradition, together with social factors such 
as centralized political systems and rapidly growing populations, have shaped a group-based, 
teacher-dominated, and centrally organized pedagogical culture:  
Culture of Examination: 
• Education is regarded as an essential way to compete for higher social statuses; 
• The performances of learners, teachers, and schools are largely defined according to 
exam scores; 
• Preparation for high-stake exams poses tremendous pressures to learners, parents, 
teachers, and administrators. 
Centralized Educational System: 
• Central governments design and execute policies and standards for school finance, 
curriculum, textbooks, assessment, and teacher preparation; 
• Teachers are required to teach uniform content, often based on the standard pace in 
reference to official teachers’ guides. 
 
Eastern schools have historically emphasized knowledge acquisition over more process, 
activity based learning. Chinese students treat texts and the instructor as highly authoritative 
sources of knowledge, and expect the instructor to provide structure and guidance. This has 
resulted in a focus on learning of content and strong accountability. However, it may lead to 
weakness in self-directed learning abilities, creativity, and critical thinking skills. Facing the 
challenges of a knowledge society and globalization, most Eastern nations are now attempting to 
steer their use of e-learning to promote students’ problem solving capabilities, lifelong learning 
skills, and creativity and inventiveness. 
 
A typical image of an Eastern classroom involves a teacher conducting expositive teaching in 
front of a large class of well-disciplined students, seated in rows. Good teachers model 
responsible learning behaviors, stimulate thinking by asking thought-provoking questions, and 
design assignments to promote understanding and integration of knowledge. Expository teaching 
is thus the most frequently used method, particularly where the primary objective in the 
curriculum is the mastery of standardized facts, concepts and procedures.  
 
Computers are being used to support such expository teaching especially in large classes. 
Educators often have a shortage of learning and teaching resources, and use ICT as a new 
information delivery tool that presents information in vivid, attractive ways. They would also 
like it to deliver drill and practice with immediate feedback. This expectation leads to a tendency 
towards software that can aid their expositive teaching. Teachers prefer content-bound and 
28 
Analysis of e-Learning 
curriculum-compliant courseware and resources, including tutorials, drills-and-practices, 
computer-assisted tests, and Web gateways that sort learning resources in line with the national 
curriculum. There is a strong need of digital projectors or LCD display boards to help deliver 
lectures in large classes without requiring significant changes in the teacher’s role. 
 
Language, too, can affect the design of e-learning programs and their success, particularly 
when the software, learning materials and Internet is in a language in which students and 
teachers are not strong. In Tanzania, for example, students switch from learning in Kiswahili in 
primary school to English as the language of instruction in secondary school. The national 
language and common lingua franca is Kiswahili, and most radio and television programs 
broadcast in Kiswahili. The students usually have had some English language classes in primary 
school, but many are not well prepared to enter into an English-only mode. Meanwhile the 
dominant language on the Internet is English, and most software and learning content is in 
English. Students and teachers with limited English may be marginalized (Naseem 2010). e-
Learning can thus require first becoming proficient in reading a second (or third) language before 
its potential can be met. However, e-learning and the Internet can also be a strong motivator for 
students to learn English.  
 
3. Gender and e-Learning 
ICT can be a strong change agent. In uprisings and pockets of challenge throughout the world 
we have seen the impact of ICT and social media to coordinate and communicate political and 
social movements. Access to ICT can empower social and economic development, as well as 
provide employment and grow the economy. But where are females in the mix? There is 
currently a digital divide between groups in society, and women in developing countries are 
often “within the deepest part of the divide” (Hafkin & Taggart, 2001). There is already evidence 
that gender inequities are being replicated in schools with girls using computers and the Internet 
less than boys (Olatokun 2008).  
 
Girls and women in developing countries thus need to be specifically written into ICT 
initiatives, particularly in schools, or their participation in education, the economy and the 
political debate may decline further relative to boys and men. UNICEF (2011) estimates the 
number of out-of-school children globally at 93 million – with the majority being girls. Almost 
80 per cent of the out-of-school children live in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. School 
attendance is rising rapidly as governments institute new education-for-all initiatives, but 
attendance in secondary schools is still low. Only 60 per cent of children of the appropriate age 
attend secondary school worldwide. In sub-Saharan Africa, that number drops to only a quarter. 
One unexpected side effect of the increase in children attending school is that the percentage of 
girls in secondary school in Africa actually dropped—studies showed that there was greater 
disparity in favor of boys in 2005 than in 1999 (UNESCO, 2008). Many factors contribute to the 
girls’ inferior educational opportunities and experiences. In secondary education, issues such as 
the lack of a safe learning environment, gender-based violence, poor sanitation facilities, the 
burden of caring for younger siblings or sick family members, early pregnancies, family pressure 
to get married, and the need to pay school fees acutely constrain girls’ ability to remain in school 
(Ugwuibe, 2009). Governments, international organizations and donors often have programs to 
improve girl’s access to education, with marked success in some countries.  
 
29 
 
e-Learning technologies could potentially play an important role in reducing the gap in 
access to education by girls in developing countries. Currently, however, the gender gap in 
access to education is mirrored in a gender gap of access to and using the Internet and other ICT 
technologies in the wider society. Fewer girls or women in developing countries have mobile 
phones, for example, or visit Internet cafes (Mercer, 2005). This report’s authors and others have 
witnessed computer labs in schools being used far more by male students than female students, 
possibly because of the cultural expectation that girls not push themselves forward (Olatokun 
2008). Few gender-disaggregated statistics exist, however, on ICT access and use in developing 
countries. One Africa country that has conducted such a survey, Senegal, found that 11% of men 
but only 5% of women were Internet users (ITU 2011a). There is even less documentation of the 
impact of e-learning on girls as compared to boys. Nevertheless, gender in secondary schools in 
developing countries is a large topic of research because of the gap in the access of girls to 
education. 
 
Much has been written about the importance of encouraging gender inclusiveness of 
educational technology (Heemskerk, ten Dam, Volman, &Admiraal, 2005). Topics examined 
include how boys and girls learn differently with technology, whether technologies or software 
favor one gender over another, and how to encourage teachers to address gender differences 
when using technology in the classroom. 
 
What makes educational technology suitable and attractive to females? From a landmark 
study by the American Association of University Women, and from ours and other’s research 
(Heeteret al., 2009), it has been found that girls have definite preferences for how they chose to 
learn with and about technology. For instance, girls prefer collaborative community ways of 
learning how to use technology, they like to have order and instructions to guide them, they 
prefer to learn about a subject of interest and then learn to use the technology as a tool rather 
than it being the focus of study, and finally they prefer to learn from female role models. 
 
In concert with the pedagogy, the tools themselves need to designed to be non-sexist in their 
assumptions and representations. Questions to ask, for example, include, “Do the illustrations 
and graphics of the program represent male and female persons, and are they represented in a 
non-stereotypical way? Do audio narrations include male and female voices and a variety of 
music and sounds that will appeal to both sexes?” (Heemskerk et al., 2011).  Representations 
such as these will signal early in the process whether or not the technology tool was designed 
with female participants in mind. 
  
According to Sanders (2005) who wrote “Lessons Learned in 22 Years of Working with 
Teachers about Girls in IT”, approaches that are successful in teacher training workshops 
regarding the sensitive subject of gender bias in education include, 
1) Diffuse resentment of teachers (who may think you blame them for the gender gap). 
Explain and emphasize the universality of gender bias, and that it is often inadvertent.  
2) Use local data when possible 
3) Stress the importance of teachers finding out about gender bias themselves (rather 
than take the presenters word on it) through mini-assignments such as observing eye 
contact of teachers with girls and boys.  
30 
Analysis of e-Learning 
4) Repeated training sessions are better than a one-time approach. Follow up is essential. 
Development happens over time. 
5) Reward teachers who do gender work. Rewards could include access to and training 
with technology, continuing education credit, drawing for a gift certificate, etc.  
6) Be explicit. Have the teachers tell the class what they are changing to ensure gender-
fair teaching. 
 
e-Learning is thus being introduced into educational systems in which girl students are often 
participating less than boy students. Access to and use of ICT technologies in the wider society is 
also gender-imbalanced in many developing countries. Nevertheless, introducing e-learning 
technologies into schools has the potential to assist girl students to improve their ability to 
participate and thrive in schools, and their new knowledge of computer technologies will 
certainly place them in a stronger position in their adult lives. 
 
 
IV. Best Practices 
The topics discussed above provide rich detail about what impacts e-learning can have, and 
what factors can affect the success of e-learning programs. The next section takes that one step 
further to describe specific programs that that integrated e-learning into schools and educational 
systems in developing countries, and what lessons can be drawn from them. This is followed by 
a summary of these lessons—the key components of successful e-learning programs. 
 
A. Case studies 
1. Algeria 
Michigan State University working with Creative Associates, International, USAID, and the 
Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) developed and implemented a three-year program to 
address the issues of infusing technology into the Algerian secondary education system. Through 
this initiative the team created a demonstration project connecting 28 secondary schools in 
northern Algeria with counterpart schools in the United States. The project activities included a 
long term ICT integration and e-learning plan in which both teachers and students would benefit 
from the use of e-learning and ICT. 
 
The lessons learned from this project are many but, most importantly; we learned that the 
teacher is the key to success in e-learning. Teachers participating in our program were often 
directed to participate by the Ministry of National Education even if they lacked the requisite 
skills. In those cases the responsibility for learning how to use the technology was left up to the 
teacher. Although program members did not consider this the best practice, it worked. At times, 
teachers relied on their students for support.  
 
We also learned that the teachers in the program often attracted other teachers who had 
initially resisted using technology. The peer-to-peer interaction yielded very positive results. 
Through this interaction, teachers created a wider learning community and participation that 
spread beyond the initial program. The evidence of this outcome was demonstrated by the fact 
that, initially only four secondary schools were participants but by the end of the second year, an 
additional 24 schools joined the program. The program thus became sustainable beyond the short 
term of the funding. 
31 
 
 The objectives listed below were essentially accomplished. Unfortunately, the project 
impacts were not measured, nor were they intended to be, at the conclusion of the project. The 
objectives for this program were as follows: 
 
Educational Objectives: 
• Upgrade the level of knowledge and skill set of Algerian Students 
• Provide an environment where the students can apply their knowledge and skills to real 
life problems and situations. 
• Provide a facilitating environment through which students can build on their acquired 
knowledge to build on existing concepts, or build new concepts altogether. 
• Empower students with the tools necessary to enter the 21st Century workplace and 
remain self-sustaining citizens (including skills such adapting to change, learning how to 
learn, communication skills, team-work skills, etc.) 
• Provide students with an interactive, collaborative learning environment through which 
they can interact with their community as well as interact with, and understand, the larger 
world. The purpose is to empower to generations of global citizens who are deeply 
rooted in their culture and heritage as well as open and understanding of the global needs, 
trends, and lifestyles. 
• Upgrade the level of knowledge and skills of the teachers in parallel to that of the 
students. Empower the teachers to facilitate the learning process by transforming 
themselves into team leaders and role models of “continuous learning”. 
 
Social Objectives: 
• Provide Algerians with the tools through which they benefit from and capitalize on life-
long learning opportunities. Life-long learning opportunities within this context include 
the following: 
o Access to learning content across Algeria and providing access to all educational 
content to every individual interested in learning or re-learning a skill. 
o Providing professional development and life-skills content to the larger Algerian 
community. 
• Help disseminate ICT further into the society by providing ICT tools that are equally 
available to males and females, rich and poor, urban and rural citizens. 
 
Economic Objectives: 
• Include local ICT professionals in the development and implementation to upgrade their 
“transferable” knowledge and expertise. 
• Transfer knowledge and expertise in learning technologies, design approaches, project 
management, best practices, and indicators/assessments to the Algerian partner 
institutions. 
 
Lessons learned from this project that are applicable to other developing countries include: 
1) Focus on the classroom teacher 
2) Establish methods and tools that enable teachers to create their own “communities of 
practice” 
3) Encourage teachers to engage their students with support and innovation 
32 
Analysis of e-Learning 
4) Challenge teachers to incorporate technology and e-learning into one aspect of their 
teaching and curriculum 
5) Provide teachers with professional development that focuses on how to use technology 
and how technology and e-learning can change their practice of teaching in positive 
ways. 
6) Encourage and reward teachers for using new and innovative ways of teaching and e-
learning. 
 
2. Lebanon 
Michigan State University participated in a three-year USAID/MEPI funded program with 
the Lebanese American University in Lebanon, which was designed to train Lebanon’s in-
service teachers on both how to use and how to teach with technology. A new teacher education 
program was developed and piloted with approximately 30 secondary school teachers. 
  
The overall goals of this program and of this university education partnership included: 
• Fostering critical thinking and inquiry learning through a comprehensive curriculum, and 
providing teachers with pedagogical skills that enable them to foster critical thinking and 
inquiry in their classrooms; 
• Developing an ICT in education curriculum that meets the specific needs of Lebanese 
teachers and is relevant to the nation’s needs; 
• Providing teacher professional development (both in-service and pre-service) that results 
in innovative teaching practices designed to motivate students at the primary, secondary, 
and postsecondary levels. 
• Developing administrator professional development programs that support the use of ICT 
in education and support innovative teaching and learning practices at all levels. 
• Developing and delivering a model ICT teacher professional development program that 
focused on the innovative uses of technology for teaching and learning, and 
• Developing better teachers, whether or not they use technology. 
 
Over the three-year life of the project, ICT standards for teachers emerged. These standards 
were adapted from a program offered to Michigan’s in-service teachers and created by the MSU 
College of Education. The standards, which were accomplished in this project to varying 
degrees, state that teachers completing this program, will: 
• Design, develop, and implement student-learning activities that integrate ICT for diverse 
student populations (emphasis on females); 
• Identify and apply resources for staying current in applications of ICT in education; 
• Demonstrate knowledge of uses of multi-media, hyper-media, telecommunications, and 
distance learning to support teaching/learning; 
• Demonstrate knowledge about instructional management resources that assist in such 
activities as writing and updating curriculum; creating lesson plans and tests; and 
promoting, reinforcing, and organizing data regarding student performance; 
• Use information technologies to support problem solving, data collection, information 
management, communications, presentations, and decision-making including word 
processing, database management, spreadsheets, and graphic utilities; 
• Demonstrate knowledge of equitable, ethical, gender, legal, social, physical, and 
psychological issues concerning use of information technology; and 
33 
 
• Use ICT to enhance continuing professional development as an educator. 
 
3. Pakistan 
From 2008 to 2010, Michigan State University directed the higher education component of 
the USAID funded PreSTEP (Pre-Service Teacher Education Program). The primary purpose of 
this program was to assist the Government of Pakistan, the Higher Education Commission and 
the Ministry of Education in achieving its goal of improving educational quality in Pakistan at all 
levels. The Michigan State University College of Education component of Pre-STEP focused on 
pre-service teacher education: on upgrading skills of teacher educators, on rationalizing and 
standardizing the curricula used for pre-service teacher education, on upgrading the 
infrastructure in the participating academic institutions, on strengthening educational research 
output, and in generating policy that strengthens teacher education at all levels. Michigan State 
University worked intensively with 15 pilot universities to improve the quality of pre-service 
education and in turn the quality of education throughout.   
 
Michigan State University’s approach was to provide support and consistent momentum to a 
large-scale change process. From the beginning the strategy was to support change from within 
the system while introducing best practices from the U. S. and elsewhere. “Early adopters” of 
technology change were identified and invited into the project. Program managers considered but 
did not focus on the resisters but rather put energy and resources toward those who were already 
moving towards the needed change.  
 
To facilitate change, the program began with a summit on “Leading for Change” and a 
process map was developed that established a path. By starting with a shared understanding of 
change and continuing to reinforce that process throughout, the project was able to maintain 
clarity in the large-scale work that was to be done. Pakistani educators were the leaders of this 
project and the MSU team provided them with professional development and attentive support to 
be successful.  
 
The list of best practices that emerged from this project included:  
1) Engage “early adopters” with interest already in technology and online learning. Reward 
them with support for their thirst for learning (a necessary trait of early adopters) and 
tools for taking their interest the next step. Let them be a shining example to others. 
Leadership should come from the key stakeholders. Sometimes these may be official 
leaders and sometimes leaders that emerge from within the system because of their 
expertise and/or passion for the change.  
2) Provide a map of the change process---the principles of change – and create a shared 
understanding of the change process. Let this guide the development of a detailed work 
plan that can be flexible as needed for taking advantage of surprises and new benefits that 
reveal as well as letting go of tasks that are not going anywhere. 
3) Learning must be ongoing, exciting, and easily accessible to those engaged in the project. 
Furthermore, the learning needs to be authentic, built around the real work of the project 
so that project advancement is the lead and the learning supports the quality of the 
outcome as well as its capacity to continue beyond the time when funding of the project 
is completed.  
  
34 
Analysis of e-Learning 
4. Chile 
An example of a broad, national ICT program that has met with success is the Enlaces 
initiative in Chile. Enlaces began in 1992 as part of the Chilean government’s educational reform 
program. As of the year 2000 the Enlaces initiative led to ICT implementation in over 5,000 
public schools, which includes 100% of secondary schools (Hinostroza, Hepp, & Laval, 2005). 
However, the goal of Enlaces goes beyond ICT implementation to the total transformation of 
school culture through integration of ICT in teaching and learning practices (Hinostroza et al.).  
 
A number of key strategies have contributed to the success of this Chilean program. First, 
teacher training is considered a focal point of the initiative and has included initial training for 
two years and follow-up training for at least another year, as well as offering “Educational 
Information Technology Encounters (Hinostroza et al., 2005, p. 4)” where teachers and students 
from different schools can meet, exchange ideas, and observe practices from other schools. A 
second key strategy involves building a national infrastructure support system, which involves a 
number of universities in providing training programs and activities (Hinostroza et al.). A third 
strategy is providing technology that is easy for initial users to learn, called La Plaza. Fourth, the 
private sector is involved in providing support, including equipment and internet expansion 
(Hinostroza et al.).  
 
Evaluations of Enlaces within Chile and by outside organizations such as UNESCO and the 
World Bank show positive results for students, teachers, and communities. For students, benefits 
include growth in knowledge, reading comprehension, social interaction, self-esteem, and 
motivation (Hinostroza et al., 2005). From teachers’ perspectives, positive outcomes include 
improved school climate, more opportunities for professional development, and positive impacts 
on the teaching-learning process (Hinostroza et al.). Impacts on the community are also evident, 
including increased school prestige and parental support (Hinostroza et al.). The Enlaces 
example stands out as positive example of reform at the national level. 
 
5. Malaysia 
Another nation that has put a major spotlight on e-learning in schools is Malaysia. As part of 
the government’s Vision 2020, a number of ICT initiatives have been implemented, including 
the Malaysian Smart School, begun in 1997. The goal of the project is to develop students who 
are self-motivated, lifelong learners and was expected to be available in all Malaysian schools by 
2010 (Digital Learning Newsletter, 2008). As in the Chilean case, Malaysian officials have 
recognized the importance of teacher professional development as a key factor in the 
sustainability of e-learning. A meta analysis of research conducted in Malaysia showed that with 
proper training and support, even older teachers were able to successfully integrate e-learning 
into their teaching practices (Lau & Sim, 2008). 
 
6. South Africa 
A comprehensive study of ICT in education was conducted by the International Association 
for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA) and reported on in the Second Information 
Technology in Education Study (Howie, Muller & Paterson, 2005). This study looked at the 
status of ICT in education in 26 countries including South Africa. 
 
35 
 
In brief, the study examined the ICT and e-learning integration process in the 26 countries; 
national policy, infrastructure, curriculum and pedagogy, staff and teacher development, school 
policies and usage of ICT, and successful practices (Howie, Muller & Paterson, 2005). Most 
countries have policies for strengthening the role of ICT in education. They recognize that 
“knowledge and competencies needed in the workplace and in society will be increasingly short 
lived due to the fast pace of development and increasing information accessibility, which implies 
an urgent need for lifelong learning skills as a new type of educational aim for our schools.” 
(Howie, Muller & Paterson, 2005). However, in South Africa the concern is that many schools 
have policies for ICT integration and e-learning but few have implemented them.  
 
While this study reports on many factors and indicators for ICT and for e-learning, the key 
takeaway for African countries is the importance of the teacher. The report noted that, according 
to school principals, most teachers’ lack of ICT knowledge and this was a major obstacle in 
realizing the schools’ ICT goals. Most schools had a policy that teachers must receive training, 
and as a result some teachers attended basic ICT courses. However, the financial constraints of 
teacher training resulted in a low number of actual participants.  
 
There were several other key observations regarding the teachers. The first is that when 
teachers were faced with mandates on the use of technology, they tended to use the technology 
for personal productivity rather than learning. The technology assisted with attendance, word 
processing, and assessment. But as a pedagogical tool it failed to realize its potential. The second 
observation was that teachers often resisted the use of technology and e-learning because of an 
insufficient amount of time needed to prepare any lessons and especially to rework the lessons to 
incorporate ICT. Novice technology users also resisted change as it took too much time, they 
feared failure, and the curriculum and school administration did not support ICT use. 
 
While a number of negatives were highlighted, the key is to recognize these challenges and 
view them as opportunities for future improvement. Through teacher training (both on how to 
use and how to teach with technology), attention to the curriculum and the creation of peer-to-
peer learning communities the potential for ICT and e-learning can be realized.  
 
These case studies and the authors’ experience indicate that there are some particular 
activities in e-learning programs that are remarkably successful–leading to e-learning being fully 
integrated into teaching, and encouraging educators to sustain and expand the use of e-learning. 
The program activities that worked well and were key to successful programs include: 
6) the integration of e-learning into the curriculum 
7) a focus on training teachers to both use and teach with technologies,  
8) the establishment of a strong pedagogical foundation for e-learning to assist teachers in 
integrating it into their teaching 
9) providing ongoing support for teachers 
10) teachers had an opportunity to join a “community of practice.” 
 
The most successful programs also took advantage of the fact that informal leaders often 
emerged from schools and classrooms. As an example, teachers participating in both the Algeria 
and Lebanon programs became the innovators and change agents within their schools. They 
embraced e-learning and their use of e-learning in classrooms encouraged others to explore the 
36 
Analysis of e-Learning 
potential it provides. These teachers encouraged the excitement and technology skills that 
students brought to their classrooms.  
 
B. Key components of successful programs 
This section provides additional information on some of the key components of successful e-
learning programs. Selecting only a few components to highlight is challenging and involves an 
examination of a broad range of issues with each interdependent upon the other. Although 
particular components may assist in providing success, a sustainable program requires a multi-
level approach. This would include: 
• Policy 
o National ministerial levels 
o District and local levels 
• Standards 
o Teacher standards 
o Student standards 
o Administrator standards 
• Curriculum 
• Infrastructure 
o Hardware, software 
o Electricity 
o Connectivity  
o Technical support 
• Professional Development 
o Pre-service teacher training programs / colleges of education / teacher training 
colleges 
o In-service teacher training 
 Formal training  
 Informal training 
o ICT training 
 Training for how to use technology 
 Training for how to teach with technology 
• Instructional Resources. 
 
Although all the above items are important, the components below—teacher training, teacher 
standards and communities of practice—have been chosen to be further discussed in this paper 
due to their relevance for planning new programs.  
 
1. Teacher Training and Professional Development 
In addition to investments in ICT infrastructure, computers and learning management 
systems, countries also reported the importance of investing in one of their most important 
resources - teachers. In a large international study, nearly half of the countries reported providing 
online professional development for improving teacher skills and providing interactive 
collaborative tools to foster the development and sharing of instructional materials and strategies 
among teachers. Almost all countries also reported providing digital instructional resources for 
teachers through websites, online portals and learning management systems, often partnering 
37 
 
with commercial publishers for their development (Bakia, Murphy, Anderson, & Estrella 
Trinidad, 2011). 
 
Research indicates that professional development for teachers, including initial training and 
ongoing support, is a key factor in supporting successful change in educational practices, 
including development of e-learning. The Second Information Technology in Education Study, 
an international study of ICT and pedagogical practices within secondary schools in 22 countries, 
indicates “the provision of ICT-PD (professional development) activities is a major means of 
improving teachers’ competence and confidence in using ICT in their teaching (p. 194, (Howie, 
Muller, & Patterson, 2005).” Research undertaken in Malaysian secondary schools showed that 
even older teachers do well implementing e-learning with appropriate training and support (Lau 
& Sim, 2008).  
 
Governments of African countries, such as Nigeria, have realized the important role of 
continuous teacher professional development in reaching their national educational goals. In their 
Roadmap for the Nigerian Education Sector, government officials outline their plan to 
implement a National Framework for Continuing Professional Development for teacher (Egwu 
2009). Teacher professional development is a critical component in addressing the challenges 
that African nations, including Tanzania, face within secondary education. Teacher support and 
training are necessary strategies to help address teacher shortages, particularly in math and 
science, absenteeism, and inequalities in education from urban to rural areas (Baker, 2010; 
MoEC, 2010). In Tanzania educational leaders within government identify capacity building and 
teacher professional development as the “main instrument for bringing qualitative improvement 
in teaching and learning (Education Sector Development Committee, 2010, p. 30).” 
 
In understanding the role of teacher professional development, it is crucial to consider that 
teachers need to know both “how to use” technology and “how to teach” with technology. 
Section II.A.1. above discusses the TPACT approach, for example. Zhang (2003) and Goldman 
(2003) note that, unless there is a strong pedagogical foundation for ICT use, teachers will 
accommodate the use of ICT rather than assimilate into the curriculum. They note that the 
acquisition of technology skills does not translate into a change in teaching and learning. They 
suggest two guiding principles: 
1) Teachers must be the pedagogical ICT leaders. Imposing the use of technology upon a 
teacher often results in the teacher using technology only for personal productivity 
(writing letters, taking attendance, etc.). Teachers are more apt to adopt and infuse 
technology into their curriculum when they assume responsibility for technology. 
2) Acquisition of both ICT and pedagogical skills are crucial. Successful cases of ICT 
implementations occur where there is a conscious effort to integrate the acquisition of 
technology skills with cognitive and curriculum needs. Hence, there is a need for basic IT 
skill training and pedagogical training. 
2. Standards – What teachers need to know and be able to do 
With a focus on 21st Century skills and e-learning we must examine what teachers need to 
know and be able to do related to teaching and learning with technology. The International 
Society for Technology and Education (ISTE), an international professional association 
38 
Analysis of e-Learning 
representing educators worldwide, has established standards for students, teachers, and 
administrators. As we examine the key components of successful programs we should look 
carefully at what the ISTE standards indicate for teachers. The standards (Annex 5) state that 
teachers should: 
1) Facilitate and Inspire Student Learning and Creativity. Teachers should use their 
knowledge of subject matter, teaching and learning, and technology to facilitate 
experiences that advance student learning, creativity, and innovation in both face-to-face 
and virtual environments 
2) Design and Develop Digital-Age Learning Experiences and Assessments. Teachers 
should design, develop, and evaluate authentic learning experiences and assessments 
incorporating contemporary tools and resources to maximize content learning in context 
and to develop the knowledge, skills, and attitudes as related to the standards for students. 
3) Model Digital-Age Work and Learning. Teachers should exhibit knowledge, skills, and 
work processes representative of an innovative professional in a global and digital 
society. 
4) Promote and Model Digital Citizenship and Responsibility. Teachers should understand 
local and global societal issues and responsibilities in an evolving digital culture and 
exhibit legal and ethical behavior in their professional practice. 
5) Engage in Professional Growth and Leadership. Teachers should continuously improve 
their professional practice, model lifelong learning, and exhibit leadership in their schools 
and professional community by promoting and demonstrating the effective use of digital 
tools and resources. 
 
3. Communities of Practice – Connecting the Educational Community 
The concept of “communities of practice” is not new and teachers for many years and 
generations have taken advantage of opportunities to gather and share information and resources. 
Today the technological advances have expanded opportunities to connect and collaborate not 
only with local teachers but also with a larger community of teachers, teacher educators, 
administrators, and a larger global community of educators. According to Bakia et al. (2011) 
there is a trend towards facilitating and encouraging the development of online communities of 
practice among educators. They report, “Added-value elements of online communities of 
practice include the ease of asynchronous communication, the inclusion of participants from a 
large geographic area, the ease of access, the digital archiving tools, and the materials and 
discussions that were posted or took place in the past.” (p. 38). 
 
Communities of practice are an emerging trend and provide interactive, collaborative models 
for material development and sharing. The community of practice allows participants to share 
information and resources and learn from one another. Through the process of sharing 
information and experiences with the group, members learn from each other. Communities of 
practice can exist online through interactive discussion forums or in real life during group 
planning periods in schools, during lunch or other designated times. Communities of practice can 
also use blended techniques, leveraging both face-to-face interactions and online tools and 
discussions (Means et al. 2010; Bakia et al., 2011). 
 
39 
 
A community of practice is based on the need to build capacity among educators for 
continued learning, innovation, and adjustment. Rather than simply importing ideas and 
strategies from elsewhere, the goal is to help educators find what is most effective for the most 
important issues within their context. Accordingly, these communities will draw upon the 
expertise of those in other areas, and then adapt and apply those lessons to their own context. To 
build such a community, it is necessary to develop a sense of membership, emotional safety, 
belonging, and personal investment (McMillan and Chavis, 1986).  
 
An excellent example of a community of practice is cited in the 2011 IETE report:  
“The Flemish Belgian Ministry has consistently favored open-source solutions, and in 
2002 it created its own open-source portal, KlasCement, as a central access point for c. 
Since its creation, the portal has expanded to include over 60,000 members and 13,000 
contributions. Learning resources available via the portal include articles, documents, 
websites and software. Because nearly all of these are freely available and non-
commercial in nature, the quality of the service depends upon user-generated 
contributions and feedback. The government has thus developed an incentive system to 
encourage teacher participation.” (p. 38). 
Another example cited in the IETE (2011) report is New Zealand. Their portal includes 
interactive Web 2.0 technologies including blog pages, discussion forums, and a community 
page that discusses various software applications to improve teaching, tools for assessing student 
knowledge, and a professional learning community that discusses best practices. In Africa, 
SchoolNet Africa is a pan-African education portal promoting education through ICT in African 
schools and provides information to school administrators, teachers and learners. 
 
In sum, the importance of establishing communities of practice cannot be overemphasized. 
Whether online or on-site, a community of practice provides opportunities for teachers, students, 
administrators, researchers, teacher educators, parents, policymakers, and other stakeholders to 
share their knowledge, best practices, and instructional resources. A community of practice also 
encourages new pedagogical strategies, innovative uses of technology, and supports innovation. 
And finally, it allows teachers and other stakeholders to learn from within their own local 
community and address the educational needs they face daily in the classroom. 
 
 
V. Conclusion 
 
Governments and donors in developing countries realize the critical importance of education 
for economic and social development. Many especially in Africa are now implementing 
ambitious plans to rapidly increase the number of schools. This investment is leading to 
significant progress in increasing the quantity of schools and students, and the next challenge is 
to update the curriculum and improve the quality of education. Governments are turning to e-
learning in this endeavor. Many have started e-learning programs and are putting computers into 
schools. This report has attempted to provide a compilation of research on e-learning impacts 
and to discuss promising practices to inform new and on-going e-learning programs.  
 
 This paper synthesized literature on the uses and impacts of e-learning in developing 
countries, particularly in Africa. e-Learning is a term that encompasses a broad array of content 
40 
Analysis of e-Learning 
and instruction methods, and that has come to mean a new model of education involving revised 
curriculum, infrastructure, teacher professional development, textbooks, and exams to provide 
students with technology and “21st century skills” such as creative problem solving. A 
particularly useful aspect of ICT in education includes accessing the enormous amount of 
educational resources on the Internet and online libraries. The networking of teachers, students 
and others can also produce a lively community sharing information, ideas and strategies.  
 
The short history of e-learning programs in developing countries has provided some key 
lessons in what activities work, and what produce sustainable programs. Many of the program 
activities that are successful are centered on the teacher: strong teacher training and professional 
development, mentorship, networking, and support to integrate e-learning pedagogical 
approaches into classroom practice and curriculum. The e-learning approaches need to be 
designed to fit the local situation and needs, for example content needs to be not only contribute 
to the curriculum and in the local language, but it also need to reflect cultural norms. Sustainable 
e-learning programs themselves require a multi-level approach from national level policy to 
Ministry curriculum revision to local infrastructure support. This involves strong national 
leadership and many participating actors. Critical national institutions include teacher training 
colleges, the Ministry of Education, and the private sector. International partners can play an 
important synergistic role providing technical expertise and financial support. 
 
The actual impact of past e-learning programs on student achievement, and related national 
economic development and societal changes in developing countries is at this point difficult to 
estimate due to the paucity of quantified research. Some research has indicated that certain types 
of e-learning approaches, especially those that blend more traditional teacher centered teaching 
with technology, and technology that encourages student interaction with the content, does 
improve student learning. Cross-country comparison research finds significant impacts of 
especially secondary and tertiary school education on economic development, and indicates that 
improved education (especially in science and technology) does lead to a better workforce and 
higher incomes of graduates. What is needed is research that follows e-learning graduates and 
others over time to identify how strong the e-learning impact is, and what educational factors are 
particularly effective. Similarly, the impact of e-learning on societal factors can only be 
indirectly inferred. Education itself does result in a significant improvement in health, especially 
in girls and women. The more education, the larger the effect. It also reduces poverty, improves 
self esteem and decision making power. Societal factors clearly shape the potential success of e-
learning programs, however. Geographical location, poverty and gender currently have a large 
role determining access to education, especially secondary school education. Access to ICT 
parallels that of education. ICT and good schools are usually concentrated in places with better 
infrastructure and connectivity—whereas rural and poor areas are where the assistance provided 
by e-learning is most needed and can make the largest difference. It requires specific planning, 
and more effort and resources to deliver e-learning to underserved areas and people.  
 
Despite the complexities, the authors feel that enough has been learned from a pedagogical, 
technical and socioeconomic perspective to be able to design a successful e-learning program 
that methodically addresses the challenges, and that provides a platform for e-learning’s 
transformative effect. 
41 
 
References 
Alemneh, D. and Hastings, S. (2006). Developing the ICT infrastructure for Africa: Overview of 
barriers to harnessing the full power of the Internet. Journal of Education for Library and 
Information Science 24 (1), 4-16. 
Bailey, J. L., & Stefaniak, G. (2002). Preparing the information technology workforce for the 
new millennium. ACM SIGCPR Computer Personnel, 20(4), 4-15. 
Bakia, M., Murphy, R., Anderson, K., & Estrella, G., (2011) International experiences with 
technology in education: Final report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, 
Office of Educational Technology. 
Baqir, M. N. (2009). A qualitative inquiry of ICT based socio-economic development in 
developing countries: the case of Pakistan. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from 
http://libres.uncg.edu/ 
Benhabib, J., & Spiegel, M. M. (1994). The role of human capital in economic development 
evidence from aggregate cross-country data. Journal of Monetary Economics, 34, 143-
173. 
Bielefeldt, T. (2000). Computers and Student Learning: Interpreting the Multivariate Analysis of 
PISA 2000. Journal for the Research of Technology in Education, 37(4), 339-347 
Brynjolfsson, E., & Hitt, L. (1996). Paradox lost? Firm-level evidence on the returns to 
information systems spending. Management Science, 3, 541-558. 
Calder, G. (2009). Are the benefits of ICT in teacher education colleges in Tanzania being 
realised? Unpublished Masters’ thesis. Newcastle University. Newcastle, U.K. 
Caselli, F., & Coleman, II W.J. (2001). Cross-country technology diffusion: the case of 
computers. Working paper no. 8130. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic 
Research, 
Clark, R.E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning from media. Review of Educational 
Research, 53, 445-459.  
Commission of the European Communities. (2007). E-skills for the 21st century: Fostering 
competitiveness, growth and jobs. Brussels. Retrieved from 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/ict/files/comm_pdf_com_2007_0496_f_en_acte_en.pdf. 
Dedrick, J., & Kraemer, K. L. IT and Productivity in Developed and Developing Countries. 
Retrieved from University of California, Irvine, Personal Computing Industry Center 
(PCIC). . Retrieved from http://pcic.merage.uci.edu/papers/2011/ITandProductivity.pdf. 
DeMaagd, K. (2011). The Moderating Role of ICT for Development. 4th Annual Workshop of 
the ICIS Special Interest Group on Global Development. Association for Information 
Systems Special Interest Group on ICT and Global Development.  
Dewan, S., & Kraemer, K. L. (2000). Information technology and productivity: evidence from 
country-level data. Management Science, 46, 548-562.  
Egwu, S. (2009). Roadmap for Education. Abuja, Nigeria: Nigerian Ministry of Education. 
42 
Analysis of e-Learning 
Farrell, G. & Isaacs, S. (2007). Survey of ICT and education in Africa: A summary report based 
on 53 country surveys. Washington, DC: infoDev / World Bank. Retrieved from 
http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.353.html
Frinking, E., Ligtvoet, A., Lundin, P., & Oortwijn, W. (2005). The supply and demand of e-skills 
in Europe. Prepared for the European Commission and European e-Skills forum, Rand 
Europe, September 2005. . Retrieved from http://europa.eu.int/comm/enterprise /ict/policy/doc/eskills-
2005-10-11.rand.pdf
Fuchs, T., Woessmann, L. (2004). Computers and Student Learning: Bivariate and Multivariate 
Evidence on the Availability and Use of Computers at Home and at School. CEIS 
Working Paper No. 1321. . Retrieved from 
www.ifo.de/portal/pls/portal/docs/1/1188938.PDF 
Fullan, M., & Smith, Gerry. (1999). Technology and the Problem of Change. Retrieved from 
http://www.michaelfullan.ca/Articles_98-99/12_99.pdf 
Furuholt, B. & Kristiansen, S. (2007). a rural-urban digital divide? Regional aspects of Internet 
use in Tanzania, Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 31(6), 1-15  
Gulek, C. (2003). Preparing for high-stakes testing. Theory Into Practice, 42 (1), 42-50.  
Gulek, J. & Demirtas (2005). Learning with Technology: The Impact of Laptop Use on Student 
Achievement. The Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment. 3(2). . Retrieved 
from www.jtla.org  
Guthrie, J. & Wigfield, A. (2000). Effects of Integrated Instruction on Motivation and Strategy 
Use in Reading. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(2), 331-341. 
Haddad, W. D., & Draxler, A. (2002). The dynamics of technologies for education. In W. D. 
Haddad & A. Draxler (Eds.), Technologies for education: potentials, parameters, and 
prospects (pp. 3-17). Paris: UNESCO.  
Hafkin, N., Taggart, N., (2001) Gender, Information Technology, and Developing Countries: An 
Analytic Study, Academy for Educational Development (AED). . Retrieved from 
ict.aed.org/infocenter/pdfs/Gender_Book_Photos.pdf 
Hare, H. (2007). Survey of ICT and education in Africa: Tanzania country report. Washington, 
DC: infoDev / World Bank. Retrieved from 
http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.353.html
Hargittai, E. (1999). Weaving the Western Web: explaining differences in Internet connectivity 
among OECD countries. Telecommunications Policy, 23, 701-718. 
Harrison, C., Comber, C., Fisher, T., Haw, K., Lewin, C., Lunzer, E., McFarlane, A., Mavers, D., 
Scrimshaw, P., Somekh, B. and Watling, R. (2002) ImpaCT2: The Impact of Information 
and Communication Technologies on Pupil Learning and Attainment, London: 
Department for Education and Skills (DfES)/Becta. 
Haydel, A. M. & Roeser, R. W. (2002). On the links between students’ motivational patterns and 
their perceptions of, beliefs about, and performance on different types of science 
assessments: A multidimensional approach to achievement validation. National Center 
for Research and Evaluation, CA: Los Angeles, Report No. 573.  
43 
 
Heeter, C., & Winn, J., (2009). Gaming, Gender, and Time: Who Makes Time to Play? Sex 
Roles, 61(1-2), 1-13. 
Hennessy, S. Onguko, B., Harrison, D. Ang’ondi, E.K., Namalefe, S., Naseem, A. & Wamakote, 
L. (2010). Developing the use of information and communication technology to enhance 
teaching and learning in East African Schools: Review of the Literature. Research Report 
No. 1. Nairobi, Kenya: Centre for Commonwealth Education & Aga Khan University 
Institute for Educational Development—Eastern Africa.  
Hinostroza, E., Hepp, P. (2009) Enlaces: The Chilean ICT Experience in Education, Instituto de 
Informática Educativa - Universidad de La Frontera Red Enlaces - Ministerio de 
Educación de Chile  http://www.enlaces.cl   
Howie, S. J., Muller, A., & Paterson, A. (2005).  Information and communication technologies in 
South African secondary schools. Cape Town, South Africa: HSRC Press. 
Intel World Ahead Program (2009). The positive impact of eLearning. Retrieved from 
http://download.intel.com/pressroom/archive/reference/Positive_Benefits_of_eLearning_whitepaper.pdf. 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). (2009). The world in 2010: ICT facts and 
figures. Retrieved from www.itu.int. 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). (2011a). ICT data and statistics (IDS). 
Retrieved from www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/index.htm. 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). (2011b). The role of ICT in advancing growth 
in least developed countries. Trends, challenges and opportunities. Retrieved from 
www.itu.int. 
Jonassen, D., Peck, K., & Wilson, B. (1999). Learning With Technology: A Constructivist 
Perspective, Prentice Hall, Inc. 
Kelly, T., & Petrazzini, B. (1997). What does the Internet mean for development? Telecom 
interactive development symposium, Geneva, 11 September. 
Koory, M. (2003). Differences in learning outcomes for the online and F2F versions of “An 
Introduction to Shakespeare.” JALN 7 (2): 18-35. 
Kozma, R. B. (2005). Monitoring and evaluation of ICT for education impact: a review, in: 
Wagner, D.A., Day, B., James, T., Kozma, R.B., Miller, J. and Unwin, T. (Eds), 
Monitoring and Evaluation of ICT in Education Projects: A Handbook for Developing 
Countries. Worldbank/InfoDev. . Retrieved from 
http://www.infodev.org/en/Publication.9.html. 
Kulik, J. (2003). Effects of Using Instructional Technology in Elementary and Secondary 
Schools: What Controlled Evaluation Studies Say. SRI International.  
Lau, B.& Sim, C. (2008). Exploring the extent of ICT adoption among Secondary School 
Teachers in Malaysia. International Journal of Computing and ICT Research, II (II),19-
36.  
Lichtenberg, F. R. (1995). The Output Contributions of Computer Equipment and Personal: A 
Firm-Level Analysis. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 3, 201-217. 
44 
Analysis of e-Learning 
Marvel, M. R., & Lumpkin, G. T. (2007). Technology entrepreneurs' human capital and its 
effects on innovation radicalness. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31, 807-828. 
Mercer, C. (2005). Telecenters and Transformations: Modernizing Tanzania through the Internet. 
African Affairs, 105 (419) 243-264. 
Means, B., Toyama, Y., Murphy, R., Bakia, M., Jones, K. (2010). Evaluation of Evidence-Based 
Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-Analysis and Review of Online Learning Studies. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education. 
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A 
framework for teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017-1054. 
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2008). The AACTE Handbook of Technological Pedagogical 
Content Knowledge for Educators, ed. AACTE Committee on Innovation and 
Technology. Washington, D.C.: American Associate of Colleges for Teacher Education. 
Retrieved from http://aacte.org, 
Nasseem, A. (2010). Physical and other related external factors affecting the use of ICT in 
primary and secondary schools in Sub-Saharan Africa. In Developing the use of 
information and communication technology to enhance teaching and learning in East 
African Schools: Review of the Literature. Research Report No. 1. (eds.) Hennessy, S. 
and Onguko, B. Nairobi, Kenya: Centre for Commonwealth Education & Aga Khan 
University Institute for Educational Development—Eastern Africa. 
Olatokun, W. (2008). Gender and ICT policy in Africa: Issue, strategies and policy options. 
Information Development, 24(1), 53-65. 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (2005). New perspectives 
on ICT skills and employment. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development.  
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. & Lal, K. (2005). Internet diffusion in sub-Saharan Africa: A cross-
country analysis. Telecommunications Policy, 29, 507–527.  
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2009). P21 Framework Definitions. Unpublished paper. 
Retrieved from http://www.p21.org/documents/P21_Framework_Definitions.pdf. 
Penuel, W. (2006). Implementation and Effects Of One-To-One Computing Initiatives: A 
Research Synthesis. Journal of Research on Technology in Education. 38(3), 329-348. 
Psacharopoulos, G., & Patrinos, H. A. (2002). Returns to investment in education: a further 
update. The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 2881. Washington, D.C.: 
The World Bank. 
Romani, J.C.C. (2009). Strategies to promote the development of E-Competencies in the Next 
Generation of Professionals: European and International Trends. Retrieved from Cardiff 
University. ESRC Centre on Skills, Knowledge and Organisational Performance. . 
Retrieved from 
http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/socsi/research/researchcentres/skope/publications/monographs/monograph13.pdf. 
Romer, P. M. (1986). Increasing returns and long-run growth. The Journal of Political Economy, 
94, 1002-1037.Sianesi, B., & Reenen, J. (2003). The returns to education: 
Macroeconomics. Journal of Economic Surveys, 17, 157-200.  
45 
 
Roblyer, M. & Doering, A. 2009. Integrating Educational Technology into Teaching (5th 
Edition). Allyn & Bacon, Pubs. 
Roderick, M. & Engel, M. (2001). The grasshopper and the ant: Motivational responses of low-
achieving students to high-stakes testing. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 23 
(3), 197–227.  
Rockman et. al. (1997). Report of a laptop program pilot: A project for Anytime Anywhere 
Learning by Microsoft Corporation Notebooks for Schools by Toshiba America 
Information Systems. San Francisco, CA: Rockman et al.  
Roth, J. L. and Paris, S. G. (1991). Motivational differences in students’ perceptions of 
classroom and standardized achievement tests. Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the American Educational Research Association. Chicago, IL: April 3–7.  
Ryckeghem, D. (1995). Information technology in Kenya: A dynamic approach. Telematics and 
Information, 12(1), 57-65. 
Sanders, J. (2005) Lessons Learned in 22 Years of Working with Teachers about Girls in IT. 
Oxford, U.K. Retrieved from http://www.josanders.com/pdf/Oxford.pdf. 
Solow, R. (1987, July 12). We'd Better Watch Out. New York Times Book Review. 
Sutherland-Addy, E. (2008). Gender Equity in Junior and Senior Secondary Education in Sub-
Saharan Africa. World Bank Working Paper 140. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.  
Ugwuibe, C. (2009). Gender and Education in Africa. African and Diaspora Women Fact Sheet 
Series. Washington, D.C.: TransAfrica Forum. Retrieved from 
http://www.transafricaforum.org/files/FACT%20SHEET%20-%20FINAL%20Education%20and%20Gender%20in%20Africa.pdf
Uden, L., Damiani, E., Wangsa, I. (2007). The future of E-learning: E-learning ecosystem. 
Inaugural IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, 21 
February 2007: 113-117. Retrieved from 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=4233689&tag=1  
UNAIDS, UNFPA and UNIFEM. (2005). Women and HIV-AIDS: Confronting the crisis. A 
joint report of UNAIDS, UNFPA and UNIFEM.  Retrieved from 
http://www.unfpa.org/hiv/women/report/index.htm 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). (2007). Science and 
technology for development: the new paradigm of ICT. Information Economy Report 
2007-2008. New York: United Nations.  
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), (2008). 
Educational for All (EFA) Global Monitoring Report 2008. Retrieved from 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001547/154743e.pdf. 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). (2008). Education statistics: Tanzania. New York: 
UNICEF Division of Policy and Practice, Statistics and Monitoring Section. Retrieved 
from http://www.childinfo.org/files/ESAR_Tanzania.pdf. 
UNICEF (2011). Millenium Development Goals. 5: Improve maternal health. Retrieved from 
http://www.unicef.org/mdg/maternal.html 
 
46 
Analysis of e-Learning 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID). (2011). Mobile Phones, eBooks 
Turning the Page on Education. Frontlines, September/October. Retrieved from 
http://www.usaid.gov/press/frontlines/fl_sep11/FL_sep11_EDU_MOBILE.html. 
Vandermoortele, J. and Delamonica, E. (2002). Education ‘vaccine’ against HIV/AIDS. Current 
Issues in Comparative Education, 3 (1), 6-13.  
Verspoor, A . (2008). At the Crossroads: Choices for Secondary Education in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Africa Human Development Series. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.  
Walton, R., Putnam, C., Johnson, E., & Kolko, B. (2009). Skills are not binary: Nuances in the 
relationship between ICT skills and employability. Information Technologies and 
International Development, 5(2), 1-18. 
White, N. (1989). Developmental relationships between students’ attitudes toward reading and 
reading achievement in grades 1 through 8 (Report No. 040, 143). (ERIC Document 
Reproduction No. ED 329 905).  
Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. S., & Rodriguez, D. (1998). The development of children’s motivation in 
school contexts. In P.D. Pearson, & A. Iran-Nejad (Eds.). Review of research in 
education. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.  
World Bank. (2011). The Use of Mobile Phones in Education in Developing Countries. 
Unpublished website http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/ 
0,,contentMDK:22267518~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:282386,00.html. 
Zhang, J. (2007). A cultural look at information and communication technologies in Eastern 
education. Education Technology Research and Development, 55:301–314. 
Zhang, J. (2010). Technology-supported learning innovation in cultural contexts. Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 58 (2), 229-243. 
47 
 
ANNEX 1: Internet Availability by Continent. 
 
Figure 1. Internet Users by Continent, 2010. Source: ITU 2011. 
67.0
50.7
34.0
29.7
24.1 22.5
10.8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Europe The Americas CIS* World Arab States Asia & Pacific Africa
Internet users per 100  inhabitants, 2010
* Commonwealth of Independent  States
Regions are based on  the ITU BDT Regions, see: http://www.itu.int/ITU‐D/ict/definitions/regions/index.html
Source:  ITU World Telecommunication /ICT Indicators database  
 
Figure 2. Broadband Subscriptions by Continent, 2010. Source ITU 2011. 
23.8
14.1
8.3
7.6
5.5
1.9
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
25
Europe The Americas CIS* World Asia & Pacific Arab States Africa
Fixed (wired) broadband subscriptions per 100  inhabitants 2010
* Commonwealth of Independent  States
Regions are based on  the ITU BDT Regions, see: http://www.itu.int/ITU‐D/ict/definitions/regions/index.html
Source:  ITU World Telecommunication /ICT Indicators database  
 
 
 
 
48 
Analysis of e-Learning 
ANNEX 2: Enabling and Constraining Features of ICT in the Tanzanian 
Educational System. Source: Hare 2007.  
 
 
Factors  Enabling Features  Constraining Features  
Policy framework 
and  The new policy, when enacted and  The lack of a policy framework  
implementation  implemented, will help guide the 
development of ICT in education and 
therefore make the ministry assume 
leadership  
has hindered the uptake of ICT in 
education to date which contributed to the 
limited active promotion of ICTs in 
education within the Ministry of 
Education .  
Infrastructure 
and cost of 
bandwidth  
 Despite the liberalisation of the 
telecommunications sector, the cost of 
bandwidth is still out of reach of many 
schools. Rural schools that are out of the 
national telecommunications network 
need to use expensive satellite 
technologies. 
Language of the 
Internet  
There is an increasing interest in 
developing online content in Kiswahili 
and some applications now come with 
Kiswahili dictionaries. The advent of 
open source software has helped 
localise ICTs and the Internet and 
therefore increased access.  
Language has been identified as one of 
the major inhibitors of ICT use in 
Tanzania. A majority of the population is 
comfortable in Kiswahili and only learns 
English in later years in late primary 
school or early secondary school.  
Electricity   The national electricity grid is still limited 
to commercially viable areas missing out 
most of the schools, which are in the rural 
areas. This, coupled with major 
breakdowns and load shedding, has 
increased the cost of owning ICT 
infrastructure.  
Tutor technicians   ICT in education is still a new concept. 
The teachers- colleges are now training 
teachers in ICT . A lot more effort will be 
required to give in-service training to 
teachers in ICT. 
New technologies There is proliferation of new 
technologies that are promising to 
drastically lower the cost of entry and 
ownership of ICT is schools. These 
include open source software and 
Wireless Connectivity solutions using 
GSM networks, which have a wider 
coverage in the country. 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
ANNEX 3. Tanzania Secondary School Education Graphs.  
Figure 3. Pupil/ Teacher Ratio in Tanzanian Schools, 1980-2006. Source: UNICEF 2008. 
 
Figure 4. Secondary School Attendance in Tanzania by Gender, Urban/Rural and Wealth Group. 
Source: UNICEF 2008. 
50 
Analysis of e-Learning 
ANNEX 4: International e-learning actors in developing countries. 
 
International Institutions 
 
InfoDev (www.infodev.org) is a program within the World Bank Group that promotes the use of 
primarily ICT technologies for entrepreneurship and education in developing countries. Its 
education program aims to produce knowledge resources on case studies, best practices and 
lessons learned in ICT4E, and it has produced a series of reports that are available on its website. 
It has also produced a toolkit for education policy makers and others to plan and evaluate ICT 
education development programs.  
 
World Bank: In addition to InfoDev (see above), the World Bank supports many programs and 
produces reports related to ICTs and education. One example would be the African Virtual 
University (AVU), an online education portal. The main page on ICT and Education from the 
World Bank's Education web site can be found at http://www.worldbank.org/education and 
clicking on "ICT and Education". 
 
eLearning Africa (http://www.elearning-africa.com) is Africa's largest annual conference on 
education and technology. It provides a forum for discussion and networking. At the sixth annual 
conference in 2011, 1,702 participants from over 90 countries from Africa and elsewhere 
attended. It was hosted by the Government of Tanzania in Dar es Salaam. The conference was 
held in English, French and partly in Kiswahili. The seventh eLearning Africa conference will 
take place in May 2012 in Cotonou, Benin. 
 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) is the United Nations’ specialized agency for 
ICTs. It allocates global radio spectrum and satellite orbits, develops technical standards for 
ensuring that networks and technologies interconnect, and works to improve access to ICTs to 
underserved communities worldwide, particularly in developing countries. This includes 
technical capacity building, and disseminating information on trends and impacts of ICTs in 
development (http://www.itu.int/en/pages/default.aspx ). 
 
UNESCO (United Nations Education, Science and Cultural Organization; 
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco/themes/icts/ ): UNESCO’s global network of offices, 
institutes and partners provide countries with resources for elaborating ICT in education policies, 
strategies and activities. The UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education 
(IITE) specializes in information exchange, research and training on the integration of ICT in 
education. This includes Open Access modalities, building communities of practice, global 
digital libraries and resource centers and digital learning tools. The Bangkok ICT in education 
office website has an e-library of ICT in education publications and other resources 
(http://www.unescobkk.org/education/leading-the-international-agenda/ict ).  
 
UKAID/ DFID, The Department for International Development in the United Kingdom, has been 
a leader in supporting research into appropriate uses of ICTs in the education sector in 
developing countries, and the related issues and challenges. See informational resources at 
http://www.dfid.gov.uk/research/imfundo.asp and the Eldis large platform of documents related 
to development at http://www.eldis.org/.  
51 
 
The Development Gateway was initiated by the World Bank and later became an independent 
foundation. The Gateway's "dgCommunities platform" hosts a set of online communities of 
practice focused around 30 development topics. The communities enable knowledge-sharing 
(over 50,000 postings), peer networking and collaboration for development professionals and 
others working in the field. The Development Gateway sponsors two on-line "communities" 
related to ICT and education: e-Learning (http://topics.developmentgateway.org/elearning and 
Open Educational Resources (http://topics.developmentgateway.org/openeducation) which is a 
clearinghouse for a wide range of OERs, including learning content, learning tools, and 
implementation resources. It also support Zunia, a knowledge sharing platform with e-learning 
information (http://zunia.org/cat/e-learning-1/).  
USAID (the United States Agency for International Development) has the “dot-EDU” 
information and communication technology (ICT) program to assist developing countries in 
strengthening educational systems that improve quality, expand access, and enhance equity 
through applications of digital and broadcast technologies 
(http://www.usaid.gov/info_technology/dotcom/dotedu.html ).  
 
Examples of private corporations involved in e-learning 
Cisco  
IBM 
Intel (Intel Learning Series software and Classmate PC)  
Microsoft (Technology for Emerging Markets) 
Sun Microsystems 
 
Small sample of international NGOs involved in education in developing countries 
Care 
Creative Associates 
Oxfam 
Save the Children 
World Learning  
World Vision 
 
Online courses and information 
The Khan Academy has a library of over 2,400 videos covering topics from arithmetic to 
physics, and 180 practice exercises (http://www.khanacademy.org/).  
 
YOUTUBE EDU hosts more than 125,000 free instructional videos from universities and 
independent educators (http://www.youtube.com/education).  
 
SchoolNet Africa is a pan-African education portal promoting education through ICT in African 
schools that provides information to school administrators, teachers and learners 
(http://www.schoolnetafrica.org/ ). 
52 
Analysis of e-Learning 
ANNEX 5. Technology Standards for Teachers of the International Society for 
Technology in Education (ISTE). Source: http://www.iste.org/standards.aspx.  
 
53 
 

