®
Internet of Things:
Wireless Sensor Networks
 
White Paper
3
Today, smart grid, smart homes, smart water 
networks, intelligent transportation, are infrastruc-
ture systems that connect our world more than we 
ever thought possible. The common vision of such 
systems is usually associated with one single con-
cept, the internet of things (IoT), where through the 
use of sensors, the entire physical infrastructure is 
closely coupled with information and communica-
tion technologies; where intelligent monitoring and 
management can be achieved via the usage of net-
worked embedded devices. In such a sophisticat-
ed dynamic system, devices are interconnected to 
transmit useful measurement information and con-
trol instructions via distributed sensor networks.
A wireless sensor network (WSN) is a network 
formed by a large number of sensor nodes where 
each node is equipped with a sensor to detect 
physical phenomena such as light, heat, pressure, 
etc. WSNs are regarded as a revolutionary 
information gathering method to build the 
information and communication system which 
will greatly improve the reliability and effi ciency 
of infrastructure systems. Compared with the 
wired solution, WSNs feature easier deployment 
and better fl exibility of devices. With the rapid 
technological development of sensors, WSNs will 
become the key technology for IoT.
In this White Paper we discuss the use and 
evolution of WSNs within the wider context of 
IoT, and provide a review of WSN applications, 
while also focusing the attention on infrastructure 
technologies, applications and standards featured 
in WSN designs. This White Paper is the sixth in 
a series whose purpose is to ensure that the IEC 
can continue to contribute with its International 
Standards and Conformity Assessment services 
to solve global problems in electrotechnology.
Section 2 starts with the historical background of 
IoT and WSNs, then provides an example from the 
power industry which is now undergoing power 
grid upgrading. WSN technologies are playing 
an important role in safety monitoring over power 
transmission and transformation equipment and 
the deployment of billions of smart meters.
Section 3 assesses the technology and charac-
teristics of WSNs and the worldwide application 
needs for them, including data aggregation and 
security.
Section 4 addresses the challenges and future 
trends of WSNs in a wide range of applications 
in various domains, including ultra large sensing 
device access, trust security and privacy, and 
service architectures to name a few.
Section 5 provides information on applications. 
The variety of possible applications of WSNs to the 
real world is practically unlimited. On one hand, 
WSNs enable new applications and thus new 
possible markets; on the other hand, the design 
is affected by several constraints that call for new 
paradigms. This section outlines WSN uses for the 
smart grid, smart water, intelligent transportation 
systems, and smart home domains.
Section 6 offers analysis of standardization being a 
major prerequisite in achieving the interoperability 
of WSNs, not only between products of different 
vendors, but also between different solutions, 
applications and domains.
Section 7 concludes with a number of key 
recommendations for industry, regulators, the IEC, 
and general observations on WSN security and 
data topics.
Executive summary
4
Acknowledgments
This White Paper has been prepared by the 
Wireless Sensor Networks project team, in the IEC 
Market Strategy Board. The project team includes:
Dr. Shu Yinbiao, Project Leader, MSB Member, 
SGCC
Dr. Kang Lee, Project Partner, NIST
Mr. Peter Lanctot, IEC
Dr. Fan Jianbin, SGCC
Dr. Hu Hao, SGCC
Dr. Bruce Chow, Corning Incorporated
Mr. Jean-Pierre Desbenoit, Schneider Electric
Mr. Guido Stephan, Siemens
Mr. Li Hui, Siemens
Mr. Xue Guodong, Haier
Mr. Simon Chen, SAP
Mr. Daniel Faulk, SAP
Mr. Tomas Kaiser, SAP
Mr. Hiroki Satoh, Hitachi
Prof. Ouyang Jinsong, ITEI China
Mr. Wang Linkun, ITEI China
Ms. Wang Shou, ITEI China
Dr. Zhen Yan, Nari Group Corporation
Dr. Sun Junping, China-EPRI
Prof. Yu Haibin, SIA
Dr. Zeng Peng, SIA
Dr. Li Dong, SIA
Dr. Wang Qin, University of Science and 
Technology, Beijing
Executive summary
5
List of abbreviations 9
Glossary 12
Section 1 Introduction 13
1.1 Overview 13
1.2 Scope of this White Paper 14
Section 2 History and industrial drivers of WSNs 15
Section 3 WSN technology 19
3.1 Characteristic features of WSNs 19
3.2 Sensor nodes 20
3.2.1 Miniaturization technology of sensor based on MEMS 20
3.2.2 Ambient energy harvesting technology 21
3.3 Access network technologies 22
3.4 Topology 24
3.4.1 Self-organizing and reliable networking technology 25
3.4.2 Low cost IP interconnection technology 25
3.4.3 Self-adaptive fl ow control technology 27
3.5 Data aggregation 28
3.6 Security 29
3.6.1 Trust, security and privacy 29
3.6.2 Crypto algorithms 30
3.6.3 Key management of WSNs 31
3.6.4 Secure routing of WSNs 31
3.6.5 Secure data aggregation of WSNs 32
Table of contents
6
Table of contents
Section 4 Challenges of WSNs 33
4.1 System qualities, architecture divergence, and the need for an architecture framework 33
4.2 Ultra-large sensing device access 35
4.2.1 Massive heterogeneous data processing 35
4.2.2 Intelligent control and services to dynamic changes 35
4.3 Sensor network architecture 36
4.4 High concurrent access 36
4.4.1 High concurrent access with frequency division multiplexing 37
4.4.2 High concurrent access with distributed antenna systems 37
4.5 High real-time transmission 37
4.5.1 Distributed solution 38
4.5.2 Centralized solution 38
4.6 Semantic representation and processing 40
4.7 More secure WSNs 40
4.7.1 Protocol security framework 41
4.7.2 Trust, security and privacy 41
Section 5 WSN applications in the infrastructure systems 43
5.1 WSN application in the smart grid 43
5.1.1 Online monitoring system for transmission lines 43
5.1.2 Intelligent monitoring and early warning system for substations 44
5.1.3 Online monitoring and early warning system for distribution networks 46
5.1.4 Smart electricity consumption services 47
5.2 WSN application in smart water networks 48
5.2.1 Sustainability (water resource focus) 48
5.3 WSN application in intelligent transportation 50
5.3.1 Sensing of traffi c fl ows 50
5.3.2 City logistics 51
5.3.3 On-board WSNs 51
5.3.4 WSN in traffi c infrastructures 52
5.4 WSN application in smart homes 52
5.4.1 The energy challenge 52
5.4.2 Energy effi ciency in buildings – Case study 53
7
5.4.3 Active control in buildings 54
5.4.4 WSNs are key for improving the energy effi cient performances of existing buildings 55
5.5 Additional application benefi ts of WSN 57
5.5.1 Improve energy effi ciency 57
5.5.2 Contribute to environmental monitoring 57
5.5.3 Enhance social services 57
Section 6 Standards of WSNs and systems 59
6.1 General 59
6.2 Present status 59
6.3 Standardization needs and outlook 67
6.4 Challenges and future standardization needs 68
Section 7 Conclusions and recommendations 69
7.1 General recommendations 69
7.2 Recommendations addressed to the IEC and its committees 70
Annex A Access technologies 71
A.1 Developing trend of access technologies 71
A.1.1 Bluetooth 4.0 71
A.1.2 IEEE 802.15.4e 72
A.1.3 WLAN IEEE 802.11™ 73
References 75
Table of contents

9
 ABS anti-lock braking system
 AMI advanced metering infrastructure
 CAPEX capital expenditure
 CoAP constrained application protocol
 COSEM companion specifi cation for energy metering
 CPU control processing unit
 DLMS device language message specifi cation
 DSN distributed sensor network
 ESC electronic stability control
 FCD fl oating car data
 FDM frequency-division multiplexing
 FH  frequency hopping
 GHG greenhouse gases
 GPS global positioning system
 ICT information and communication technologies
 IoT internet of things
 KPI key performance indicator
 M2M machine to machine
 MAC media access control
 MEMS microelectromechanical systems
 MIMO multiple-input multiple-output
 OEM original equipment manufacturer
 OFDM orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
 OPEX operational expenditure
 PHY physical layer
 PV photovoltaic
 QoS quality of service
 RES renewable energy source
List of abbreviations
Technical and
scientifi c terms
 RFID radio-frequency identifi cation
 SOA service oriented architecture
 SOAP service oriented architecture protocol
 TDMA time division multiple access
 TSMP  time synchronized mesh protocol
 TSP trust, security and privacy
 UCC urban consolidation centre
 USN ubiquitous sensor network
 WIA-FA wireless networks for industrial automation – factory automation
 WIA-PA wireless networks for industrial automation – process automation
 WISA wireless interface for sensors and actuators
 WLAN  wireless local area network
 WMAN  wireless metropolitan area network
 WPAN  wireless personal area network
 WSN  wireless sensor network
 WWAN  wireless wide area network
 XFCD extended fl oating car data
 ABB ABB Group
 ARPANET Advanced Research Projects Agency Network
 BBF Broadband Forum
 CAB Conformity Assessment Board (of the IEC)
 China-EPRI China Electric Power Research Institute
 DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (USA)
 ETSI European Telecommunications Standards Institute
 IEC International Electrotechnical Commission
 IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
 IETF Internet Engineering Task Force
 ISO International Organization for Standardization
 ITEI Instrumentation Technology and Economy Institute (China)
Organizations, 
institutions and 
companies
List of abbreviations
11
 ITU-T  International Telecommunication Union – 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector
 MSB Market Strategy Board (of the IEC)
 NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
 OGC Open Geospatial Consortium
 OMA Open Mobile Alliance
 SGCC  State Grid Corporation of China
 SIA Shenyang Institute of Automation (China)
 SMB Standardization Management Board (of the IEC)
 UCB University of California Berkeley (USA)
 W3C World Wide Web Consortium
List of abbreviations
12
Glossary
internet of things
IoT
refers to the interconnection of uniquely identifi able 
embedded computing-like devices within the 
existing internet infrastructure
media access control layer
MAC layer
part of the data link protocol that controls access 
to the physical transmission medium in IEEE 802 
networks (LANs)
system on a chip
SoC
integrated circuit (IC) that integrates all components 
of a computer or other electronic system into a 
single chip
time synchronized mesh protocol
TSMP
a networking protocol that forms the foundation 
of reliable, ultra low-power wireless sensor 
networking
wireless local area network
WLAN
local area network in which data are transferred 
without the use of wires
wireless metropolitan area network
WMAN
also known as a wireless local loop (WLL). WMANs 
are based on the IEEE 802.16 standard. Wireless 
local loop can reach effective transfer speeds of 
1 to 10 Mbps within a range of 4 to 10 kilometres
wireless personal area network
WPAN
a low-range wireless network which covers an area 
of only a few dozen metres
wireless sensor network
WSN
self-organizing, multi-hop networks of wireless 
sensor nodes used to monitor and control physical 
phenomena
wireless wide area network
WWAN
wireless network that provides communication 
services to a geographic area larger than a single 
urban area. The most common of all wireless 
networks
13
Section 1
 Introduction
1.1 Overview
Today sensors are everywhere. We take it for 
granted, but there are sensors in our vehicles, 
in our smart phones, in factories controlling CO2 
emissions, and even in the ground monitoring 
soil conditions in vineyards. While it seems that 
sensors have been around for a while, research on 
wireless sensor networks (WSNs) started back in 
the 1980s, and it is only since 2001 that WSNs 
generated an increased interest from industrial 
and research perspectives. This is due to the 
availability of inexpensive, low powered miniature 
components like processors, radios and sensors 
that were often integrated on a single chip (system 
on a chip (SoC)).
The idea of internet of things (IoT) was developed 
in parallel to WSNs. The term internet of things 
was devised by Kevin Ashton in 1999 [1] and refers 
to uniquely identifi able objects and their virtual 
representations in an “internet-like” structure. 
These objects can be anything from large buildings, 
industrial plants, planes, cars, machines, any kind 
of goods, specifi c parts of a larger system to human 
beings, animals and plants and even specifi c body 
parts of them.
While IoT does not assume a specifi c communi-
cation technology, wireless communication tech-
nologies will play a major role, and in particular, 
WSNs will proliferate many applications and many 
industries. The small, rugged, inexpensive and low 
powered WSN sensors will bring the IoT to even 
the smallest objects installed in any kind of envi-
ronment, at reasonable costs. Integration of these 
objects into IoT will be a major evolution of WSNs.
A WSN can generally be described as a network 
of nodes that cooperatively sense and may control 
the environment, enabling interaction between 
persons or computers and the surrounding 
environment [2]. In fact, the activity of sensing, 
processing, and communication with a limited 
amount of energy, ignites a cross-layer design 
approach typically requiring the joint consideration 
of distributed signal/data processing, medium 
access control, and communication protocols [3].
Through synthesizing existing WSN applications 
as part of the infrastructure system, potential 
new applications can be identifi ed and developed 
to meet future technology and market trends. 
For instance WSN technology applications for 
smart grid, smart water, intelligent transportation 
systems, and smart home generate huge amounts 
of data, and this data can serve many purposes.
Additionally, as the modern world shifts to this new 
age of WSNs in the IoT, there will be a number of 
legal implications that will have to be clarifi ed 
over time. One of the most pressing issues is the 
ownership and use of the data that is collected, 
consolidated, correlated and mined for additional 
value. Data brokers will have a fl ourishing business 
as the pooling of information from various sources 
will lead to new and unknown business opportu-
nities and potential legal liabilities. The recent US 
National Security Administration scandal and other 
indignities have shown that there is wide interest in 
gathering data for varied uses.
One of the more complex issues which arise 
within this new world is the thought of machines 
making autonomous decisions, with unknown 
impact on the environment or society within which 
14
Introduction
it functions. This can be as simple as a refrigerator 
requesting replenishment for milk and butter at 
the local store for its owner, or as complex as a 
robot that has been programmed to survive in a 
harsh environment that originally did not foresee 
human interaction. It can also be as simple as a 
vehicle that records its usage, as does the black 
box in the aerospace industry, but then not only 
using the information to understand the cause of 
an accident, but also to provide evidence against 
the owner and operator. For example, a machine 
that notifi es legal authorities if it was used against 
the law.
It comes to the point where a machine starts acting 
as if it were a legal entity. The question of liability 
starts to get fuzzy and the liability question for the 
“owner” and “operator” of the machine gets more 
diffi cult to articulate if there is little to no real human 
intervention in the actions of the machine or robot. 
This is certainly the worst case scenario, but the 
question is how to balance the cost of potential 
liabilities with the benefi ts of IoT solutions? This 
quickly starts to become more of a societal or 
ethical, and moral discussion. That is what we 
usually refer to as generational shifts in values – 
but the IoT trend will not wait a generation.
1.2 Scope of this White Paper
This White Paper is the sixth in a series whose 
purpose is to ensure that the IEC can continue 
to contribute through its International Standards 
and Conformity Assessment services solving 
global problems in electrotechnology. The White 
Papers are developed by the IEC MSB (Market 
Strategy Board), responsible for analyzing and 
understanding the IEC’s market so as to prepare 
the IEC to strategically face the future.
15
Section 2
History and industrial drivers of WSNs
The development of WSNs was inspired by military 
applications, notably surveillance in confl ict zones. 
Today, they consist of distributed independent 
devices that use sensors to monitor the physical 
conditions with their applications extended to 
industrial infrastructure, automation, health, traffi c, 
and many consumer areas.
Research on WSNs dates back to the early 
1980s when the United States Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) carried out the 
distributed sensor networks (DSNs) programme 
for the US military. At that time, the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) 
had been in operation for a number of years, 
with about 200 hosts at universities and research 
institutes [4]. DSNs were assumed to have many 
spatially distributed low-cost sensing nodes, 
collaborating with each other but operated 
autonomously, with information being routed to 
whichever node that can best use the information. 
Even though early researchers on sensor networks 
had the vision of a DSN in mind, the technology was 
not quite ready. More specifi cally, the sensors were 
rather large (i.e. the size of a shoe box and bigger), 
and the number of potential applications was thus 
limited. Furthermore, the earliest DSNs were not 
tightly associated with wireless connectivity.
Recent advances in computing, communication 
and micro-electromechanical technology have 
resulted in a signifi cant shift in WSN research and 
brought it closer to the original vision. The new wave 
of research on WSNs started around 1998 and 
has been attracting more and more attention and 
international involvement. The new wave of sensor 
network research puts its focus on networking 
technology and networked information processing 
suitable for highly dynamic ad hoc environments 
and resource-constrained sensor nodes. Further-
more, the sensor nodes have been much smaller 
in size (i.e. from that of a pack of cards to dust 
particle) and much cheaper in price, and thus 
many new civilian applications of sensor networks 
such as environment monitoring, vehicular sensor 
network and body sensor networks have emerged.
Again, DARPA acted as a pioneer in the new wave 
of sensor network research by launching an 
initiative research programme called SensIT [5] 
which provided the present sensor networks 
with new capabilities such as ad hoc networking, 
dynamic querying and tasking, reprogramming 
and multi-tasking. Currently, WSNs have been 
viewed as one of the most important technologies 
for the 21st century [6]. China for example has 
included WSNs in their national strategic research 
programmes [7]. As a result, the commercialization 
of WSNs is accelerating and many new technology 
companies are emerging such as Crossbow 
Technology (connecting the physical world to the 
digital world) and Dust Networks.
Today, industrial automation is one of the most 
important areas of WSN applications. According 
to Freedonia Group, the global market share of 
sensors for industrial use is 11 billion USD, while 
the cost of installation (mainly cabling costs) and 
usage is up to more than 100 billion USD. This high 
cost is the main issue hindering the development 
of industrial communication technology. WSN 
technology, allowing “ubiquitous sensing” over the 
whole industrial process, can secure the important 
parameters which are not available by online 
monitoring due to the cost reasons stated above. 
These parameters are important foundations for 
16
History and industrial drivers of WSNs
the implementation of optimal control in order to 
achieve the objective of improving product quality, 
and reducing energy consumption.
According to ON World [8], wireless devices to 
be installed in industrial fi elds will increase by 
553 % between 2011 and 2016 when there will be 
24 million wireless-enabled sensors and actuators, 
or sensing points, deployed worldwide. Among 
these, 39 % will be used for new applications that 
are only possible with wireless sensor networking. 
By 2014, the number of WSN devices will account 
for 15 % of the entire industrial measurement and 
control equipment sensing points, and 33 % by 
2016.
In today’s market, three-fourths of the industrial 
WSN income comes from the process industry; 
with the oil and power industry being the fastest 
growing ones. For example, PetroChina is carrying 
out IoT projects in its oil fi elds, with the purpose 
to reconstruct 200 000 oil wells. WSN technology 
applied in the digital conversions of the oil wells will 
make use of online monitoring to measure oil well 
production and ensure production safety.
In the power industry which is now undergoing 
the power grid upgrading, WSN technology is also 
playing an important role in safety monitoring over 
power transmission and transformation equipment 
and the reconstruction of billions of smart meters.
Figure 2-1 | Global installed industrial wireless sensing points [8]
17
History and industrial drivers of WSNs
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 
$ 2 500 
$ 5 000 
$ 7 500 In-plant process 
Oil and gas 
Power transmission 
Vertical markets 
Factory automation 
$ Millions 
Source: ON World 
$ 
Figure 2-2 | Global industrial fi eld instrument shipments, wired and wireless [8]
Figure 2-3 | WSN revenue growth in all industries [8]

19
Section 3
WSN technology
3.1 Characteristic features 
of WSNs
A WSN can generally be described as a network 
of nodes that cooperatively sense and control the 
environment, enabling interaction between persons 
or computers and the surrounding environment [2]. 
WSNs nowadays usually include sensor nodes, 
actuator nodes, gateways and clients. A large 
number of sensor nodes deployed randomly inside 
of or near the monitoring area (sensor fi eld), form 
networks through self-organization. Sensor nodes 
monitor the collected data to transmit along to other 
sensor nodes by hopping. During the process of 
transmission, monitored data may be handled by 
multiple nodes to get to gateway node after multi-
hop routing, and fi nally reach the management 
node through the internet or satellite. It is the user 
who confi gures and manages the WSN with the 
management node, publish monitoring missions 
and collection of the monitored data.
As related technologies mature, the cost of 
WSN equipment has dropped dramatically, and 
their applications are gradually expanding from 
the military areas to industrial and commercial 
fi elds. Meanwhile, standards for WSN technology 
have been well developed, such as Zigbee®1, 
1 Zigbee® is an example of a suitable product available 
commercially. This information is given for the convenience 
of users of this standard and does not constitute an 
endorsement by IEC of this product.
Figure 3-1 | Wireless sensor networks
20
Figure 3-2 | Market size of WSN applications [9]
WirelessHart, ISA 100.11a, wireless networks 
for industrial automation – process automation 
(WIA-PA), etc. Moreover, with new application 
modes of WSN emerging in industrial automation 
and home applications, the total market size of 
WSN applications will continue to grow rapidly.
3.2 Sensor nodes
The sensor node is one of the main parts of a WSN. 
The hardware of a sensor node generally includes 
four parts: the power and power management 
module, a sensor, a microcontroller, and a wireless 
transceiver, see Figure 3-3. The power module 
offers the reliable power needed for the system. 
The sensor is the bond of a WSN node which can 
obtain the environmental and equipment status. A 
sensor is in charge of collecting and transforming 
the signals, such as light, vibration and chemical 
signals, into electrical signals and then transferring 
them to the microcontroller. The microcontroller 
receives the data from the sensor and processes 
the data accordingly. The Wireless Transceiver (RF 
module) then transfers the data, so that the physical 
realization of communication can be achieved.
It is important that the design of the all parts of a 
WSN node consider the WSN node features of tiny 
size and limited power.
3.2.1 Miniaturization technology 
of sensor based on MEMS
The miniaturization technology of WSN nodes 
based on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) 
has made remarkable progress in recent years. 
The core technology of MEMS is to realize the 
combination of microelectronics technology, micro-
machining technology and the packaging tech-
nology. Different levels of 2D and 3D micro-
sensitive structures can be produced based on 
microelectronics and micro-machining technology, 
which can be the miniature sensing elements. These 
miniature sensing elements, associated power 
supply and signal conditioning circuits can be inte-
grated and packaged as a miniature MEMS sensor. 
WSN technology
21
Power and 
power management 
Sensor Microcontroller Transceiver 
Figure 3-3 | Hardware structure of a WSN sensor node
WSN technology
At present, there are already many types of miniature 
MEMS sensors in the market which can be used to 
measure a variety of physical, chemical and biomass 
signals, including displacement, velocity, accelera-
tion, pressure, stress, strain, sound, light, electric-
ity, magnetism, heat, pH value, etc. [10]. In 2003, 
researchers at the University of California Berkeley 
(UCB) developed a WSN sensor node (mote) with a 
micro sensor. The actual size of its MEMS sensing 
module was only 2.8 mm × 2.1 mm [11].
3.2.2 Ambient energy harvesting 
technology
Nodes need an energy source, and ambient 
energy harvesting from external sources are used 
to power small autonomous sensors such as those 
based on MEMS technology. These systems are 
often very small and require little power, however 
their applications are limited by the reliance on 
battery power.
Ambient energy harvesting cannot only be realized 
by conventional optical cell power generation, 
but also through miniature piezoelectric crystals, 
micro oscillators, thermoelectric power generation 
elements, or electromagnetic wave reception 
devices [12] [13].
Some companies have begun to commercialize 
sensor network applications using energy acqui-
sition devices. For example, the German compa-
ny EnOcean has provided light energy harvesting 
devices, vibration energy harvesting devices and 
temperature-based energy harvesting devices for 
smart building lighting and air monitoring appli-
cations. For equipment and construction health 
monitoring applications, a variety of piezoelectric 
vibration energy harvesting products have entered 
the market. The British company of Perpetuum 
provides a series of products that converts mechan-
ical vibration into electrical energy used to perpetu-
ally power autonomous, maintenance-free industrial 
wireless sensor nodes. For these sensor nodes the 
energy of vibration made by your fi ngers knock-
ing the desk can support the sensor node sending 
2 kB data to 100 m away every 60 seconds.
For the monitoring applications of piping systems, 
a large number of products based on temperature 
difference energy harvesting have been developed. 
Nextreme Company’s products can produce 
0.25 W of power by a temperature difference of 
60 °C in an area of 3.2 mm × 1.6 mm energy 
harvesting materials. Figures 3-4 and 3-5 show 
some sensor nodes confi gured with ambient 
energy harvesting devices.
22
Figure 3-4 | Sensor nodes confi gured with ambient energy harvesting devices [14]
Figure 3-5 | Motor monitoring system based 
on vibration energy harvesting [14]
the access network has become the bottleneck of 
the entire network system.
As shown in Figure 3-6, due to the open property 
of wireless channels, confl icts will happen in time, 
space or frequency dimension when the channel 
is shared among multiple users. The function of 
access network technologies is to manage and 
coordinate the use of channels resources to ensure 
the interconnection and communication of multiple 
users on the shared channel.
According to the distance and speed of access, 
existing access technologies can be classifi ed 
into four categories: wireless local area network 
(WLAN), wireless metropolitan area network 
(WMAN), wireless personal area network (WPAN) 
and wireless wide area network (WWAN). However, 
the overall developing trend of high transmission 
rates is not suitable for the application requirements 
of WSNs. The main reasons are as follows:
 § In terms of reliability, the working environment 
of WSNs is usually rather severe. The bad 
environment with narrow-band multi-frequency 
noise, interference and multi-path effects 
makes the reliable communication based on 
the rare channel resources an urgent problem 
which needs to be resolved.
3.3 Access network technologies
The access network, whose length ranges from a 
few hundred meters to several miles, includes all 
the devices between the backbone network and the 
user terminals. It is thus aptly called “the last mile”.
Because the backbone network usually uses 
optical fi bre structure with a high transmission rate, 
WSN technology
23
Year
0.01
~1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
M
axim
um
 transm
ission rate
Trm
ax(M
bps)
1000
100
10
1
0.1
2015
2G
2G+
3G
3G+
4G
Local
Hi Speed
Super
Hi Speed
Nomadic
WLAN
WLAN+
WLAN++
Generation
(Cellular)
1st Generation
Analog voice
2nd Generation
Digital voice&
Low rate data
3th Generation
Voke & High speed data
Multime data
4th Generation
ALL-IP Broadband
Ubiquiteus & Seamless
Time
Space
Frequency
Bang !!
Figure 3-7 | Developing trends of access technologies [15]
Figure 3-6 | Access technologies [14]
 § In terms of real-time capability, applications 
for WSN and IoT have stricter real-time 
requirements than the others. A tiny latency 
may lead to a major mishap. Therefore, hard 
real-time communication has to be guaranteed 
in many applications.
 § In terms of energy effi ciency, low energy 
consumption is the key to support the long-
fl ow of independent battery-powered devices 
and to reduce maintenance cost. This is 
also another requirement for WSNs and IoT 
applications, especially for the devices with 
batteries diffi cult to be replaced.
According to the current specifi c requirements 
for WSN applications, the development of 
WSN technology
24
access network technology has already made 
signifi cant progresses. The representative access 
technologies that are more systematic and 
noteworthy are Bluetooth 4.0 oriented towards 
medical WSN; IEEE 802.15.4e [16] oriented towards 
industrial WSN; and WLAN IEEE 802.11™ [17] in 
view of the IoT. These technologies are described 
further in Annex A.
3.4 Topology
Generally, a WSN consists of a number of sensor 
network nodes and a gateway for the connection 
to the internet. The general deployment process 
of a WSN is as follows (see Figure 3-8): fi rstly, the 
sensor network nodes broadcast their status to the 
surroundings and receive status from other nodes 
to detect each other. Secondly, the sensor network 
nodes are organized into a connected network 
according to a certain topology (linear, star, tree, 
mesh, etc.). Finally, suitable paths are computed 
on the constructed network for transmitting the 
sensing data. The power of sensor network nodes 
is usually provided by batteries, so the transmission 
distance of WSN nodes is short. The transmission 
distance can be up to 800 to 1 000 meters in 
the open outdoor environment with line of sight. 
It will sharply decline in the case of a sheltered 
indoor environment to an estimated few meters. 
In order to expand the coverage of a network, 
the sensor network uses multi-hop transmission 
mode. That is to say the sensor network nodes 
are both transmitter and receiver. The fi rst sensor 
network node, the source node, sends data to a 
nearby node for data transmission to the gateway. 
The nearby node forwards the data to one of its 
nearby nodes that are on the path towards the 
gateway. The forwarding is repeated until the 
Figure 3-8 | Organizing and transmitting process of WSNs [18]
WSN technology
25
data arrives at the gateway, the destination. The 
protocols and some implementation techniques of 
WSNs can be adapted to the mature architecture 
and technologies of wireless and wired computer 
networks. However, the features of WSNs are self-
organization, self-adaption, limited nodes energy, 
and unstable transmission links.
3.4.1 Self-organizing and reliable 
networking technology
The positions of WSN nodes are random, and the 
nodes can be moved, sheltered and interfered 
with. The topology of mesh networks have great 
advantages in fl exibility and reliability compared 
with other network topologies. The self-organizing 
management approach of network nodes can 
greatly improve the robustness of the network, 
resulting in a smart mesh networking technology, 
as shown in Figure 3-9. In smart mesh ad hoc 
networking technology, the node fi rst monitors the 
neighbour nodes and measures the signal strength, 
and then it selects the appropriate neighbour 
node for time synchronization and sends a joining 
request. Then the neighbour node delivers the 
request to the gateway. The gateway receives the 
request and assigns network resources for the 
node. Based on the mesh network, the sensor 
network nodes can be assigned with two or more 
transmission paths to improve the reliability of 
network. Time synchronized mesh protocol (TSMP) 
network [19] of the dust network can support 
self-organizing network and maintain a network 
consisted of one hundred nodes.
3.4.2 Low cost IP interconnection 
technology
The design of early sensor networks commonly 
used internal addresses to manage the sensor 
network nodes. The address length was relatively 
short and suitable for implementing in low-power 
embedded sensor network nodes. However, 
the internal address management method is not 
compatible with the IP method of the internet, which 
increased the diffi culty of interacting between 
the sensor network nodes and the traditional IP 
network nodes. Therefore, there is a need to resolve 
Figure 3-9 | Mesh self-organizing network [14]
WSN technology
26
the connectivity problem of WSN and IP network. 
Traditional IPv4 addresses have been gradually 
depleted, and the new IPv6 technology has an 
enormous address resource which is suitable for 
a wide range of sensor network deployment. As 
a result, 6LoWPAN low-power wireless technology 
based on IPv6 has emerged [20]. 6LoWPAN has 
generally implemented a simplifi ed IPv6 protocol 
above the link layer of the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol. 
Header compression and packet fragmentation 
reloading is implemented by adding an adaptation 
layer between the IP layer and the link layer, which 
is a reliable method to achieve protocol adaptive 
between IPv6 network and the sensor network, as 
shown in Figure 3-10. The sensor network products 
of Sensinode Company based on NanoStack [21] 
and of TI Company based on CC-6LoWPAN [22] all 
use 6LoPAN technology to provide the capability of 
scalability, seamless and reliable interconnection 
between sensor network and IP network.
Figure 3-10 | 6LoWPAN protocol stack [14]
WSN technology
27
Figure 3-11 | 6LoWPAN improved header compression example [23]
3.4.3 Self-adaptive fl ow control 
technology
One of the differences between WSNs and 
traditional wired networks is the instability of wire-
less communication. In WSNs, the communication 
between nodes is susceptible to interference and 
occlusion, resulting in signal transmission failure. 
The traditional network is a stable wired network, 
which data will only be lost due to congestion. The 
principle of fl ow control is that the data sender 
adjusts the sending traffi c according to the loss 
situation of data transmission. When data loss 
occurs, the sender decreases the transmission 
rate. And when the data is not lost, the sender 
increases the transmission rate. Such fl ow control 
mechanisms are no longer suitable for WSNs [23], 
because the data loss in sensor networks is mostly 
caused by congestion, interference and occlusion. 
Purely decreasing the transmission rate cannot 
solve the problem, but only lowers the network 
performance. In order to solve the network perfor-
mance degradation problem in unstable transmis-
sion conditions, adaptive fl ow control is proposed. 
Adaptive fl ow control checks the reason for packet 
loss and adjusts the transmission fl ow. Mean-
while, according to the quality of the link and the 
WSN technology
28
number of transmission errors, the best transmis-
sion rate for the data transmission between nodes 
is prioritized to obtain good network stability while 
considering the transmission distance and 
throughput.
3.5 Data aggregation
In the energy-constrained sensor network 
environments, it is unsuitable in numerous aspects 
of battery power, processing ability, storage 
capacity and communication bandwidth, for each 
node to transmit data to the sink node. This is 
because in sensor networks with high coverage, 
the information reported by the neighbouring nodes 
has some degree of redundancy, thus transmitting 
data separately in each node while consuming 
bandwidth and energy of the whole sensor network, 
which shortens lifetime of the network.
To avoid the above mentioned problems, data 
aggregation techniques have been introduced. 
Data aggregation is the process of integrating 
multiple copies of information into one copy, which 
is effective and able to meet user needs in middle 
sensor nodes.
The introduction of data aggregation benefi ts 
both from saving energy and obtaining accurate 
information. The energy consumed in transmitting 
data is much greater than that in processing 
data in sensor networks. Therefore, with the 
node’s local computing and storage capacity, 
data aggregating operations are made to remove 
large quantities of redundant information, so as 
to minimize the amount of transmission and save 
energy. In the complex network environment, it is 
diffi cult to ensure the accuracy of the information 
obtained only by collecting few samples of data 
from the distributed sensor nodes. As a result, 
monitoring the data of the same object requires 
the collaborative work of multiple sensors which 
effectively improves the accuracy and the reliability 
of the information obtained.
The performance of data aggregation protocol 
is closely related to the network topology. It is 
then possible to analyze some data aggregation 
protocols according to star, tree, and chain network 
topologies as seen in Figure 3-12. 
Data aggregation technology could save energy 
and improve information accuracy, while sacrifi cing 
performance in other areas. On one hand, in the 
data transfer process, looking for aggregating 
nodes, data aggregation operations and waiting 
for the arrival of other data are likely to increase 
in the average latency of the network. On the 
other hand, compared to conventional networks, 
sensor networks have higher data loss rates. 
Data aggregation could signifi cantly reduce 
data redundancy but lose more information 
inadvertently, which reduces the robustness of the 
sensor network.
a) Star WSN topology b) Tree WSN topology c) Chain WSN topology
Figure 3-12 | Three kinds of WSN topologies: star, tree, chain [14]
WSN technology
29
3.6 Security
There have been many Hollywood fi lms on how the 
future will look – and the IoT vision comes close 
to the Hollywood vision. There is one common 
theme across both visions: machines become very 
powerful as a whole within a highly automated 
society. The question of individual privacy and 
security within this for the individual becomes 
more diffi cult as the complex chain within which 
the security has been created is infi nite and the 
weakest link defi nes the overall level of security. 
With IPv6 there are enough IP addresses to go 
around for the predicted tens of billions of data 
points that will form our new world – the question 
is whether they can all be secured to a level that 
can ensure individual privacy rights and secure the 
systems from malicious attacks.
In traditional TCP/IP networks, security is built to 
protect the confi dentiality, integrity and availability 
of network data. It makes the system reliable 
and protects the system from malicious attacks 
which can lead to malfunctioning systems and 
information disclosure. As the characteristic of 
node and application environment, WSN security 
not only needs traditional security protection, but 
also the special requirements of trust, security and 
privacy (TSP) WSNs.
3.6.1 Trust, security and privacy
TSP WSNs may, depending on the application 
scenario, require security protection of integrity, 
availability, confi dentiality, non-repudiation, and 
user privacy. It supports system integrity, reliability 
by protecting the system from malicious attacks. 
TSP WSNs may need to protect the nodes against 
tampering, protect the communication channel, 
and routing in the network layer [24]. TSP logging/
audit functions may be required to detect attacks.
The technology of TSP WSNs consists of message 
authentication, encryption, access control, identity 
authentication, etc. The TSP necessities of WSNs 
 may be categorized as follows: node security, 
 crypto algorithms, key management, secure 
routing, data aggregation [25] [26].
Figure 3-13 | TSP architecture for WSNs [27]
WSN technology
30
Node security and sleep deprivation
A node of a WSN may be tampered with via its 
logical interfaces or by direct physical attacks; it 
may be relocated without authorization, or stolen.
Node security may contain secure wakeup and 
secure bootstrapping. A low duty cycle is crucial 
to ensure a long lifetime of battery-powered sensor 
nodes. A special class of denial of service attacks, 
the so called sleep deprivation attacks [28] prevents 
the sensor node from going to the power-saving 
sleep mode, hence severely reduces the lifetime 
of an attacked sensor node. Standard security 
mechanisms like message authentication codes or 
frame encryption do not prevent sleep deprivation 
attacks: the node is powered up and energy is 
spent for processing the received message. The 
attack can only be noticed when battery power has 
already been spent. Figure 3-14 shows a sensor 
node with an additional ultra-low-power wake-up 
radio. The wake-up radio listens on the channel 
when the sensor node is in sleep state. It triggers 
the sensor wake up when it receives a wake-up 
signal. To add security to the general wake-up 
radio design, the wake-up signal is an encoded 
wake-up code [29]. As the wake-up code is used 
only once and as it is specifi c for each node, it can 
be sent in clear when waking up a node.
3.6.2 Crypto algorithms
Encryption is a special algorithm to change the 
original information of the data sensor node, 
which makes an unauthorized user not recognize 
the original information even if he has accessed 
the encrypted information. The WSNs of public 
infrastructure are inevitably exposed to the scope of 
public activities. Traditional message authentication 
code, symmetric encryption and public-key 
encryption have exposed their shortcomings [30] 
[31]. So an encryption system, which is more 
suitable for WSNs, needs to be proposed. The 
Spanish company Libelium developed waspmote 
encryption libraries to ensure the data security of 
smart city’s WSN in 2010. Their wireless sensor 
devices have supported those libraries basically. 
Libraries are designed for different encryption 
mechanism and consultation mechanisms at data 
link layer, network layer and application layer. 
And they extend the Zigbee® protocol and make 
Zigbee® more secure, see Figure 3-15.
Sensor node
CPU
Flash RAM
I/O Wake-up radio
Main radio
Figure 3-14 | Secure wake-up radio [29]
WSN technology
31
Figure 3-15 | Typical application of waspmote encryption libraries [32]
WWW 
Gateway 
Application layer - P2P key 
Link layer - Common key 
Web layer - SSL, HTTPS 
3.6.3 Key management of WSNs
Key management is focused on the area in WSN 
security. Key management includes key generation, 
distribution, verifi cation, update, storage, backup, 
valid and destroy. An effective key management 
mechanism is also the foundation of other 
security mechanisms, such as secure routing, 
secure positioning, data aggregation. Typical key 
management schemes in WSNs include global key 
management, random key management, location 
key management, clustering key management and 
public key-based key management [33].
The security bootstrapping procedure establishes 
the security confi guration of a sensor node, e.g. 
a join key is established during the bootstrapping. 
As there are multiple bootstrapping procedures 
and the choice of an appropriate bootstrapping 
procedure heavily depends on the environment, 
normal operation of the sensor network is 
decoupled from the bootstrapping such that it is 
possible to change the bootstrapping procedure 
without any change on the security architecture for 
normal operation. The appropriate bootstrapping 
procedure depends to a high degree on the 
application and its environment. Therefore, several 
different bootstrapping procedures have been 
proposed [34]: token based, pre-confi guration 
of the keys during manufacturing of the nodes, 
physical protection of messages, in-band during 
a weak security set-up phase, out-of-band 
communication.
3.6.4 Secure routing of WSNs
Since WSNs using multi-hop in data transfer and 
self-organization in networking, each node also 
needs routing discovery, routing establishment, 
routing maintenance. Secure routing protocol 
is that complete effective routing decisions and 
may be a prerequisite for data aggregation and 
redundancy elimination safe from a source node 
to a sink node. Many secure routing networks have 
been specifi cally designed for WSNs, they can 
be divided into three categories according to the 
WSN technology
32
network structure: fl at-based routing, hierarchical-
based routing, and location-based routing [35].
Typical methods of sec ure routing protocols 
include methods based on feedback information, 
location information, encryption algorithm, multi-
path selection method and hierarchical structures. 
Different secure routing protocols can solve 
problems of different types of attacks [36], such as 
the secure routing protocol based on the feedback 
information that includes the information of delay, 
trust, location, excess capacity in acknowledgment 
frame of the media access control (MAC) layer. 
Although not using encryption, this method can 
resist common attacks such as false routing 
information, cesspool attack and wormhole. Most 
current secure routing protocols assume the 
sensor network is stationary, so more new secure 
routing protocols need to be developed to satisfy 
mobility of sensor nodes [37].
3.6.5 Secure data aggregation of WSNs
Secure data aggregation is to ensure each node 
data is secure. Therefore, the general processes of 
secure data aggregation are as follows: fi rst nodes 
should be possible to provide reliable date and 
securely transmit them to the higher aggregation 
nodes. The higher aggregation nodes judge the 
credibility of data and do aggregation calculation 
based on redundancy. Each aggregation nodes 
select the next safe and reliable hop, transmit data 
to the central node. The central nodes judge the 
credibility of data and do the fi nal aggregation 
calculation [38].
Initially, data aggregation regarded energy as 
the object and barely considered security issues. 
Now secure data aggregation is mostly realized 
by authentication and encryption based on the 
theory of cluster, ring, and hierarchical. The 
University of Munich developed a data aggregation 
prototype, which is based on DTLS protocol to 
realize secure transmission schemes. The red 
circle of Figure 3-16 represents their secure data 
aggregation prototype.
Figure 3-16 | Secure data aggregation products [39]
WSN technology
33
Section 4
Challenges of WSNs
4.1 System qualities, architecture 
divergence, and the need for an 
architecture framework
IoT is characterized by a wide range of challenges 
that can be characterized by a single word: scale. 
Every challenge that is known in the context of the 
current internet also pertains to IoT, but its scale 
is generally much larger and the implications even 
more severe. Examples for such challenges are:
 § Range of use-case domains: while the current 
internet already has made inroads into the lives 
of denizens and also that of businesses and 
organizations, this penetration will increase 
in scope and depth due to IoT. Not only will 
new application fi elds be opened up (real-time 
remote life-stock monitoring; monitoring interest 
groups; participatory traffi c monitoring; etc.), but 
also the penetration of processes and actions 
by information and communication technologies 
(ICT) will increase. A taste of this has been 
provided by the adoption of radio-frequency 
identifi cations (RFIDs) in value chains. While 
business IT already had made it possible to 
trace gross fl ows of products within a company, 
RFID penetrated entire value chain down to 
single items and across organizational units 
(production; outbound logistics; retail, etc.).
 § Difference in business models: while Web 2.0 
has already led to a diversifi cation of business 
models and the proliferation of new, disruptive 
business model, this trend is expected to 
amplify once IoT becomes a sizable part of the 
future internet.
 § Ownership and tenancy: in the current internet, 
exclusive ownership and exclusive usage are 
very much the rule, but the sociology of the 
IoT will be different. Complex systems, for 
instance city-wide sensor networks, will not 
necessarily be owned by one group, and the 
infl uence of non-owner groups will increase 
(advocacy groups, public bodies, legislative 
bodies, etc.). Also, more often than not, more 
than one organization will operate in the same 
system. For, instance, an original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM) might outsource the 
maintenance of its production-machinery to 
several off-location service providers, which 
will, in turn, need remote access to the 
production IoT system.
 § Range of objects covered: the range of “things” 
that will be sensed, tracked, and manipulated 
through IoT will truly be overwhelming. It 
will span from microscopic and even sub-
microscopic entities (bacteria, nanobots, etc.) to 
macroscopic objects on the scale of planets and 
larger. The digital shadows of these will be very 
different, and what constitutes them will also 
depend on the context. For instance, while for 
a shipping company whole containers usually 
constitute the fi nest scale of granularity and 
thus “things”, the individual pieces of products 
in such a container constitute “things” for the 
receiving retailer as well as the end-customer.
 § Time scales and reliability: IoT will be applied 
to areas in which real-time control with high 
reliability will be mandatory (factory automation, 
air-plane control, etc.), while other applications 
(glacial monitoring, herd monitoring, etc.) might 
be conducted in a quasi-offl ine manner over 
time scales of minutes to years.
34
The mere scale of the above challenge will lead 
to very diverse problems IoT systems will have to 
solve. This, of course, will translate into diverse 
system concerns and aspirations, many, if not most, 
of which will be formulated at a cross-system level. 
Specifi cally, concerns and aspirations will address 
the performance of the entire IoT systems and less 
of individual members or even parts. IoT architects 
will thus be faced with diverse, qualitative 
requirements, and there will be more than one 
design choice that will fulfi l the same qualitative 
requirement. This problem is exemplifi ed in 
Table 1. For each system quality there is more than 
one architectural view through which this quality can 
be infl uenced. Take, for instance, system scalability. 
One view through which to infl uence scalability is 
the functional view. For example, to champion 
distributed functionalities over centralized functions. 
The same strategy can be pursued in terms of 
information that is handled in the system. 
In other words, system qualities cut across more 
than one architectural view. Also, achieving one 
quality through one view (for instance, scalability) 
can have adverse impacts on other system qualities 
(for instance, security).
Since the solution space for architectures is multi-
dimensional and entangled, and since qualitative 
requirements cut across more than one system 
aspect, and since there is usually more than one tactic 
to achieve a certain quality, this leads to architecture 
divergence. Particularly, different development 
teams will derive different architectures and 
implement incompatible system implementations for 
the same requirement set if no mitigating actions are 
taken. Note that this is not an entirely novel problem 
but that it is even more accentuated in IoT due to 
the huge range of use-case domains covered and 
the different cultures and best practices that have 
evolved in each use-case domain.
Next to endangered interoperability, there is another 
downside to architecture divergence: lowered 
“horizontal recycling” of functions, modules and 
concepts from one domain to another. That is, 
the fl ow of best-practice solutions, functional 
modules, etc. across usage-domain borders will 
be hampered by a diverse, uncontrolled ecosystem 
of divergent architectures. This both impacts 
the capital expenditure (CAPEX) (for instance, 
innovation and development cost) and operational 
expenditure (OPEX) (for instance, systems of high 
complexity that are hard to understand and need 
time to be understood by new staff). Therefore, 
architecture divergence also negatively infl uences 
the business viability of IoT.
Challenges of WSNs
System quality
Trust, security, 
privacy
Performance and 
scalability
Availability and 
resilience
Scalability
A
rc
h
ite
c
tu
ra
l
view
Functional Medium Medium Low High
Information Medium Medium Low High
Concurrency Medium High Medium Medium
Deployment High High High Low
Operational Medium Low Medium Low
Table 4-1 | Leverage of architectural views on system qualities (selection) [40]
35
The above problems will not solve themselves, 
rather, corrective action is needed. An architecture 
framework (reference model, reference architecture 
plus guidance of how to apply them) that fosters 
the reuse of architectural principles and the reuse 
of system modules and concepts is needed. A 
reference model provides a coherent ontology 
and semantic for describing and analyzing IoT use 
cases and IoT systems. A reference architecture 
provides high-level advice on how to build IoT 
systems that meet IoT stakeholder concerns 
and expectations. The guidance of how to apply 
both also answers the question of how to tackle 
qualitative system requirements while, at the same 
time, avoiding architecture and system divergence.
4.2 Ultra-large sensing device 
access
The installation of WSN sensing devices in the 
future will grow exponentially due to the needs 
for comprehensive monitoring in transportation, 
electricity, industry and other critical infrastructures. 
For example, in the monitoring of production 
equipment in factories, it is necessary for each 
device to install a variety of sensors to measure 
such device states as temperature and vibration. 
An estimate by ABI Research, 50 billion new 
machine-to-machine (M2M) devices will appear 
in the next 10 years, and the number of the WSN 
devices will account for most of the scale [41]. As a 
result, how to cope with a very large scale of WSN 
device access is an important challenge.
4.2.1 Massive heterogeneous data 
processing
With the large-scale application of WSN technology 
in the information and intelligence process of 
infrastructures, the amount of data produced 
by WSN sensors will grow from today’s EB level 
(1 018 bytes) to ZB (1 021 bytes) level. According 
to IDC statistics and forecasts, in 2009, the global 
data volume was 0.8 ZB (1 021 bytes), and will be 
35 ZB by 2020 [42]. As a major part of the data, 
the amount of sensing data from the physical world 
is 30 times more than that from human society. 
In this sense, the storage and transmission as 
well as timely treatment of mass data will be an 
unprecedented challenge.
WSN sensing data, including those of 
temperature, pressure, fl ow, speed and other 
physical dimensions, have multi-dimensional 
heterogeneous characteristics. The application of 
information and intelligent infrastructure require 
the fusion processing of those multi-dimensional 
heterogeneous data. However, the existing 
information processing technology is diffi cult to 
meet the growing demand for WSN.
4.2.2 Intelligent control and services to 
dynamic changes
Future operation and management of city infra-
structures are required to meet the needs for safety, 
energy conservation, effi ciency, convenience, etc. 
In the existing mode, information is automatically 
collected and processed through manual analysis, 
decisions and responses are made accordingly. 
Yet, this mode is no longer applicable. Intelligent 
control that is ready to respond to dynamic chang-
es must be implemented. Firstly, WSN application 
mode should transform from simple perception 
to closed-loop control. For example, in intelligent 
transportation applications, to guarantee smooth 
urban transportation, it is necessary to make 
dynamic analysis on traffi c conditions and real-time 
adjustments of traffi c lights. Nevertheless, the 
infrastructure control is of great signifi cance, so 
ensuring the security and reliability of intelligent 
control will be a major challenge. Secondly, the 
WSN service mode should transform from the 
single and predefi ned into the dynamic and per-
sonalized. For example, in smart power utiliza-
tion, to ensure both the user’s electricity demand 
and improve the effi ciency of grid operation, the 
setting of the air conditioning temperature and 
light levels should be dynamically adjustable in 
Challenges of WSNs
36
accordance with the grid current load, environmen-
tal conditions and personal preferences. Although, 
dynamically generating services in accordance with 
environmental changes will be a major challenge.
4.3 Sensor network architecture
Sensor network technology has been widely used 
in urban infrastructure construction with marked 
achievements. However, in different sensor 
network applications, network embedded sensing 
or controlling devices are usually based on different 
hardware platforms, operating systems, databases 
and middleware. And they cannot be deployed in 
a variety of heterogeneous network environments 
with free exchange of information except if 
supported by dedicated business systems and 
application management platforms. In terms of 
architecture design, most application environments 
of sensor network are designed in tightly coupled 
closed architectures. In this sense, the system 
presents features of an information silo and is only 
suitable for the application environment in small-
scale industries. Moreover, it is diffi cult to share and 
reuse the infrastructure system architecture and 
services. Also, third-party resources are diffi cult to 
be cost-effectively integrated into the system. As a 
result, the application and promotion of large-scale 
sensor network technology is limited.
Thus, there is an urgent need to build a more 
open and flexible system framework to break 
this bottleneck of IoT. In order to share with 
convenience sensor information or control 
demand and integrate isolated data into sensor 
network, pervasive computing is inevitable for the 
development of sensor networks.
Web technology is the natural choice of 
technology to achieve pervasive computing and 
share heterogeneous resources, as it is a basic 
framework for the sharing of resources and 
services among platforms.
Currently, there are two trends in the world for web-
related sensors: one enables people in different 
places around the world to easily share sensors 
and the other enables sensors to cooperate with 
other sensors.
4.4 High concurrent access
As wireless access technology proliferates in 
smart grids and other industrial applications, more 
rigorous performance requirements (large scale, 
low latency) are expected at the same time. Taking 
smart grid as an example, control applications in 
transformer substations usually requires a latency 
of 0.667 ms to 2 ms for networks with dozens of 
nodes, second-level latency for networks with 
thousands of nodes within the substation area, and 
second or minute-level latency for future advanced 
metering infrastructure (AMI) applications with 
thousands of nodes. Though current access 
technologies of WSNs can support second-
level latency for the end-to-end transmission in 
hundred-scale networks, which is suffi cient for 
monitoring applications, the demand for high 
concurrent access for future applications cannot 
be met yet. The drawbacks of the existing access 
technology when dealing with WSN applications 
with such characteristics as light traffi c and high 
concurrency are given as follows:
 § The existing scheduled-based access 
technology usually adopts such strategies 
as reserving retransmission time slots, 
frequency division among multiple users, non-
reusable resource allocation etc., to guarantee 
transmission reliability. These protected 
resources are extremely underutilized.
 § Contention-based access technology has to 
cope with the confl icts over resource utilization. 
As the data traffi c of concurrent applications 
increases, the network performance will 
dramatically degrade.
 § Applications with high concurrency character-
istics, especially control applications, whose 
payloads are normally small, will suffer heavy 
overhead due to the large head of the packets 
Challenges of WSNs
37
if existing access technologies are employed, 
and the effi ciency of the spectrum access is 
also very low.
So far two solutions have been proposed to solve 
the problems above. One is the Bluetooth-based 
wireless interface for sensors and actuators 
(WISA) proposed by ABB; and the other is the 
IEEE 802.11™-based wireless networks for 
industrial automation – factory automation (WIA-
FA) proposed by a group of Chinese organizations 
(more than ten members) led by Shenyang Institute 
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
4.4.1 High concurrent access with 
frequency division multiplexing
Bluetooth technology operates within the range 
of 2 400 MHz to 2 483.5 MHz, has 79 designated 
Bluetooth channels and exchanges data over short 
distances. Bluetooth can be used on the physical 
layer to meet the requirements for light traffi c and 
high concurrency. Besides, MAC layer can be 
designed to support time division multiple access 
(TDMA), frequency division multiplexing (FDM) and 
frequency hopping (FH) techniques. Long-wave 
radio frequency power supply is an advanced 
technology for power supplies.
4.4.2 High concurrent access with 
distributed antenna systems
IEEE 802.11™ [17] is a set of MAC and physical 
layer (PHY) specifications for implementing 
WLAN communication in the 2.4 GHz, 3.6 GHz, 
5 GHz and 60 GHz frequency bands. Following 
the network architecture of distributed antenna 
systems, IEEE 802.11™–based PHY and the FDM 
and TDMA-based MAC layer are suitable for 
long distance communication. Besides, by jointly 
utilizing channel states-aware resource allocation, 
data aggregation, packet aggregation and other 
performance optimization methods, data latency 
can be reduced to 10 ms. IEEE 802.11™–based 
high concurrent access technologies can be 
broadly applied in industries, such as beer bottle 
filling and robotic production lines, see Figure 4-2.
4.5 High real-time transmission
Traditional WSNs are used to perceive, collect and 
process information of the objects in the network 
covered areas and forward it to observers for offl ine 
or online analysis with low real-time requirements, 
such as meter reading, environmental monitoring, 
etc. The network coverage is limited (in a housing 
estate or an open space of several square kilometres) 
and the delay requirements are low (minute or hour 
levels). Therefore, traditional WSN research focuses 
on how to improve network reliability and reduce 
power consumption. However, with the continuous 
development of the infrastructures in smart cities, 
the network coverage area is increasing and so are 
the real-time requirements for transmission. Take the 
urban traffi c control system for example. Information 
Figure 4-2 | High concurrent access with 
distributed antenna systems [14]
Challenges of WSNs
38
such as road conditions and the number of vehicles, 
rate of speed, etc. must be collected in the whole 
city and then transmitted real-time to the control 
centre where the most appropriate traffi c scheduling 
scheme is calculated and transmitted again real-
time to the crossroads. This process needs to be 
completed within one second, which presents new 
demand for the real-time transmission of the sensor 
network system in wide areas.
Other network technologies can be used to build 
a wide-area sensor network (such as Ethernet, 
WLAN, mobile communications networks, etc.) 
and build heterogeneous networks with a variety 
of physical media and management mechanisms. 
Wired networks such as Ethernet use copper 
twisted pairs or optical fi bres as a physical medium, 
with a rate of 100 Mbps to 1 000 Mbps or more and 
have a transmission delay of a few milliseconds; 
the transmission rate of wireless networks based 
on IEEE 802.11™ and IEEE 802.15.4 can be from 
250 kbps to 72.2 Mbps, and the transmission delay 
ranges from a few hundred milliseconds to several 
minutes. The development of these network 
technologies, especially multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) and orthogonal frequency-division 
multiplexing (OFDM) technologies in wireless 
communication, greatly increases the spectral 
effi ciency of the wireless network and improve 
network performance, and thus lays a foundation 
for the building of a wide-area sensor network. 
However, these networks are operated in a best-
effort manner, and have not taken into consideration 
the interconnection with other networks on how to 
ensure real-time transmission, which is the focus 
of future sensor networks research. The research 
of real-time sensor networks in wide area is a great 
concern throughout the world, and the solutions 
can be roughly divided into distributed and 
centralized ones .
4.5.1 Distributed solution
At the entrance of the network, the distributed 
solution divides transmission tasks into several 
levels according to the task requirement. Each 
part of the network schedules different levels of 
tasks according to the local network operating 
conditions, to ensure a wide-area and real-time 
protection. Distributed solution features a relatively 
high robustness, so damage to parts of the network 
does not affect the entire network. Besides, a 
distributed solution is implemented in the same 
manner as the internet, and is thus compatible 
with the existing web and can evolve smoothly. 
However, the local scheduling strategy of the 
distributed solution lacks an overall perspective 
and it is hard to make the best overall decision.
A proposed architecture is in Figure 4-3, which 
is a wide-area transmission network architecture 
establishing a cross-regional, real-time data 
integration and sharing mechanism in the smart 
grid. This architecture is based on mature IP, and 
IP’s best-effort service model is both simple and 
unchanging, well-suited for distributed algorithms.
4.5.2 Centralized solution
The centralized solution, from the overall view, 
manages heterogeneous networks composed 
of wide area networks in a unifi ed way. To meet 
such needs as the transmission tasks’ delay, 
throughput, reliability, etc., the centralized solution 
reserves communication resources and conducts 
cooperative scheduling in various heterogeneous 
networks, which ensures the overall end perfor-
mance requirements. A centralized solution is 
superior in that it can optimize global scheduling 
with better transmission performance. Neverthe-
less, complexity is its weak point so it can only 
be installed on certain private networks in specifi c 
areas.
The wide-area real-time network based on 
cognizing and coordination is proposed as follows. 
Cooperative scheduling of heterogeneous networks 
is conducted in a centralized manner through 
cross-layer sensing to obtain information about the 
network operation status, in accordance with the 
Challenges of WSNs
39
Security 
Link Quality Cognizing
Resource Cognizing
Scene Cognizing
Status  
Cognizing
Cooperative  
Scheduling
Figure 4-3 | Wide-area transmission network architecture [43]
Figure 4-4 | Architecture of centralized wide area real-time network [14]
Challenges of WSNs
40
real-time requirements for task transmission. The 
solution is to focus on overall network management, 
which is complex and requires strong consistency, 
making it suitable in a centralized manner.
4.6 Semantic representation and 
processing
Semantic technology is one of the most important 
research fi elds in information technology in recent 
years, mostly due to huge expectations and 
demands for knowledge sharing and exchanging 
through networks. Semantic research on WSN 
information becomes a hot topic especially with 
the development of WSN and the expansion from 
the traditional concept of the internet to sensing 
layer devices. WSN semantic research focuses 
on the semantic representation of the physical 
world perceived by sensor nodes. In brief WSN 
semantics refers to the meaning or sense of the 
information perceived by sensor nodes [44], with 
which the underlying data can be put into better 
use.
Semantic WSN research originated in the semantic 
web. The existing web content gives priority to 
unstructured and semi-structured text. While the 
semantic web can give information on the web to 
a correctly defi ned meaning, it aims at ensuring a 
better cooperation between computers and people. 
However, the medium of WSN is the sensor node, 
whose information content is completely different 
from that of the web, in order to accommodate 
the semantic information of WSN nodes to the 
WSN application, scientifi c research institutes and 
standardization organizations have put forward 
corresponding solutions in the fi eld.
Three areas have been identifi ed as becoming 
hot research topics for the realization of sensor 
semantic issues:
1) semantic representation technology for 
terminal devices, directly adds semantic tags 
to sensor data in terminal device levels to 
achieve semantic representation,
2) semantic platform based on querying 
implements the sensor data query through the 
semantic interpretation of sensor data, and,
3) semantic analysis and management of sensor 
information based on cloud computing 
technology. It is expected that this could 
support large-scale sensor nodes, semantic 
expression, and processing based on cloud 
computing platforms.
4.7 More secure WSNs
Nowadays, WSNs connect the infrastructure 
of physical entities tightly with the information 
network. Damage to the infrastructure (such 
as power, transportation, chemical plant and 
national security) by virus threats will result in 
unimaginable consequences. WSN is usually 
more exposed to various security threats as 
the unguided transmission medium is more 
susceptible to security attacks than those of the 
guided transmission medium. TSP problems have 
to be taken into account right from the beginning. 
The threats to which a WSN is exposed can 
only be partly addressed by network security 
technologies. The defence against complex attack 
forms, such as Sybil, Dos and abnormal nodes, is 
not satisfactory [45].
As the goal of TSP in WSNs is to protect the in-
formation and resources from attacks and misbe-
haviour, the possible requirements to implement 
this goal are huge, like availability, authorization, 
authentication, anonymity, confidentiality, fresh-
ness, integrity, node protection, non-repudiation, 
privac, etc. In the future, the scale of WSNs could 
become greater and the combination of WSNs 
with the internet tighter. Although research efforts 
have been made with regard to node security, 
cryptography, key management, secure routing, 
secure data aggregation, something will do to en-
sure more secure WSN in the future.
Challenges of WSNs
41
4.7.1 Protocol security framework
 In view of the computing ability, energy 
consumption and communication bandwidth 
of sensor node limits, protection of privacy and 
identity management, studies need to be made on 
the protocol security framework which is suitable 
and a common model for each layer in WSN. 
Because a single security solution for a single layer 
may not be a more efficient solution, the holistic 
approach for security would involve all the layers 
for ensuring overall security in a network [46]. Its 
goals aim at improving the performance of WSN 
with respect to security, longevity and connectivity. 
Its principle is that the cost for ensuring security 
should not surpass the assessed security risk at 
a specific time.
There are many methods that are now being 
proposed to ensure special layer security in WSNs, 
such as secure wakeup for nodes, tamper-proofi ng, 
authentication and encryption for network layers, 
logging for application layers. Nevertheless, how 
to  structure other layers protocol and make up a 
common protocol security framework is a major 
research issue in future.
There will be a common model that can combine 
all security layers mechanisms together. The 
others can  protect WSNs from attacking even if 
a layer is failing. But the cost-effectiveness and 
energy effi ciency could still pose great research 
challenges in the coming years.
4.7.2 Trust, security and privacy
Confi dentiality, personal rights to privacy, data 
security and integrity come at a cost. The question 
is: what is the cost benefi t ratio when looking at 
the benefi t the solution provides? Is the individual 
willing to forfeit his or her rights in order to gain 
the benefi t? Google and Apple have been able to 
take great liberties with personal data in return for 
Figure 4-5 | Link layer security protocol framework [14]
Challenges of WSNs
42
benefi ts that outweigh the risks – at least for many 
consumers. Within an enterprise context, losing 
control of customer data and potentially sharing 
with data brokers breaks the trusted relationship 
that often legally unties longstanding confi dential 
business to business relationships.
The personal key infrastructures and certifi cate 
authority responsibilities within an infi nite number 
of data sources will tax the system and many will 
look to minimize proactive security measures and 
only look to deal with cyber-attacks when they 
actually happen – thus forcing the risk onto the 
overall system. IoT networks sending malware 
packets to all connected systems start to sound 
like the worst nightmare of any Hollywood science 
fi ction fi lm. In the end, it will be important to keep 
as many systems as possible separate from 
another to ensure the vulnerability of one system 
does not infect all systems. This potential domino 
effect is probably the worst case scenario as poor 
data integrity can lead to failures in magnitude 
that were not envisioned by any one system. The 
proactive security systems will be dependent on 
understanding what is “normal” cyber-physical 
data traffi c, but this again might be excessively 
costly and reduce the benefi ts or increase costs of 
mandatory IoT solutions.
For safety, there are four qualities of WSN 
frameworks to consider. Firstly, the security of 
WSNs are vulnerable to network attacks due to 
the broadcast nature of the transmission medium 
and the limitation of computing resources of sensor 
nodes, like smaller power and smaller bandwidth. 
Secondly, identity and trust management are more 
complicated and diffi cult due to the deep integration 
of information space with the physical world and 
ubiquitous access to information technology. 
Thus, identity management and trust systems are 
faced with great challenges. Thirdly, the dynamic, 
heterogeneous and mass characteristics of WSN 
perception and computing model are also great 
challenges to the protection of effective system 
integrity, data integrity, data confi dentiality, user 
privacy, like identity, behaviour, and environment. 
Finally, since the WSN has a large number of 
terminals, various terminal types and dynamic 
adaptive network structures, the size and complexity 
of environmental data are major challenges for the 
existing security posture monitoring system.
Figure 4-6 | Trust security and privacy [14]
Challenges of WSNs
43
Section 5
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
5.1 WSN application in 
the smart grid
The power grid is not only an important part of the 
electric power industry, but also an important part 
of a country’s sustainability. With the dependence 
on electric power gradually increasing, demand for 
the reliability and quality of the power grid is also 
increasing in the world. Utilities, research institutions 
and scholars have researched how to modernize 
the power grid to one that is effi cient, clean, safe, 
reliable, and interactive.
A smart electricity grid opens the door to new 
applications with far-reaching impacts: providing 
the capacity to safely integrate more renewable 
energy sources (RES), electric vehicles and 
distributed generators into the network; delivering 
power more effi ciently and reliably through 
demand response and comprehensive control 
and monitoring capabilities; using automatic grid 
reconfi guration to prevent or restore outages 
(self-healing capabilities); enabling consumers to 
have greater control over their electricity 
consumption and to actively participate in the 
electricity market.
Sensors will be a key enabler for the smart grid to 
reach its potential. The idea behind the “smart” grid 
is that the grid will respond to real time demand; in 
order to do this, it will require sensors to provide this 
“real time” information. WSNs as “smart sensing 
peripheral information” can be an important 
means to promote smart grid technology 
development. WSN technology in the smart grid 
will also further promote the industrial development 
of WSNs.
5.1.1 Online monitoring system for 
transmission lines
The condition of transmission lines are directly 
affected by wind, rain, snow, fog, ice, lightning and 
other natural forces; at the same time industrial and 
agricultural pollution are also a direct threat to the 
safe operation of transmission lines. The operating 
environment of transmission lines and the operating 
states are very complex, which requires more 
automatic monitoring, more control and protection 
equipment to automatically send alarms when 
accidents occur and dispatch strategy adjustment 
according to the operation mode, thus the faults 
will be processed at the early phase or be isolated 
in a small range.
Traditional wired communications cannot meet 
the communication needs of online monitoring of 
transmission lines. WSNs have an advantage of the 
strong ability to adapt to harsh environments, large 
area coverage, self-organization, self-confi guration 
and strong utility independence and are very 
suitable for data communication monitoring 
systems for transmission lines.
With the technical advantages of WSNs, 
establishing a full range, multi element online 
monitoring system can send timely warnings of 
disasters, rapidly locate the positions of faults, 
sense transmission line faults, shorten the time of 
fault recovery and thus improve the reliability of the 
power supply. WSN use can not only effectively 
prevent and reduce power equipment accidents, 
when combining with the conductor temperature, 
environmental and meteorological real-time online 
monitoring, but can also provide data to support 
transmission effi ciency improving and increasing 
dynamic capacity for transmission lines.
44
The general architecture of online monitoring 
systems for transmission lines is shown in 
Figure 5-1.
Currently, some provincial power companies 
of the State Grid Corporation of China (SGCC) 
are promoting applications of WSN technology 
in the online monitoring of transmission line. For 
example, since 2013, Liaoning and Ningxia electric 
power companies are developing demonstration 
projects based on WSN for transmission lines 
online monitoring system.
5.1.2 Intelligent monitoring and early 
warning system for substations
After decades of development, the domestic 
substation automation technology has reached 
the international standards level. Most of the new 
substations, regardless of voltage level difference, 
adopt integrated automation systems. It is 
estimated that since 2005, more than 200 digital 
substations with different degrees of automation, 
voltage grades and modes have been put into 
operation.
Compared with the conventional substations, dig-
ital substations focus on the network information 
digitization, substation information standardiza-
tion and networked transmission. For substations 
in smart grid, more attention is focused on smart 
power equipment, information exchange, interop-
erability and the intelligence application functions 
of the inner station. Now many smart monitoring 
functions can be realized and can improve the 
intelligent substation management, including 
the transformer/breaker/temperature monitoring, 
current leakage monitoring of lightning arrester, 
Electric 
communication 
network 
GPRS, DCMA 
Wireless Sensor Network 
Application 
layer 
Network 
layer 
Perception 
layer 
Substation 
Communication agent 
Video 
surveillance 
Transportation 
line monitoring 
Transportation 
line monitoring 
Communication agent UVA patrol 
Figure 5-1 | General architecture of online monitoring system for transmission line based 
on WSNs [47]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
45
electric leakage monitoring equipment, SF6 leak-
age monitoring of combined electric equipment, 
secondary equipment environmental monitoring, 
equipment anti-theft monitoring, etc. Applications 
of WSNs, can provide reliable, accurate, real-time, 
safety, suffi cient information for the substation 
management, not confi ned to the traditional elec-
trical quantities information of telemetry, remote 
communication, remote control, remote adjust-
ment, but also including equipment information, 
such as the cooling system condition, the circuit 
breaker action times, the energy storage state of 
transmission mechanism, size of breaking current, 
and environmental information, video information, 
etc., fi nally achieve digitalization of information 
description, integration of data acquisition, data 
transmission by network, intelligent data pro-
cessing, data display visualization and scientifi c 
production decision-making.
For example, SGCC joined forces with Shenyang 
Institute of Automation (SIA) of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences to establish the state maintenance 
system using WSN technologies. In Liaoning 
province and in Panjin south circle, China, 220 kV 
smart substations were successfully used to 
establish the auxiliary control systems. After the 
two systems were put into operation, the power 
grid was stable and data transmission ran well. It 
achieved the anticipated effect of communication, 
was accepted and made a good demonstration 
model.
It should be noted that service solutions based on 
WSNs will have to be aligned with the international 
standardization activities going on within smart 
metering (e.g. series of International Standards 
IEC 62056 (DLMS/COSEM), driven by the DLMS 
user group).
Wireless 
private 
network 
TD-SCDMA 
Application 
system 
Communication 
layer 
Acquisition 
layer 
Equipment 
status 
monitoring 
Transportation 
line 
monitoring 
Substation 
Transportation Line 
Transformer 
Other electric 
equipment 
Sensors 
Work 
station 
Backup 
server 
Application 
server 
Database 
server 
Data access 
server 
Firewall 
Figure 5-2 | Architecture of operation status monitoring for equipment [47]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
46
5.1.3 Online monitoring and early warning 
system for distribution networks
Distribution networks directly connect the power 
grid with users, and distribute electrical energy 
to them. Reliability and quality of distribution 
network is an important element for reliable power 
supplies. The distribution network consists of 
primary equipment such as feeders, distribution 
transformers, circuit breakers, switches, and 
secondary equipment such as relay protections, 
automatic devices, measurements and meters, 
communication and control equipment, etc.
Distribution networks have characteristics of a 
massive number of points, large coverage areas and 
long distance power lines. The application of WSN 
in distribution fi elds can strengthen management, 
save manpower, improve the reliability of the power 
supply and accelerate the recovery effi ciency of 
fault handling. SGCC supported an IoT application 
demonstration project in Ningxia Yinchuan, Henan 
Hebi, China, and verifi ed that the application of 
WSN technology in power distribution networks can 
provide protection and support for the construction 
of distribution networks in the following aspects:
1) By deploying integrated sensing equipment, 
power quality variations and load situation of 
large electricity can be monitored, moreover 
the accuracy and timeliness of voltage, current, 
harmonics and other information are improved.
2) By utilizing RFID, navigation, video surveillance, 
smart wearable technology together, capability 
of the real-time monitoring over the status 
of distribution equipment and environment 
parameters is strengthened. It can improve the 
fault location of distribution lines.
3) By monitoring distribution line conditions, 
underground distribution pipe networks, higher 
automatic levels of fi eld operation monitoring 
and anti-theft facilities can be achieved.
Figure 5-3 | WSN technology used in distribution network monitoring applications [47]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
47
5.1.4 Smart electricity consumption 
services
Intelligent electricity consumption services rely on 
a strong power grid and the concept of modern 
management, based on advanced metering, high 
effi ciency control, high speed communication, 
and quick energy storage technology, to realize 
the real time interaction between power networks, 
customer energy fl ow, information fl ow, and 
business fl ow.
WSNs can connect the terminal equipment of the 
supply side and the user side with sensors to form 
a complete interactive network for electric energy 
consumption information and realize electricity 
information acquisition in a complex environment. 
Information integration analysis based on WSNs 
can guide the user or directly adjust the electricity 
consumption style, to achieve the best confi guration 
of power resources, reduce the electrical supply 
costs, improving reliability and effi ciency. WSNs 
have broad application prospects in the intelligent 
electricity consumption fi elds such as intelligent 
communities, intelligent industrial parks, etc.
The electric energy data acquisition system is 
a basis for intelligent electricity consumption 
services. The system could comprehensively 
collect several kinds of large users data. This 
includes data for special transformers, medium 
and small users of special transformers, three-
phase general business users, single-phase 
general industrial and commercial users as well as 
resident users and public distribution transformer 
data for examination of metering points. This 
data can be combined to construct integrated 
power information platforms. The architecture of a 
WSN-based electric energy data acquisition 
system is shown in Figure 5-4.
DCU 
DCU
Concentrator 
Acquisition 
gateway 
Acquisition 
terminal 
Fiber/GPRS 
TD-LTE 230 
Broadband PLC 
Building 
block 
Building 
block 
Intelligent ammeter Intelligent ammeter Intelligent ammeter 
WSN 
Acquisition 
gateway 
Wireless 
gateway 
Wireless broadband 
PLC gateway 
Figure 5-4 | Architecture of WSN based electric energy data acquisition system [47]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
48
At present, some provincial power companies of 
SGCC have begun to use the automatic meter 
reading system based on WSN technology. For 
example, Liaoning Province Electric Power Limited 
Company has carried out WSN-based electric 
energy data acquisition system for more than 20 000 
households. The communication system is based 
on the industrial wireless network standard WIA, 
and has achieved good results during operation 
testing. The main station has an accurate clock, 
thus the concentrator clock can be synchronized 
by the upstream communication network.
5.2 WSN application in smart water 
networks
Today, the world’s water consumption is 300 % 
of what it was in 1950. The strong growth of the 
world’s population combined with a strong growth 
of what is known as the middle class will continue 
to create increasing demand for the planet’s 
limited resources. An example of a key resource 
in this context is the availability of clean water. In 
addition to the usual governmental regulation and 
policing of the exploitation of natural resources, 
many corporations are seeing the impact on the 
environment. They also see social and commercial 
advantages in taking steps to ensure the negative 
impact their operations have on natural resources is 
minimal. These are usually captured by monitoring 
environmental impact within a complex score card 
such as Figure 5-6 where the monitoring of impact 
on water pollution would be just one example.
5.2.1 Sustainability (water resource focus)
There are share price implications as well as 
regulatory requirements that drive this new green 
behaviour. It can be said that it is generally accepted 
in modern society that the perceived need to better 
manage the environmental impact corporations 
have on scarce resources and the CO2 footprint 
as an indication of pollution costs to society versus 
profi t will become increasingly important. Thus the 
trend for corporations to invest in this area in addition 
to governments creating regulations demanding 
compliance to new environmental rules and creating 
new national market entry costs is clear.
When focusing on clean water, a monitoring system 
has to be built to determine base line quality as 
well as monitor the various potential sources of 
contaminants to clean water. Traditional operational 
technology systems are not usually created to 
monitor potential pollutants, thus new sensors 
and actuators need to be used to monitor also air-
born pollutants that are usually the most diffi cult 
pollutants to track and manage. The information 
gathered can not only be used as a key performance 
indicator (KPI) dashboard but also be used to 
predict water quality based on real-time monitoring 
of related events, such as manmade (pollution) or 
environmental (weather) events. This can be useful 
for corporations who are always working within 
an international regulatory framework, and can 
potentially lead to additional value creation in the 
form of emission/pollution certifi cates.
This mind shift means that corporations need to shift 
from a mentality of traditional operational effi ciency 
to sustainability as a competitive advantage in an 
ever aware market. This means that value has to be 
captured and given to products and services that 
have the least negative impact on the environment.
Figure 5-5 | Monitoring of water networks 
[48]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
49
Figure 5-6 | Example of score card [49]
Figure 5-7 | Airborne pollutants greenhouse gases (GHG) a threat to water [48]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
50
5.3 WSN application in intelligent 
transportation
Wireless sensing in intelligent transportation differs 
on several points from the traditional concepts 
and design requirements for WSN. In most cases, 
sensors can rely on some sort of infrastructure for 
power supply, for example the aspect of energy 
effi ciency is usually of secondary importance in 
these systems.
WSN applications in intelligent transportation can 
be subdivided into two categories:
1) Stationary sensor networks, either on board of 
a vehicle or as part of a traffi c infrastructure.
2) Floating sensor networks, in which individual 
vehicles or other mobile entities act as the 
sensors.
The latter category comprises applications related 
to the tracking and optimization of the fl ow of 
goods, vehicles and people, whereas the former 
comprises mainly applications that were formerly 
covered by wired sensors.
5.3.1 Sensing of  traffi c fl ows
Intelligent traffi c management solutions rely on the 
accurate measurement and reliable prediction of 
traffi c fl ows within a city. This includes not only an 
estimation of the density of cars on a given street 
or the number of passengers inside a given bus 
or train but also the analysis of the origins and 
destinations of the vehicles and passengers.
Monitoring the traffi c situation on a street or 
intersection can be achieved by means of traditional 
wired sensors, such as cameras, inductive loops, 
etc. While wireless technology can be benefi cial 
in reducing deployment costs of such sensors, it 
does not directly affect the accuracy or usefulness 
of the measurement results.
However, by broadening the defi nition of the term 
“sensor” and making use of wireless technology 
readily available in many vehicles and smart 
phones, the vehicles themselves as well as 
the passengers using the public transportation 
systems can become “sensors” for the accurate 
measurement of traffi c fl ows within a city.
Techniques for collecting traffi c fl ow data from 
vehicles are collectively referred to as fl oating 
car data (FCD). This includes methods relying 
on a relatively small number of vehicles explicitly 
transmitting their position information to a central 
server (e.g. taxis or buses sending their position 
obtained via GPS) as well as approaches relying 
on location information of mobile phones obtained 
from real-time location databases of the cellular 
network operators. The latter approach does not 
actually involve any sensing by the vehicle itself, 
but still makes use of a wireless network (i.e. the 
existing cellular network) to sense or rather infer the 
current characteristics of traffi c fl ows. The technical 
challenges lie particularly in the processing of the 
potentially large amounts of data, the distinction 
between useful and non-useful data and the 
extrapolation of the actual traffi c fl ow data from the 
observation of only a subset of all vehicles.
Extensions of the FCD idea involving information 
gathered from the on-board electronics of the 
vehicles have been proposed under the term 
extended fl oating car data (XFCD). Collecting and 
evaluating data from temperature sensors, rain 
sensors, ABS, ESC and traction control system 
of even a relatively small number of cars can be 
used to derive real-time information about road 
conditions which can be made available to the 
public and/or used for an improved prediction of 
traffi c fl ows based on anticipated behaviour of 
drivers in response to the road conditions.
Privacy issues must be taken into consideration 
whenever location or sensor data is collected from 
private vehicles. However, this is a general concern 
related to the monitoring of traffi c fl ows, and 
schemes that don’t make use of wireless technology 
(e.g. relying on license-plate recognition) also have 
to consider the car owners’ privacy.
Equivalent to the measurement of vehicle 
movement by FCD, passenger behaviour in public 
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
51
transportation systems can be analyzed with the 
help of wireless technology. For example electronic 
tickets, which typically employ RFID technology for 
registering the access to a subway station, bus or 
tram, effectively turn the passenger into a part of a 
sensor network.
The possibilities for gathering information about 
passenger movement and behaviour can be 
further increased if smart phones are used to 
store electronic tickets. Especially for gathering 
information about intermodal transportation habits 
of passengers, electronic ticket applications for 
smart phones offer possibilities that conventional 
electronic tickets cannot provide. It remains to 
be seen, however, to which extent users will be 
willing to share position data in exchange for the 
convenience of using their mobile phone as a bus 
or metro ticket.
5.3.2 City logistics
Urbanization is posing a lot of challenges, especially 
in rapidly developing countries where already huge 
cities are still growing and the increasingly wealthy 
population leads to a constantly rising fl ow of 
goods into and out of the city centres.
Delivery vehicles account for a large portion of the 
air pollution in the cities, and streamlining the fl ow 
of goods between the city and its surroundings is 
the key to solving a lot of the traffi c problems and 
improving the air quality.
A promising approach towards reducing the 
traffi c load caused by delivery vehicles is the 
introduction of urban consolidation centres 
(UCCs), i.e. warehouses just outside the city 
where all the goods destined for retailers in a city 
are fi rst consolidated and then shipped with an 
optimized routing, making the best possible use of 
truck capacity and reducing the total number of 
vehicles needed and the total distance travelled for 
delivering all goods to their destinations.
To achieve such optimization, careful analysis 
and planning of traffi c fl ows in the city as well as 
monitoring of the actual fl ow of the goods are 
needed. The challenges and the solutions are 
similar to the ones discussed in 5.3.1, but with a 
fi ner granularity. Rather than just tracking a subset 
of vehicles as they move through the city, tracking 
of goods at least at a pallet level is required. The 
pallet (or other packaging unit) thus becomes the 
“sensor” for measuring the fl ow of goods, and a 
combination of multiple wireless technologies 
(GPS, RFID, WLAN, cellular) in combination with 
sophisticated data analysis techniques are applied 
to obtain the required data for optimizing the 
scheduling and routing of the deliveries and ensure 
timely arrival while minimizing the environmental 
impact of the transportation.
5.3.3 On-board WSNs
Vehicles of all kinds rely on an increasingly large 
number of sensors to ensure safe and smooth 
operation. This includes sensors primarily providing 
information to the driver as well as sensors that 
are part of the propulsion or vehicle dynamics 
systems. Due to the safety-critical nature of those 
subsystems, wireless technology is not usually a 
feasible option for these applications.
Figure 5-9 | Electronic tickets for smarter 
travel [50]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
52
However, especially in large vehicles such as 
busses, trains, and airplanes, a lot of sensors 
and actuators serve non-safety-critical purposes, 
e.g. monitoring cabin temperature, collecting data 
used in preventive maintenance of the vehicle or 
monitoring the status of transported goods.
In railway applications, WSNs can play an 
important role in the refurbishment of old carriages 
with state-of-the-art electrical systems.
In airplanes, saving the weight of copper or aluminium 
cables by applying wireless sensors for non-critical 
applications is an important consideration. Wireless 
sensors employing energy harvesting techniques 
have been discussed even for monitoring the 
mechanical stress on composite materials forming 
part of the aircraft structure. Wiring the sensors in 
such “smart materials” would increase the weight 
of the structure and therefore signifi cantly reduce 
the advantages of the composite material over 
conventional metal structures.
5.3.4 WSN in traffi c infrastructures
Traffi c lights at intersections are usually controlled 
by units located close to the intersection, taking 
inputs from a set of sensors (e.g. inductive loops) 
as well as commands from a centralized control 
unit and switching the individual lights (also known 
as signal heads) according to the traffi c rules and 
situational requirements.
With the number and complexity of sensors and 
display elements increasing, the task of a traffi c 
controller today is really based on communication 
rather than a pure switching of the connected 
components. Traffi c lights may be equipped with 
count-down timer displays, variable message 
signs display updates speed limits, and optical 
or radar-based sensors deliver information about 
the occupancy of individual lanes or the speed of 
vehicles passing the intersection.
Upgrading the infrastructure of an existing inter-
section with state-of-the-art technology requires 
also providing the necessary communication links 
between sensors, signal heads, variable message 
signs, traffi c controllers and other components. 
Wireless technology can help reduce the cost 
by eliminating the need to route communication 
cables (e.g. Ethernet) to all devices in an intersec-
tion. Such an installation will in most cases not be a 
pure sensor network, as it will usually also include 
display components or actuators. Furthermore, a 
combination of wired and wireless communication 
links and possibly even a combination of different 
wired/wireless standards within the same system 
due to a combination of components from different 
vendors are not unlikely.
Interaction of the traffi c infrastructure with vehicles 
through wireless communication (e.g. granting 
priority to busses or emergency vehicles at 
intersections) is another promising application 
for wireless technology in traffi c infrastructure. 
Though not all possible applications actually 
involve the exchange of sensor data over the 
wireless communication links, there are also a 
number of scenarios in which either vehicles share 
their sensor data with the infrastructure elements 
(e.g. regarding speed when approaching the 
intersection) or where the infrastructure provides 
sensor data to the vehicles (e.g. regarding road 
congestion on the other side of the intersection).
5.4 WSN application in smart 
homes
5.4.1 The energy challenge
Faced with growing consumption and high energy 
costs, as well as the scarcity of fossil fuels, all 
of the scenarios developed by public institutions 
and experts to curb energy demand and our CO2 
emissions at the same time converge on: energy 
effi ciency being an absolute priority.
In Europe, the energy consumption of buildings 
(residential and tertiary) represents 40 % of the 
total energy consumption, industry is 30 % and 
transportation is 30 %.
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
53
Public authorities take it very seriously. As an 
example in Europe, the Energy Effi ciency Directive, 
adopted in October 2012, heads in this direction. 
It includes measures about buildings renovation; 
long term renovation roadmaps for commercial and 
residential buildings and 3 % renovation rate for 
central public buildings. Each member state of the 
European Union had to translate these objectives 
into national law by June 2014.
5.4.2 Energy effi ciency in buildings – 
Case study
A collaborative programme named HOMES has 
been launched by Schneider Electric in France 
in 2008 [51], and over a four year period the 
programme was designed to provide buildings 
with solutions to achieve better energy effi ciency. 
The HOMES programme enabled the study, 
improvement and testing of simple, effective, 
economically sustainable active energy effi ciency 
solutions using active control with the possibility 
of optimizing energy use by means of automated 
control and monitoring systems.
One of the achievements of this programme was to 
understand that the energy system is composed by 
three (quasi) independent subsystems, each one 
being responsible of useless energy consumptions:
1) Distribution subsystem (world of machines): 
energy production, transformation, storage.
2) Usage subsystem (world of people): energy 
services delivered to the occupants.
3) Constructive subsystem (world of materials): 
energy transfer between indoors and outdoors.
This programme has delivered a new vision of the 
energy performance of a building, built around 
solutions that simultaneously involve the quality of 
the enclosure, equipment performance and active 
control. These are three independent vectors of 
intervention, without a specifi c order of application 
and complementary to each other.
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
Figure 5-10 | Systemic approach of energy in buildings
Usage system 
Rooms Applications 
Outlets 
Activity 
Heating
Cooling 
Lighting 
DHW 
Distribution system 
Technical 
systems 
Technical 
vectors 
!
Pipes 
Ducts 
Wires 
OCCUPANT 
 
 
Physical comfort 
 
Psychological 
comfort 
 
Activity 
efficiency 
Product equipment 
 
Distribution equipment 
 
Storage equipment 
 
Transformation 
equipment 
Fuel 
 
Renewable 
Electrical 
 
Gas 
Emission 
equipment 
BIQ : intrinsic quality of the building envelope 
Constructive system 
Weather (temperature, wind, light) 
Energies Energy 
services 
54
5.4.3 Active control in buildings
Based on the vision described above, the HOMES 
programme has thus proposed a protocol of active 
control articulated around the three strategies to 
maximise building performance while making it 
smart grid compatible.
1) Act room by room: for maximizing the energy 
performance of a building, it is necessary to 
optimize the services rendered to the occupant, 
which is to say at the level of a room or a zone in 
a tertiary building. Thanks to the zone control, 
the occupant can adapt the environment to his 
or her activities and comfort.
2) Optimize energy supplies: to serve the needs 
of the occupants of a building, it is necessary 
to optimize the supply of energy based on the 
economic and carbon costs. The supply and 
distribution of energy are then managed as a 
function of the sum of the needs of each location. 
It enables control of the energy sources and 
the relationship with the upstream ecosystem 
consisting of the district, city, etc. This strategy 
facilitates anticipation of the development of 
smart grids. It creates a system where each 
level contributes to optimization at a higher 
level. It also participates in developing the 
demand management potential for electricity 
in buildings. Therefore, it is necessary to move 
from vertical independent application control 
to a multi-application control by zone.
3) Act on the engagement of the stakeholders: 
to improve the energy performance of a 
building, it is necessary to establish an 
incremental action plan to progressively look 
for sources of savings. However, the needs 
differ depending on the stakeholders involved. 
Information strategies must be implemented 
that are tailored to the specifi c needs of each 
stakeholder and their areas of responsibility for 
helping them to take energy effi cient decisions.
Space and time fragmentation of the building and 
its technical systems have a strong impact on the 
effi ciency of monitoring and energy savings through 
active control. Therefore, the implementation of 
active control strategies modify the sensing and 
control command architectures of active control 
solutions, to be based on a zone control ecosystem 
Figure 5-11 | Zone control [50]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
55
as shown in Figures 5-11 and 5-12 where the 
comfort sensor is one of the key elements.
Further, this has been assessed on fi ve pilot sites 
representing different climatic zones, sector, 
constructive age, heating energy, hot water energy 
and owner type. The savings went from 25 % 
for residential up to 56 % for the school, proving 
the relevance of the above assumptions, see 
Figure 5-13.
5.4.4 WSNs are key for improving the 
energy effi cient performances of 
existing buildings
For achieving multi-applicative control at the 
zone level, it is necessary to closely monitor the 
environment (light, temperature, relative humidity, 
CO2) as well as the activity of the occupants 
(presence detection, alarms). If we keep in mind 
that just a few percent of new buildings are built 
every year, the challenge is to deploy active control 
Figure 5-12 | Incidence on time fragmentation in savings [50]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
Figure 5-13 | Savings [50]
Hotel 1970 Hotel Nice 1980 School 1990 Office 2007 Residence 2010 
30 % -37 % 
-56 % 
-36 % 
-25 % 
56
Figure 5-15 | Schneider Electric sensor 
prototypes [50]
Figure 5-14 | Autonomous sensor 
electronics [50]
Figure 5-16 | Worldwide buildings sensors market forecast [52]
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
57
at the zone level in millions of existing buildings. 
The only way to achieve this is to use wireless, 
and even battery-less sensors for avoiding having 
hundreds of millions of batteries to manage and 
maintain.
The feasibility of a multi-physics wireless autono-
mous sensor has been demonstrated. The results 
were presented in Munich at the Energy Harvesting 
and Storage Conference in June 2011.
Powered by a photovoltaic (PV) cell, the prototype 
was able to measure temperature, relative humidity 
and light intensity, and to transmit it every 10 
minutes on an 802.15.4 radio, using ZigBee® Green 
Power protocol. The average power consumption 
was 5 μW, enabling to have such a sensor operating 
continuously under less than 100 lux 8 hours/day.
From a study made by IMS Research in October 
2011 [52], it is expected that sensors will have 
a continuous growth in the building market, 
with wireless sensors growing at a much faster 
pace.
From a communication protocol perspective, the 
ZigBee® Alliance has adopted the Green Power 
feature set as part of the ZigBee standard in 2012 
[53]. It enables to integrate in a ZigBee® meshed 
network wireless sensors with very limited energy 
available like when powered by energy harvesting. 
This makes it a very attractive solution for control 
in a building.
WSNs are a key enabler for deploying multi-
applicative control in buildings at the zone level, 
and they contribute signifi cantly to improve energy 
effi ciency by taking into account the building within 
its environment, while taking care of the comfort 
and the activity of the occupants.
5.5 Additional application benefi ts 
of WSN
5.5.1 Improve energy effi ciency
As is indicated in the 2010 IEC White Paper, 
Coping with the Energy Challenge – The IEC’s Role 
from 2010 to 2030: “but of the theoretical energy 
in the fuel, two-thirds is today lost in generation 
and another 9 % in transmission/distribution, so 
that of the primary energy consumed only about 
30 % is available as electricity at the point of use.” 
However, IoT can help to solve this problem. As 
an effective means to acquire information, it can 
implement real-time monitoring over the operation 
of energy conversion, and make timely analysis and 
processing of the large amount of data. In addition, 
it can also make speedy responses to abnormal 
status and guarantee the system security as it can 
enable a valid management of the whole process 
(from generation to transportation and usage) of 
the energy system in fi ne grain and dynamic mode.
5.5.2 Contribute to environmental 
monitoring
Environment pollution, sudden natural and 
ecological disasters and man-made damages are 
still the major environmental problems that need to 
be resolved at present. Early detection, alarming 
and initiation of emergency measures are key steps 
to avoid great environment disasters. IoT, featuring 
a powerful sensing ability and wide coverage 
of detecting area, can make a real-time and all-
around monitoring over the environment. In this 
sense, with a data fusion and intelligent recognition 
technology, it can increase the alarming effi ciency. 
As a result, it is reasonable to predict that IoT will 
play a key role in the warning and forecast of fl ood, 
forest fi re and water pollution, etc.
5.5.3 Enhance social services
IoT offers a way for different elements in social 
services to relate and connect with each other 
through the internet: man, equipment, and social 
service resources. Thanks to IoT, on one hand, 
the service providers can obtain information about 
people’s demands and provide them tailored 
and high-quality services; while on the other 
hand, people can have a better understanding of 
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
58
themselves and the environment around them. 
It is safe to predict that IoT will change people’s 
lifestyles in some aspects. For example, IoT-based 
smart health care and smart home systems will 
bring more convenience and comfort to people’s 
lives.
WSN applications in the infrastructure systems
59
Section 6
Standards of WSNs and systems
6.1 General
Standardization is a major prerequisite to achieve 
interoperability, not only between products of 
different vendors, but also between different 
solutions, applications and domains. The latter 
are of special interest to IoT and WSN as common 
access to devices, sensors and actors from various 
application domains leading to new cross domain 
applications is the major intent of IoT.
Interoperability has to be considered at different 
layers from component, to communication, 
information, function and business layer. The 
component layer basically refl ects the devices 
like sensors and actuators, but also gateways 
and servers which run the applications. The 
communication layer is responsible for the data 
exchange between the components while the 
information layer represents the actual data. The 
function layer is concerned with the functionality 
which can be software applications, but also 
hardware solutions. At the business layer the 
business interactions are described. From the 
WSN and IoT approach to provide information 
exchange between “things” and applications 
covering various application domains, common 
communication and information layer standards 
are of main interests, but also generic functions 
might be used by different application areas. At 
the component layer we will fi nd various types of 
devices, but still standards defi ning for example 
form factors and connectors for modules (e.g. 
wireless modules, control processing unit (CPU) 
boards) can make sense.
As a prerequisite for the successful standardization 
use cases and requirements have to be collected 
and architecture standards are needed to structure 
the overall system and identify the relevant 
functions, information fl ows and interfaces.
As WSN will be used in the wider context of IoT, 
also IoT standards and standardization activities 
are considered. This concerns especially the 
higher communication protocol, information and 
function layer.
Note that the list of standards and standardization 
activities below is not exhaustive.
6.2 Present status
IEEE 802.5.14 is the most relevant communication 
standard for the WSN. It defi nes the physical and 
link layer for short-range wireless transmission with 
low power consumption, low complexity and low 
cost. It uses the ISM frequency bands at 800/900 
MHz and 2.4 GHz. IEEE 802.15.4 is the foundation 
for other standards like ZigBee®, WirelessHart, 
WIA-PA and ISA.100.11a which defi ne regional 
or market specifi c versions. The base standard 
was published in 2003 and revisions in 2006 and 
2011. Various amendments have been added to 
cover additional physical layer protocols, regional 
frequency bands and specifi c application areas. 
Current work is covering additional frequency 
bands (e.g. TV white space, regional bands), ultra-
low power operation and specifi c applications like 
train control.
Bluetooth is also a wireless short range protocol 
defi ned by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group. 
With Bluetooth 4.0 they have included a low energy 
protocol variant for low power applications.
RFID is not only used in the WSN context, but is 
of general interest to IoT. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 31 
60
is one of the major standardization drivers with 
its ISO/IEC 18000 series of standards defi ning 
diverse RFID technologies. Other bodies like ISO, 
EPCglobal and DASH7 have either contributed to 
or used these standards.
While the lower communication layers are often 
specifi c for a certain application approach like 
WSN, the network and higher communication layer 
should preferably use common protocols in order to 
allow interoperability across networks. Still specifi c 
requirements of certain technologies, such as 
low power consumption and small computational 
footprints in the case of WSNs, have to be taken 
into account. The IP protocol suite is today the de 
facto standard for these layers. While previously 
domain specifi c standards have defi ned their own 
protocol stack they all move today to IP. In the case 
of WSN and IoT IPv6 is the preferred solution. The 
IPv6 standards set (network to application layer) 
from Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) (RFC 
2460 and others) is available and stable. In order 
to support low power constrained devices and 
networks, especially considering IEEE 802.15.4, 
IETF is working on specifi c extensions and protocols. 
The 6LoWPAN working group defi nes the mapping 
of IPv6 on IEEE 802.15.4 (e.g. RFC 6282). The roll 
working group considers routing over low power and 
lossy networks (e.g. RFC 6550). The constrained 
application protocol (CoAP) working group defi nes 
an application protocol for constrained devices and 
networks. This is an alternative to the HTTP protocol 
used for RESTful web services taking into account 
the specially requirements of constrained devices 
and networks.
The ZigBee® specifi cations enhance the IEEE 
802.15.4 standard by adding network and security 
layers and an application framework. They 
cover various application areas like home and 
building automation, health care, energy and light 
management and telecom services. The original 
Zigbee® specifi cations defi ne their own network 
and application layer protocols, while the latest 
Zigbee® IP specifi cation builds on IPv6 and CoAP.
For the actual data exchange between applications 
various approaches exist, often using a service 
oriented architecture (SOA). Examples are OPC-
UA which is an IEC standard and SOAP, WSDL 
and REST defi ned by World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C). XML as defi ned by W3C is the commonly 
used encoding format. In the context of WSN it 
has to be considered how far these protocols fi t 
to constrained devices and networks. The Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) has defi ned a set 
of open standards for integration, interoperability 
and exploitation of web-connected sensors and 
sensor-based systems (sensor web enablement).
For the management of devices and networks 
the SNMP protocol defi ned by IETF is widely 
used. NETCONF is a new approach for network 
management in IETF. Currently activities have 
started to cover management of constrained 
devices and networks explicitly in IETF. Other 
devices management protocols considered for IoT 
are TR-69 from Broadband Forum (BBF) and Open 
Mobile Alliance (OMA) Device Management.
Semantic representation of the information is an 
important issue in WSN and IoT in order to ease 
knowledge sharing and auto-confi guration of 
systems and applications. W3C is defi ning the base 
protocols like RDF, RDFS and OWL in its semantic 
web activities. Again the specifi c requirements 
of constrained networks and devices have to be 
taken into account. Furthermore semantic sensor 
network ontology has been defi ned. For querying 
geographically distributed information OGC has 
defi ned GeoSPARQL.
The European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute (ETSI) TC SmartM2M has started from 
use cases and requirements for several application 
areas to develop M2M communication architecture 
and the related interfaces between devices, 
gateways, network notes and applications with 
a focus on offering M2M services. This work is 
introduced into OneM2M.
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SWG 7 (sensor networks) has 
developed the ISO/IEC 29182 services for a sensor 
Standards of WSNs and systems
61
network reference architecture and services and 
interfaces for collaborative information processing. 
They are working on sensor network interfaces 
for generic applications and smart grid systems. 
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SWG 7 (IoT) was started analysis 
market requirements and standardization gaps 
for IoT.
ITU has setup a M2M focus group to study the IoT 
standardization landscape and identify common 
requirements. Its initial focus is on the health 
sector. A joint coordination activity (JCA-IoT) 
shall coordinate the ITU-T work on IoT, including 
network aspects of identifi cation functionality and 
ubiquitous sensor networks (USNs). In addition 
ITU has varies more or less related activities for 
example on next generation networks including 
USN, security and identifi cation (naming and 
numbering).
IEEE has in addition to the 802.15.4 also activities on 
smart transducers (1451 series) and for ubiquitous 
green community control (1888 series).
Information models, sometimes with semantic 
representation and even ontology are already 
available for different application areas like for 
smart grid from IEC TC 57, industry automation 
from IEC TC 65 and ISO TC 184 and building 
automation from ISO TC 205 and ISO/IEC JTC 1/
SC 25.
Important in the IoT context are also product data 
standards as defi ned for example by IEC SC 3D, 
identifi cation standards as defi ned by ISO and ITU 
and location standards as defi ned for example by 
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 31 and OGC.
And last but not least security and privacy 
standards are important for WSN and IoT.
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
IEEE 802 Physical and link 
layer protocol for 
short range wireless 
network
802.15.4-2011 
(including amendments 
a, c and d),
802.15.4e-2012, 
802.15.4f.2012, 
802.15.4g-2012,
802.15.4k-2013, 
802.15.4j-2013
TV white 
space, rail 
communication
IETF IP protocol suite 
(network to application 
layer)
e.g. RFC 2460 (IPv6), 
RFC 2616 (HTTP), RFC 
768 (UDP), 1180 (TCP), 
RFC 5246 (TLS), RFC 
4301 (IPsec)
Standards of WSNs and systems
Table 6-1 | WSN/IoT standardization activities (not exhaustive)
62
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
IETF roll Routing for low power 
and lossy networks
RFC 5548, RFC 5673, 
RFC 5826, RFC 5867, 
RFC 6206, RFC 6550, 
RFC 6551, RFC 6552, 
RFC 6719, RFC 6997, 
RFC 6998
Multicast 
routing, 
security threats, 
applicability 
statements 
for different 
applications
IETF core Application protocol 
for constrained 
devices/networks
RFC 6690, draft-ietf-
core-coap-18 (waiting 
for publishing as RFC)
Group 
communication, 
HTTP mapping, 
resources, 
device 
management
IETF 6LoWPAN IPv6 mapping for 
constrained wireless 
networks (i.e. IEEE 
802.15.4)
RFC 4919, RFC 4944, 
RFC 6282, RFC 6568, 
RFC 6606, RFC 6775
IPsec header 
compression, 
DECT low 
power mapping
Zigbee® 
Alliance
2007 Specifi cation, 
IP Specifi cation, 
RF4CE Specifi cation, 
Building Automation, 
Remote Control, 
Smart Energy, 
Smart Energy Profi le 2, 
Health Care, 
Home Automation, 
Light Link, 
Telecom Services, 
Gateway
Retail services
ISO/IEC 
JTC 1
SC 31 RFID, NFC ISO/IEC 14443, 
ISO/IEC 15693,
ISO/IEC 15961, 
ISO/IEC 15962, 
ISO/IEC 18000, 
ISO/IEC 18092, 
ISO/IEC 21481,
ISO/IEC 24791,
ISO/IEC 29160
Standards of WSNs and systems
63
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
EPCglobal RFID (Electronic 
Product Code)
EPCglobal Tag Data, 
Tag Data Translation, 
EPCglobal HF air 
interface protocol, 
EPCglobal UHF “Gen2” 
air interface protocol, 
EPC Information 
Services (EPCIS)
ISO TC 104 RFID (container 
tracking)
ISO18185
DASH7 RFID ISO/IEC 18000-7 DASH7 Alliance 
Protocol
W3C Application 
communication, Web 
Services
XML, SOAP, WSDL, 
REST
IEC TC 65 Application 
communication
IEC 62541 (OPC-UA)
IETF opsawg Device and network 
management
RFC 1155, RFC 1157, 
RFC1213, RFC3411-
3418 (SNMPv3)
Management 
for constrained 
devices
IETF netconf Device and network 
management
RFC 4741-4744 Security
BBF BroadbandHome Device management TR-69
OMA DM WG Device management DM 1.3 Version 2.0, 
constrained 
devices 
(Lightweight 
DM)
W3C Semantic 
representation
RDF, RDFS, RIF, OWL, 
SPARQL, EXI, SSN 
ontology
Binary RDF, 
Object Memory 
Modeling 
(OMM), 
RDF stream 
processing
Standards of WSNs and systems
64
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
OGC Sensor Web 
Enablement 
DWG
Application 
communication, 
web services
Overview and High 
Level Architecture, 
Application 
communication, Web 
Services, Sensor 
Model Language, 
Transducer Model 
Language, Sensor 
Observations Service, 
Sensor Planning 
Service, Sensor 
Alert Service, Web 
Notifi cation Services
OGC GeoSPARQL 
SWG
Semantic 
representation
GeoSPARQL
ETSI 
(OneM2M)
TC SmartM2M M2M communication, 
architecture, 
use cases, 
requirements, 
interfaces
TS 102689, 
TS 102690, 
TS 102921, 
TS 103092, 
TS 103093, 
TS 103104, 
TR 101584,
TR 102691, 
TR 102725, 
TR 102732, 
TR 102857, 
TR 102898, 
TR 102935, 
TR 103167
Interworking, 
security, smart 
cities, smart 
appliances, 
semantics
ISO/IEC 
JTC 1
SWG 7 Sensor network, 
architecture, 
application interfaces
ISO/IEC 29182, 
ISO/IEC 20005
Smart grid 
interfaces 
(ISO/IEC 30101), 
generic 
application 
interfaces 
(ISO/IEC 30128)
Standards of WSNs and systems
65
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
ITU-T Focus Group 
M2M
M2M architecture, 
requirements, 
application interfaces, 
e-health
Requirements, 
architecture 
framework, 
APIs, protocols, 
e-health 
Standardization 
activities and 
gap analysis, 
e-health M2M 
eco system, 
e-health use 
cases
ISA Physical and link 
layer protocol for 
short range wireless 
network
ISA100.11.a
IEEE P1451 Smart transducers IEEE 1451
(ISO/IEC/IEEE 21451)
IEEE P1888 Community control IEEE 1888
ITU-T SG16 Ubiquitous sensor 
network middleware, 
applications, 
identifi cation
F.771, F.744, H.621, 
H.642
IoT applications, 
tag-based 
identifi cation
IEC TC 57 Information models, 
smart grid
IEC 61850, IEC 61968, 
IEC 61970
Web services 
mapping, 
renewable 
integration, 
customer 
interface, 
market interface
IEC TC 65 Information models, 
industry automation 
IEC 6242, IEC 62714, 
IEC 62794, 
ISO TC 184 Information models, 
industry automation
ISO 13584, ISO 15926
Standards of WSNs and systems
66
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
ISO/IEC 
JTC 1
SC 25 Information models, 
building automation
ISO/IEC 14543
ISO TC 205 Information models, 
building automation
ISO 16484
IEC SC 3D Product data IEC 61360
ISO TC 184 Product data ISO 13584
ecl@ss Product data ecl@ss 7.0
IEC TC 65 Wireless sensor 
network
IEC 62591, IEC 62601, 
IEC 62734
ISO TC 46 Identifi ers ISO 27729, ISO 26324, 
ISO 3297, ISO 2108, 
ISO 10957
ISO/IEC 
JTC 1
SC 31 Location ISO/IEC 24730, 
ISO/IEC 24769
ISO/IEC 
JTC 1
SC 31 Identifi ers ISO/IEC 15459
ITU-T SG2 Identifi ers E.101, Y.2213
ITU-T SG13 Ubiquitous sensor 
network
Y. 2221
ITU-T SG17 Security X.1171, X.1311, X.1312, 
X.1313
OGC SWE Location OpenGIS location 
services
3GPP SA1, SA2, SA3 Service and system MTC 
optimization, 
MTC 
communication
3GPP G2, R1, R2, R3 Radio access 
networks
Enhancement 
tech. of wireless 
access MTC
Standards of WSNs and systems
67
Organization Group Relationship with 
WSN/IoT
Standards Ongoing work
3GPP CT1, CT3l, CT4 Communication 
networks
Evaluate the 
infl uence of 
3GPP protocols
3GPP2 TSG-SX M2M communication Study for M2M 
communication 
for CDMA2000 
networks
CCSA TC10/WG3 M2M communication M2M 
communication, 
next generation 
network
CCSA TC5/WG7 Typical M2M 
application
ITU-T JCA-NID Identifi cation system Network 
character of 
identifi cation 
system 
(including RFID)
6.3 Standardization needs and 
outlook
WSN and even more IoT are not single technolo-
gies, but represent complex systems using various 
technologies from physical communication layers 
to application programmes. Furthermore, they are 
used in many application areas and different envi-
ronments. This can also result in a complex stan-
dardization environment. As discussed above we 
have already a large set of existing standards and 
ongoing standardization activities. However they of-
ten cover only certain aspects and application areas 
of the overall system or focus on specifi c use cases.
As IoT and WSN are base technology areas for 
ongoing and emerging standardization areas by the 
IEC like smart grid, industry 4.0 and smart cities, it 
is important for IEC to have a good understanding 
of them, the standardization environment and the 
specifi c needs for the IEC applications areas in 
order to steer standardization in the necessary 
direction and identify and fi ll the standardization 
gaps. This has to be done in close cooperation 
with other relevant standardization bodies.
Starting from the use cases of the specifi c 
application areas (i.e. smart grid, industry 4.0, 
smart cities) the requirements and an architectural 
framework have to be defi ned that fi t the needs 
of IEC. Based on that it can be identifi ed which 
existing standards can be reused and which gaps 
have to be fi lled.
Standards of WSNs and systems
68
6.4 Challenges and future 
standardization needs
WSN is an emerging technology which involves 
different layers and aspects of information 
technology. So its standardization has its unique 
complexity:
 § Disunity: communication, coordination and 
unifi ed planning are absent from different 
standard organizations and between each 
other.
 § Incompatibility: since WSN involves different 
aspects of information technology, its 
standards are complex and diverse. Yet 
different standards developed by different 
standard organizations are not compatible.
 § Lack of harmonization: some WSN applications 
have already begun to implement successively. 
Though different standard organizations have 
carried out the work from different perspective 
and with different depth, most of the work is 
still in its initial stage and is not market ready.
 § Divergence: since the applications are out of 
sync and the standard development is delayed, 
the application constructions are not in 
conformity with standard development, which 
affects the reusability and intercommunity of 
the applications and impede the development 
of industrialization.
To resolve the above problems, it is recommended 
that WSN standardization should enhance the 
communication and coordination among different 
standard organizations, make unifi ed planning, 
optimize resource allocation and reduce repetition 
of work.
Standards of WSNs and systems
69
Section 7
Conclusions and recommendations
WSN and even more so, IoT, are not single 
technologies but instead represent complex 
systems using various technologies from physical 
communication layers to application programmes 
and are used in many application areas and 
different environments. This diversity has resulted 
in a complex standardization environment. As 
discussed in this White Paper there is already a 
large set of existing applications, challenges and 
ongoing standardization activities for WSNs. This 
can create opportunities for industry, research 
organizations and standardization bodies due to 
the unique characteristics of WSNs. This makes 
them attractive in current and future infrastructure 
applications.
As IoT and WSN are based on technology areas 
strongly covered by the IEC, like smart grid, industry 
4.0 and smart cities, it is important for the IEC to 
have a good understanding of the applications, 
the standardization environment, and the specifi c 
needs of WSN for the IEC stakeholders. In order 
to steer standardization in the right direction, and 
to identify and fi ll the standardization gaps, close 
cooperation within and outside the IEC (i.e. other 
relevant standardization bodies) is required.
7.1 General recommendations
7.1.1  Large-scale WSNs
As the number of nodes in large-scale WSNs 
increase, the density of the network is also 
increased and the possibility of link failure 
becomes more frequent. The IEC recommends 
that further research should consider other 
network performance criteria such as the quality of 
service (QoS) issues for the real-time applications, 
and node mobility in some special environments.
7.1.2  Research on system architecture and 
 integration technology suitable
 for ultra-large sensing and dynamic
 changes
The IEC recommends that industry and research 
institutes develop systems architecture and 
integration technology for WSN. The system 
architecture based on Service Oriented 
Architecture Protocol (SOAP) combined with 
integration technology, e.g. OPC-UA, semantic 
representation and processing, is needed in order 
to realize free exchange of information in a variety 
of heterogeneous network environments.
7.1.3   Develop common model to ensure 
security
Because more and more nodes are deployed, 
and performance is generally impacted with the 
addition of security services in WSNs, especially 
in infrastructure, the IEC recommends relative 
research organizations to combine their efforts 
to develop a common model to ensure security 
for each layer, and to make the layers work in 
collaboration with each other.
7.1.4   High-concurrent access technology 
of WSNs
The IEC recommends signifi cant effort to be put into 
developing and operating with the high-concurrent 
access technology in addition to current access 
technologies, despite their novelty in the historical 
context. The high-concurrent access technology 
70
can further improve the effi ciency of scarce 
wireless spectrum, and support larger networks.
7.2 Recommendations addressed
 to the IEC and its committees
7.2.1   Basic standards needed that are 
suitable for architecture of WSNs
The MSB recommends the SMB to develop 
relative standards for a unifi ed architecture of 
WSNs. Starting from the use cases of the specifi c 
application areas that fi t the needs of IEC (i.e. 
smart grid, industry 4.0, smart cities), the 
requirements and an architectural framework 
need to be defi ned. Based on the analysis, only 
then can we identify which existing standards can 
be reused and which gaps have to be fi lled.
7.2.2  Technical contribution to the WSN for
 factory automation
The MSB recommends the SMB to take an 
active part in the development of WSNs for 
factory automation with high-concurrent access 
requirements. IEC TC 65 is positioned in this fi eld.
7.2.3  Rapid progress in WSN standards for
 factory automation
The MSB recommends the SMB to implement the 
WSN standards for factory automation, paying 
particular attention to the harmonization of already 
existing national or regional standards.
7.2.4  Synergy with industry associations on
 WSNs for factory automation
The MSB recommends the SMB to encourage TCs 
to follow WSN developments at the global industry 
level. Many industry associations are active in this 
area and produce studies and position papers 
which contribute certain views of the problems. 
Standardization efforts should take account of 
these efforts.
7.2.5  Systems certifi cation standards
The MSB recommends the CAB to consider future 
standardization needs to promote and support 
modular certifi cation for WSNs. Since complex 
systems usually come with very complex system 
behaviours, certifi cation of large-scale systems is 
anything but straightforward. However, modular 
systems come with the promise of modular 
certifi cation. In such a system, most of the 
certifi cation process focuses on individual system 
modules, and only a minor, remaining certifi cation 
is conducted on the integrated system itself. In 
other words, the system “inherits” the certifi cation 
of its modules.
Conclusions and recommendations
71
Annex A
Access technologies
A.1 Developing trend of access 
technologies
According to the current specifi c requirements 
for WSN applications, the development of access 
technology has already made signifi cant progress-
es. The representative access technologies that 
are more systematic and remarkable are Bluetooth 
4.0 oriented towards medical WSN, IEEE 802.15.4e 
oriented towards industrial WSN, and WLAN IEEE 
802.11™ in the view of IoT.
A.1.1 Bluetooth 4.0
Considering the characteristics and requirements 
of medical and some other IoT applications, 
especially the requirements of low power, Bluetooth 
SIG published the latest Bluetooth standard of 
Bluetooth 4.0 in 2012.
Oriented towards the highly integrated and 
compacted devices, Bluetooth 4.0 adopts a 
lightweight access technology to provide ultra-low-
power standby mode operation, which ensures 
extremely low power consumption in both operating 
and standby modes. Even a button battery can 
support the uninterruptible work of a Bluetooth 
4.0 device for several years. The following table 
compares the parameters of Bluetooth 4.0 and 
traditional Bluetooth technology.
Technical specifi cation Classic
Bluetooth technology
Bluetooth low energy technology
Distance/Range 100 m (330 ft) 50 m (160 ft)
Over the air data rate 1 Mbit/s to 3 Mbit/s 1 Mbit/s
Application throughput 0.7 Mbit/s to 2.1 Mbit/s 0.27 Mbit/s
Active slaves 7 Not defi ned; implementation dependent
Security 56/128-bit and application 
layer user defi ned
128-bit AES with Counter Mode CBC-MAC 
and application layer user defi ned
Robustness Adaptive fast frequency 
hopping, FEC, fast ACK
Adaptive frequency hopping, 
Lazy Acknowledgement, 24-bit CRC, 
32-bit Message Integrity Check
Table A-1 | Comparisons between Bluetooth 4.0 and traditional Bluetooth technology [54]
72
Latency (from a non-
connected state)
Typically 100 ms 6 ms
Total time to send data 
(detect battery life)
100 ms 3 ms, <3 ms
Voice capable Yes No
Network topology Scatternet Star-bus
Power consumption 1 as the reference 0.01 to 0.5 (depending on use case)
Peak current 
consumption
<30 mA <15 mA
A.1.2 IEEE 802.15.4e
The characteristic of WSN is quite similar to the 
low-speed WPAN, and thus most WSNs take 
IEEE 802.15.4 as the underlying communication 
standard. Moreover, ZigBee® [55], WirelessHART 
[56], ISA100.11a [57] and WIA-PA [58] are all built 
upon on the standard of IEEE 802.15.4. Therefore, 
for the high reliability, hard real-time requirements 
of industrial IoT applications, IEEE 802.15.4 working 
group put forward IEEE 802.15.4e in 2012.
Contention-free Contention-free 
E-GTS TDMA 
Contention-access Contention-access 
(Factory automation) 
(ZigBee 802.15.5) 
(WIA-PA) (ISA, HCF) 
Beacon-enabled PAN Non-beacon PAN 
Overhead reduction/security 
Low energy 
Channel diversity 
IEEE 
802.15.4e 
Figure A1-1 | Access technology architecture of IEEE 802.15.4e [59]
Access technologies
73
Oriented towards industrial applications, IEEE 
802.15.4e extends IEEE 802.15.4 by having four 
access methods, including non-competitive 
expansion GTS method based on Beacon 
supporting the process automation-oriented WIA-
PA, non-beacon non-competitive TDMA method 
supporting the process automation-oriented 
WirelessHART and ISA100.11a, competitive 
access based on Beacon method supporting 
factory automation applications, and Non-beacon 
competitive access method supporting Zigbee® 
and IEEE 802.15.5 [60].
A.1.3 WLAN IEEE 802.11™
The main advantages of WLAN IEEE 802.11™ in 
the view of IoT are
 § the easy integration of WLAN clients and 
devices into the internet,
 § its broad acceptance as wireless 
communication technology in offi ces, homes, 
and industry,
 § its support of mobile devices, and
 § low power consumption levels acceptable for 
industrial applications and sensor networks.
Wireless LANs based on the standard IEEE 
802.11™ [17] are the favourite choice for wireless 
data communication in offi ces, at conferences and 
meetings, in homes, but also in industrial wireless 
communication. WLAN IEEE 802.11 networks 
provide an easy integration into the internet through 
its network-oriented, ethernet-like specifi cation 
and through their stable, commercially successful 
and widely deployed eco system.
The predominant network topologies for IEEE 
802.11™ WLANs are mobile WLAN clients 
connected to access points of the WLAN network. 
Other network topologies are also possible, 
especially wireless mesh networks (IEEE 802.11s 
[62]) WLAN IEEE 802.11™ which provides data 
rates of 56 Mb/s with IEEE 802.11a/g, of 150 Mb/s 
and more with IEEE 802.11n, and of up to 1 Gb/s 
with IEEE 802.11ac.
Moreover, WLANs are also reaching into industrial 
wireless communication and sensor networks. 
Companies such as GainSpan offer so-called 
low-power Wi-Fi clients (see Figure A1-2). The low 
power consumption is achieved by energy-effi cient 
hardware and a consequent usage of power save 
capabilities of the IEEE 802.11™ specifi cation. A 
certifi cation through the Wi-Fi Alliance is planned. 
More amendments to IEEE 802.11™ that are 
relevant to IoT and WSNs are underway. For 
instance, additional PHY layers for the sub-GHz 
band in IEEE 802.11ah and for the 60 GHz band in 
IEEE 802.11ad/aj.
Access technologies
Figure A1-2 | GainSpan GS1011M low-power 
Wi-Fi module [61]

75
[1] ASHTON, K. That ‘Internet of Things’ Thing. In the real world, things matter more than ideas. RFID 
Journal, 22 June 2009. Available from: http://www.rfi djournal.com/articles/view?4986
[2] BRÖRING, A. et al. New generation sensor web enablement. Sensors, 11, 2011, pp. 26522699. ISSN 
1424-8220. Available from: doi:10.3390/s110302652
[3] SENSEI. Integrating the physical with the digital world of the network of the future. Available from: 
http://www.sensei-project.eu/
[4] CHONG, C.-Y. and KUMAR, S. P. Sensor networks: Evolution, opportunities, and challenges. 
Proceedings of the IEEE 91(8), 2003, pp. 1247-1256.
[5]  KUMAR, S. and SHEPHERD, D. Sensit: Sensor information technology for the warfi ghter. Proceedings 
of the 4th International Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION’01), 2001, pp. 3-9.
[6]  COY, P. and GROSS, N. et al. 21 Ideas for the 21st Century. Business Week Online, 1999, pp. 78-167. 
Available from: http://www.businessweek.com/1999/99_35/2121_content.htm
[7]  NI, L.M. China’s national research project on wireless sensor networks. Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous, and Trustworthy Computing (SUTC’08), 
2008, p. 19.
[8]  HATLER, M., GURGANIOUS, D. and CHI, C. Industrial wireless sensor networks. A market dynamics 
report. ON World, 2012.
[9] Figure courtesy of Silicon Labs and RTC Magazine:  http://rtcmagazine.com/fi les/images/4151/
RTC1212_SilLabs_fi g1_medium.jpg
[10] Yole Development SA. MEMS technology: World’s smallest barometric pressure sensor. Micro News, 
2009,78:1.
[11]  KAHN, J. M., KATZ, R. H. and PISTER, K. S. J. Mobile Networking for Smart Dust. ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom 99), Seattle, WA, August 
17-19, 1999.
[12]  ANG, R.J., TAN, Y.K. and PANDA, S.K. Energy harvesting for autonomous wind sensor in remote 
area. 33rd Annual IEEE Conference of Industrial Electronics Society (IECON’07), Taipei, Taiwan, 2007.
[13]  TANG, L. and GUY C. Radio frequency energy harvesting in wireless sensor networks. International 
conference on communications and mobile computing, 2009, pp. 644648.
[14] Courtesy of Shenyang Institute of Automation, Shenyang, China, 2014.
[15]  FP7 EXALTED consortium, D3.3 – Final report on LTE-M algorithms and procedures, project report, 
July 2012. Available from: http://www.ict-exalted.eu/fi leadmin/documents/EXALTED_WP3_D3.3_
v1.0.pdf
References
76
[16] IEEE 802.15.4e-2012, IEEE Standard for local and metropolitan area networks – Part 15.4: Low-Rate 
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs) Amendment 1: MAC sublayer.
[17]  IEEE Std 802.11™-2012, Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
Specifi cations, IEEE Computer Society, March 2012.
[18]  UIMER, C. Wireless Sensor Networks. Georgia Institute of Technology, 2000. Available from: www.
craigulmer.com/portfolio/unlocked/000919_sensorsimii/wireless_sensor_networks.ppt
[19]  PISTER, K. and DOHERTY, L. TSMP: Time synchronized mesh protocol. [C]. Proceedings of the 
IASTED International Symposium, Distributed Sensor Networks (DSN 2008), 2008, pp. 391398. 
Available from: http://robotics.eecs.berkeley.edu/~pister/publications/2008/TSMP%20DSN08.pdf
[20]  SHELBY, Z. and BORMANN C. 6LoWPAN: The wireless embedded Internet. New York, NY, USA: 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2009. Available from: http://elektro.upi.edu/pustaka.elektro/Wireless%20
Sensor%20Network/6LoWPAN.pdf
[21]  Sensinode. Available from: www.sensinode.com\\EN\\products\\software.html
[22]  6LoWPAN Sub1GHz Evaluation kit. Texas Instruments. Available from: www.ti.com/tool/CC-
6lOWPAN-DK-868
[23]  HUI, J., CULLER, D. and CHAKRABARTI, S. 6LoWPAN: Incorporating IEEE 802.15.4 
into IP architecture. IPSO, Industrial Ethernet Book Issue 59, 1997. Available from: http://
www.iebmedia.com/index.php?id=7176&parentid=63&themeid=255&hf t=59&showdetai l=
true&bb=1&PHPSESSID=a3tc6d9vhs5ab6svu8ahcb4c10
[24]  BLILAT, A., BOUAYAD, A., CHAOUI, N. and EL GHAZI, M. Wireless sensor network: Security challenges. 
Network Security and Systems (JNS2), 2012 National Days of. IEEE, 2012, pp. 6872. Available from:
http://novintarjome.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Wireless-Sensor-Network.pdf
[25] JAIN, A., KANT, K. and TRIPATHY, M. R. Security solutions for wireless sensor networks[C]. 
Proceedings of the 2012 Second International Conference on Advanced Computing and 
Communication Technologies (ACCT ‘12). IEEE Computer Society, 2012, pp. 430433.
[26] WANG, Y., ATTEBURY, G. and RAMAMURTHY, B. A survey of security issues in wireless sensor 
networks IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials 8, 2006, pp. 223.
[27]  ALZAID, H. Security map for WSN. 2009. Available from:http://www.wsn-security.info/Security_
Map.htm
[28]  MARTIN, T., HSIAO, M., HA, D. and KRISHNASWAMI, J. Denial-of-service attacks on battery-
powered mobile computers. Second IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communications (PerCom’04), IEEE, 2004, pp. 309318. Available from: http://www.ece.vt.edu/
tlmartin/power-secure/percom_martin_camera-fi nal.pdf
[29]  FALK, R. and HOF, H.-J. Fighting insomnia, a secure wake-up scheme for wireless sensor networks. 
Third International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies 
(SECURWARE’09), Athens/Glyfada, Greece, 18-23 June 2009, pp. 191196.
[30]  LE X. H., SANKAR, R., KHALID, M., and SUNGYOUNG, L. Public key cryptography-based security 
scheme for wireless sensor networks in healthcare. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference 
on Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication (ICUIMC ‘10). ACM, 2010.
References
77
[31]  SZCZECHOWIAK, P., KARGL, A., COLLIER, M. and SCOTT, M. On the application of pairing based 
cryptography to wireless sensor networks. Proceedings of the second ACM conference on Wireless 
network security. ACM, 2009: 1-12.
[32]  Libelium, Encryption libraries for waspmote sensor networks. Available from: http://www.libelium.
com/products/waspmote/encryption/
[33]  KALITA, H. K. and KAR, A. Key management in secure self-organized wireless sensor network: a 
new approach. Proceedings of the International Conference and Workshop on Emerging Trends in 
Technology (ICWET ‘11). ACM, 2011, pp. 865870.
[34]  FALK, R. and HOF, H.-J. Security design for industrial sensor networks. Information Technology, Vol. 
52, No. 6, Oldenbourg, 2010, pp. 331-339.
[35]  AL-KARAKI, J. N. and KAMAL, A. E. Routing techniques in wireless sensor networks: a survey. 
Wireless communications, IEEE, Vol. 11, No. 6, 2004, pp. 628.
[36]  WOOD, A. D., FANG, L. and STANKOVIC, J. A. SIGF: a family of confi gurable, secure routing protocols 
for wireless sensor networks. Proceedings of the fourth ACM workshop on Security of ad hoc and 
sensor networks. ACM, 2006: 35-48.
[37] SEN, J. A survey on wireless sensor network security. International Journal of Communication 
Networks and Information Security (IJCNIS), Vol. 1, No. 2, 2009, pp. 5578. Available from: http://
arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1011/1011.1529.pdf
[38]  JHA, M. K. and SHARMA, T. P. Secure data aggregation in wireless sensor network: a survey. 
International Journal of Engineering Science and Technology (IJEST), Vol. 5, No. 3, 2011.
[39]  SCHMITT, C. Cooperation between all components in the established wireless sensor network. 
Technische Universität München, 2009. Available from: https://corinna-schmitt.de/doku.php?id=
wsn_research
[40]  ROZANSKI, N. and WOODS, E. Software systems architecture: Working with stakeholders using 
viewpoints and perspectives. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2nd edition, 2011.
[41]  DUNLAP, J. From billing & technology convergence to ecosystem convergence: Why M2M matters 
to your business. Pipeline: Technology for Service Providers, Vol. 8, No. 7, 2011, pp. 13. Available 
from: http://pipelinepub.com/1211/OSS_BSS/pdf/7230_PipelineDecember2011_A5.pdf
[42]  FELDMAN, S. Unifi ed information access: Creating information synergy. IDC, 2012. Available from: 
http://www.infonortics.com/sdv-12-post/feldman.pdf
[43]  MYRDA, P. T. and KOELLNER, K. NASPInet-The internet for synchrophasors. 43rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, 2010, pp. 16.
[44]  HEBELER, J. et al. Semantic Web Programming. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009.
[45]  WOOD A. D. and J.A. Stankovic. 2002. “Denial of Service in Sensor Networks.” IEEE Computer,35 
(10), 54-62.
[46] PATHAN, A. S. K., LEE, H. W. and HONG, C. S. Security in wireless sensor networks: issues and 
challenges. The 8th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT 2006). 
IEEE, 2006, Vol. 2, 6 pp.-1048. Available from: http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/0712/0712.4169.pdf
References
78
[47]  Courtesy of State Grid Corporation of China, 2014.
[48]  Courtesy of SAP.
[49]  Industry group leader report, “Sustainability Scores”. RobecoSAM AG, 2013. Available from: http://
www.sustainability-indices.com/images/Industry_Group_Leader_DJSI2014_Wipro-Ltd.pdf
[50]  Courtesy of Schneider Electric. 
[51] http://www2.schneider-electric.com/sites/corporate/en/press/press-kit/homes-project.page 
[52] Courtesy of IMS Research.
[53] ZigBee 2012, ZigBee specifi cation overview. Available from:  http://www.zigbee.org/Specifi cations/
ZigBee/GreenPower.aspx
[54]  Bluetooth Low Energy. Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. 31 July 2014 at 05:16. Available from: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth_low_energy
[55]  ZigBee Alliance. http://zigbee.org/Home.aspx
[56] IEC 62591,  Industrial communication networks Wireless communication network and communication 
profi les WirelessHART™.
[57]  IEC/PAS 62734, Industrial communication networks – Fieldbus specifi cations – Wireless systems for 
industrial automation: process control and related applications.
[58]  IEC 62601, Industrial communication networks – Fieldbus specifi cations – WIA-PA communication 
network and communication profi le.
[59]  IEEE Std 802.15.4e-2012, Local and metropolitan area networks – Part 15.4: Low-Rate Wireless 
Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs) Amendment 1: MAC sublayer. April 2012.
[60]  IEEE P802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs). IEEE 802.15.5 
WPAN Mesh Networks. http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/15/pub/Meeting_Plan.html. May 
2005.
[61]  GainSpan, Low Power Wi-Fi Modules and Embedded Software, Product Photography, Available 
from: http://www.gainspan.com/news/media_kit 
[62] IEEE Std 802.11s-2011, Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
specifications, Amendment 10: Mesh Networking, IEEE Computer Society, September 2011.
References
International
Electrotechnical
Commission
T +41 22 919 0211
info@iec.ch
www.iec.ch
3 rue de Varembé
PO Box 131
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
® Registered trademark of the International Electrotechnical Commission. Copyright © IEC, Geneva, Switzerland 2014.
ISBN 978-2-8322-1834-1
CHF 50.-
®
IE
C 
W
P 
Io
T:
W
SN
:2
01
4-
11
(e
n)

