Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602
An initial assessment of cooperative action in Wi-Fi
networking
Christian Sandvig*
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 244 Lincoln Hall, 702 S. Wright Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Received 1 April 2004; received in revised form 1 May 2004
Abstract
In the development of past infrastructures, cooperative and amateur action has been a vehicle for
diffusion, experimentation, innovation, popularization, and the provision of new features or services.
802.11 (‘‘Wi-Fi’’) cooperatives are now proliferating. This user study considers three cases of cooperative
action in the discovery, development, and provision of 802.11 (Wi-Fi) networks: (1) mapping and
‘‘Warchalking,’’ (2) open-source portal software, and (3) the provision of service as an alternative to paying
for a commercial subscription. It finds that these co-ops exist primarily to build elite expertise, but that it
may be possible to direct these skilled groups toward societal goals.
r 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Wireless; Innovation; Popularization; Infrastructure; Unlicensed; 802.11
1. Introduction
Free or low-cost wireless Internet access is now being produced across the urban developed
world by groups of cooperating individuals. The proliferation of these Wireless Internet ‘‘co-ops’’
has produced claims that ‘‘ad hoc, self-organized networks of grassroots usersynow challenge
existing technologies, regulatory regimes, and industries’’ (Rheingold, 2002: see Chapter 6) but
‘‘whether wireless guerrillas blanket the world with inexpensive high-speed Internet access before
the big players crush them remains to be seen’’ (p. 133). The prospect that they might success
has captured the imagination of many in the popular press and beyond, leading to conclusions
such as: ‘‘While [this] might not be the best technical solution for the last miley[it] is the most
ARTICLE IN PRESS
*Tel.: +1-217-333-0141; fax: +1-217-244-1598.
E-mail address: csandvig@uiuc.edu (C. Sandvig).
0308-5961/$ - see front matter r 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2004.05.006
cost-effective’’ (Escudero, 2003, p. 1). At the most extreme, cooperative Wi-Fi has been hailed as
‘‘a broadband system built by the people and for the people’’ that means, ‘‘everything you
assumed about telecommunications is about to change’’ (Negroponte, 2002).
This ‘‘guerrilla’’ movement is no surprise to scholars of telecommunication policy.
‘‘Infrastructures’’ are often thought to be large-scale projects best attempted by large entities:
governments build roads and telecommunications companies provide phones. But historically, co-
ops also built roads, and farmers provided their own phones—although sometimes not very good
ones. When is a decentralized, cooperatively run communication infrastructure a significant
alternative to the centrally driven, commercial systems that have historically prevailed? The
research literature on utility and communication infrastructures answers, ‘‘almost never,’’ or
‘‘only in the early stages of a system.’’ In electricity (Hughes, 1983), radio broadcasting (Douglas,
1989), and the telephone (Fischer, 1992), amateur and co-op involvement in early phases of a
system’s development produced innovation and popularization benefits, and in a few cases
amateurs and co-ops appear to remain significant in the longer-term: from the Ocean Spray
agricultural co-op in the US to Scandinavian broadband collectives. This user study considers
802.11 (Wi-Fi) related co-ops in the US and UK, assesses their role in system development and the
likelihood of any benefits to society in the context of this previous research, and considers what
role public policy action and further scholarly research might play in realizing any benefits from
co-ops.
Previous research predicts co-ops to be a vehicle for experimentation, innovation, diffusion,
popularization, and the provision of new features or services. As Schuler (1994) has noted for
Community Networks, these loose groupings of people might be dedicated to a number of very
different tasks, from education to provision. Similar to Fischer’s (1987a) analysis of rural
telephone co-ops, each role might also trigger different weaknesses (disorganization, unreliability,
lack of expertise) and also strengths (flexibility, heightened awareness of public-interest concerns,
low cost). The study employs empirical research in three case studies in an embedded, multiple-
case design sampled to replicate earlier findings about co-ops (after Yin, 1994). Each case
concerns a different area of wireless Internet service: discovery, development, and provision. For
network discovery, it analyzes Wi-Fi mapping as a low-tech, cooperative version of federated
network discovery services like Boingo. For development, it analyzes co-op produced NoCatAuth
software as an alternative to the commercial gateway demons found on devices like 3Com’s Home
Wireless Gateway. For provision, it considers the Consume co-op’s attempt to build a parallel
Internet infrastructure through self-provision in the UK as an alternative to ISPs like BT
OpenWorld. Consistent with von Hippel (1988); (and see von Hippel & von Krogh, 2003),
significant innovation benefits can be produced by users in a co-op setting. This suggests a number
of possible strategies for telecommunications policy: co-ops can indeed be superseded by
commercial infrastructure as the system develops, or they can be employed as an important
adjunct to carriers, providing service in commercially undesirable areas and addressing public
goals that other organizational forms could not.
First, this article will consider the role of such cooperative action in the previous literature on
communication network development. Secondly, it will introduce Wi-Fi and the Wi-Fi co-op as a
topic area. Then, the article will present the three empirical cases of (i) Wi-Fi mapping, (ii)
NoCatAuth, and (iii) Consume as evidence of cooperative action. Finally, the article will compare
the findings from these cases to the literature’s treatment of co-ops, propose experimental policy
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602580
proposals to harness co-ops and a set of research questions to further assess the place of the
cooperative form in telecommunications.
1.1. Popularizers and innovators: the role of cooperatives in related literatures
This study will consider several activities from the range of Wi-Fi co-ops. Rather than settle on a
single definition and use a dictionary’s strictness to choose the cases, this article will instead continue
to use ‘‘co-op’’ as it found it—an untidy agglomeration of non-commercial, activist, and amateur
components. The literature on large-scale systems of communication has often analyzed co-ops,
although sometimes as ‘‘independents’’ or ‘‘amateurs.’’ Hughes’ (1983) groundbreaking synthesis of
the technical, political, economic, and social in the early development of electric utility systems
advanced a loosely structured model of four phases: (1) invention and development, (2) transfer, (3)
growth in scale, and then (4) the acquisition of momentum. Hughes was explicitly influenced by
early systems theory (Parsons, 1951, 1966, 1971), itself an outgrowth of Wiener’s (1948) cybernetics.
Hughes saw that there was a role for amateur action at the inception of new technologies—as there
is initially no profession for an innovation there can be no professionals. In Hughes’s invention and
development stage, it was the work of entrepreneurs that pushed the technology forward before it
was stable enough to attract more organized financial interests. In this conception, co-ops are
important at the introduction of a system, but then they fade away as the need for daring and
tolerance for disorganization diminishes. This conception is consistent with other theoretical models
for infrastructure development (such as the Infrastructure Development Model; Sawhney, 2002).
Beyond electricity, the last 20 years have seen a new vigor in the study of sociotechnical systems of
communication, especially studies employing historical methods (Streeter, 1996a). Inspired by the
social constructivist movement in technology studies pioneered in part by Hughes (Bijker, Hughes,
& Pinch, 1987; Bijker & Law, 1992; for a philosophical overview and critique, see Hacking, 1999),
sometimes called ‘‘social shaping’’ (Williams & Edge, 1996), this study finds evidence that any given
large system is special—each is so different that it requires its own analysis (Fischer, 1985; Hughes,
1987). Yet, the frequent occurrence of cooperative action in the literature begs for comparison.
The most direct comparison is the early development of radio. Douglas (1989) refines the
concepts of strategy and structure from the history of the corporation (Chandler, 1962, 1977;
Noble, 1979) and details how a realistic grassroots challenge to centralization was mounted by
amateur enthusiasts and what she terms ‘‘the cult of the boy operator’’ before 1920. Other authors
concur that, ‘‘by 1914y the largest system of communication by radio in the United Statesywas
an ad hoc, nonprofit network run byyhobbyists’’ (Streeter, 1996b, p. 65; for a related account, see
Smulyan, 1994). While these accounts agree that co-ops were crucial in early radio, they (at least
implicitly) support Hughes’s notion of an initial emphasis on the system benefits of the co-op.
Beyond radio, wireless co-ops are reminiscent of early telephone co-ops (Fischer, 1987a, b).
Fischer’s (1992) study of the telephone in the US before 1940 discovers a range of cooperative
action during the independent era of telephony. Fischer develops the concept of user autonomy:
while users are constrained by income, price, vendor action, and regulation, they are (1) relatively
resistant to pressure from vendors, (2) not subject to a technological imperative, and (3) work to
adapt a technology to their own ends. When telephone companies declined to provide features or
even service, users simply formed a co-op and did it themselves. In this can be discerned a second
role for co-ops beyond Hughes: they are a vehicle for the frustrated needs of users that cannot find
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 581
satisfaction in the offerings of existing vendors. Like Hughes, Fischer notes that these offerings
are later commodified by successful firms.
1.2. Internet co-ops: community networks and public access centers
Contemporary cooperative action has also appeared frequently in the research literature, often
under other names. Some of the wireless co-ops later considered wish to portray themselves as the
heirs apparent to the community networking (CN) movement (see Schuler, 1994, 1996). CNs
include PEN in Santa Monica, CA (see Rogers, Collins-Jarvis, & Schmitz, 1994; Schmitz, Rogers,
Phillips, & Paschal, 1995), Netville—a ‘‘wired suburb’’ of Toronto, Canada (Hampton & Wellman,
1999, 2000), Blacksburg Electronic Village and the Seattle Community Network (Silver, 2004). For a
review of the research on CNs, see Harrison and Stephen (1999). While some CNs may operate Wi-
Fi services, cooperative action in Wi-Fi comes in a number of flavors beyond provision and training,
and in this only the Wi-Fi co-ops related to provision and training are comparable to CNs. Also
relevant are governmental initiatives at community centers and public libraries aimed at providing
access to the Internet. While these attempt to serve many of the same goals as CNs (Straubhaar,
LaPastina, Lentz, Main, & Taylor, 2000), aside from the CNs that are run by governments, public
access centers are often considered separately by the research literature (for example, Sandvig, 2003;
for a collection, see Kahin & Keller, 1995). In the interdisciplinary social informatics tradition
(Kling, 2000), O’Neil (2002) reviews the research to date on both CNs and public access centers,
finding five broad normative themes within which past research has located the consequences of
‘‘community’’ informatics: (1) ‘‘strong’’ democracy, (2) social capital, (3) individual empowerment,
(4) sense of community, and (5) opportunities for economic development (pp. 79–82). These
categories will be applied below after an examination of co-op activity in the area of Wi-Fi, as this
seems to provide a set of motives beyond innovation and popularization that can explain the co-op
in telecommunications.
This review anticipates co-ops rising to prominence in the early stages of a large-scale system as
a vehicle for experimentation, innovation, diffusion, popularization, and provision of features or
services that are not on offer from commercial vendors. Much of the literature implies that the co-
op form will later wane in importance, but studies of CNs suggest a five-fold typology of
consequences that may also be significant reasons to expect co-ops to continue at any stage in a
system’s development. Next, 802.11 wireless networking will be introduced before examination of
the Wi-Fi case data.
2. An overview of Wi-Fi networking
In industry circles, a medium-range wireless data technology now called ‘‘Wi-Fi’’ was thought
to be a means by which individuals could solve small networking problems in their home or office.
Wi-Fi employs unlicensed spectrum, and anyone can build a network linking computers within a
range of about 150 ft simply by buying the equipment.1 With the introduction of the Apple
AirPort in late 1999, Steve Jobs promised users that, ‘‘it’s a liberating experience to surf the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
1Wi-Fi employs the spectrum made available in the FCC’s Part 15 rules for unlicensed operation.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602582
Internetywhile freely moving about your home or classroom.’’2 Echoing Fischer’s concept of
user autonomy, however, people have had other ideas about where they wanted to freely move.
Wi-Fi installations over the past 4 years have produced a ‘‘cloud’’ of Wi-Fi connectivity in
many metropolitan areas similar in density to that produced by earlier coordinated commercial
data networks such as Metricom’s Ricochet.3 This cloud is composed of heterogeneous networks
that interoperate by accident as often as by intent. Individuals purchased Wi-Fi devices such as
the AirPort to connect a computer in the den to a cable modem in the living room without having
to re-wire their house, but the result of many such individual purchases has been that laptop users
all over the world are surprised to find that when they open their computer in an unfamiliar place,
they have Internet connectivity—through generosity, ignorance, or security failure of some
unknown network. At the talks leading to the development of the 802.11 protocols, also called
‘‘Wireless Fidelity’’ or ‘‘Wi-Fi’’ (see Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1999),
interoperability was of paramount importance, not security. The result was a default
implementation of Wi-Fi products that easily allowed any Wi-Fi device to communicate with
any other. Wi-Fi access points (APs) were initially set up by individuals in scenarios that echo
Steve Jobs’ speech: a homeowner with a cable modem on the first floor and a home office on the
second floor who does not want to run wiring to connect them might buy a Wi-Fi AP to bridge
this distance. Wi-Fi networks meant to support many users across several APs are also set up by
corporations, cafes, and governments.4 In these functions, Wi-Fi is analogous to Ethernet wiring,
although it can be more flexible and convenient. Indeed, an early name for Wi-Fi was ‘‘Wireless
Ethernet.’’5 At the same time, larger Wi-Fi ‘‘meta-networks’’ function more like a common
directory and authentication system that allows sharing across many smaller networks.6 For
instance, early nationwide Wi-Fi providers in the US such as Wayport, Surf and Sip, and T-Mobile
deployed hotspots in cafes, hotels and airports. Providers such as Boingo and iPass attempted to
‘‘federate’’ existing APs they did not own by offering centralized subscription, billing, software,
and technical support (Bar & Galperin, 2004).7
In sum, Wi-Fi developed through individual and collective non-commercial or
small-scale commercial action. While the first users were encouraged to use Wi-Fi to
‘‘move freely about their home or office,’’ they built an extensive cloud of connectivity
that soon had large telecommunications companies entering the Wi-Fi market with a
variety of strategies. It is the aim of this study to consider some of the early wireless co-ops
ARTICLE IN PRESS
2This quote was taken from the Apple Press release archives: (http://www.apple.com/pr/library/1999/jul/
21lucent.html).
3Ricochet is now defunct as a national system (see Cherry, 2002).
4 In 802.11 terminology, an extended service set (ESS).
5This comparison to Ethernet aptly distinguishes Wi-Fi from other related wireless data technologies like Bluetooth
(which uses the same spectrum at very short range to form Personal Area Networks), 3-G (the ‘‘third generation’’ of
mobile telephony which uses the spectrum assigned for mobile telephony to carry data as well as voice at high speeds).
The failed standards HiperLAN (Europe) and HomeRF (US) provided similar functionality.
6No standards exist for true 802.11 roaming. Roaming solutions are proprietary and any roaming that involves
nodes from more than one vendor may not work. Technically, macro-networks provide shared authentication—a user
is allowed access from one of many ESSs, but may not move across ESS boundaries in real-time.
7This ‘‘federated’’ approach is particularly relevant to our second case study, which is about co-op developed
software that allows non-commercial networks to be federated.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 583
and assess their role in the development of Wi-Fi as a system, in light of the earlier research on
cooperative action.
2.1. The scope and extent of Wi-Fi co-ops
Wherever there is Wi-Fi there are users cooperating to share it. In most metropolitan areas of
the Western world, some of this cooperation has become organized enough to produce a group
with a name, Web site and regular meetings. In early 2003, combining multiple directories of Wi-
Fi co-ops produced 52 groups in six countries (the US, Canada, the UK, Ireland, New Zealand,
Australia) with an extensive online presence in English.8 Most cities have some kind of Wi-Fi-
related cooperative effort: at the very least a traveling Wi-Fi enthusiast might use ‘‘International
Wi-Fi Meetup Day’’ (the 2nd Wednesday of every month) to connect with like-minded tinkerers.9
While CNs are fairly well-justified enterprises from a normative perspective, Wi-Fi co-ops are a
much stranger animal. While some co-ops are outgrowths or projects of CNs, many are not.
While activists and policymakers working on CN and public access projects take as a central
premise that their facilities exist to provide free or subsidized access to underserved populations
(the socioeconomically disadvantaged, underserved rural areas, etc.), Wi-Fi co-ops often exist to
provide free access to an inexpensive service for the rich—it may take over a thousand dollars of
personal equipment to participate in a co-op (laptop/palmtop, wireless card, etc.). In some areas
co-ops have been employed to establish point-to-point broadband connections to rural
households that are not served by cable modem or DSL services, but the bulk of Wi-Fi co-op
activity is occurring in wealthier metropolitan areas.
The point here is not to characterize all cooperative action in Wi-Fi, but instead to strategically
sample three contrasting functions that a co-op might serve and compare the operation of the
cooperative form in each, then attempt to assess the societal benefits of cooperative action in these
different circumstances. This samples for breadth and contrast rather than for generalizability, yet
this paper will only consider functional areas that seem likely to be important to the
communication system as a whole. Conceptually, a Wi-Fi system requires three things: (i) a
mechanism for users to determine where access might be found: network discovery; (ii) a way to
allow or deny users access: authentication;10 and (iii) actual network transport: provision. Table 1
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 1
Overview of cases and functions
Function Cooperative Opposed to
(i) Discovery Warchalkers/mappers (Zhrodague) Federated Wi-Fi ISPs (Boingo)
(ii) Authentication Software developers (NoCatAuth/splash) Default equipment (3Com Home Gateway)
(iii) Provision Network operators (Consume) Broadband ISPs (BT OpenWorld)
8For present purposes, ‘‘extensive’’ usually required a public mailing list archive to allow researchers to read the
internal communications of the group.
9See: http://wifi.meetup.com/.
10 It is possible that this function is not so important, and that the most relevant authentication mechanism will
eventually be to allow anyone access to everything. This is still a policy of authentication, however, and this paper
includes authentication because it is important here even for free or ‘‘open’’ networks, as will be seen in case two.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602584
presents an overview of the three case studies, selected for each functional area. Each case has
been listed with an opposition, as co-ops often define themselves in opposition to commercial
activity, and these co-ops are no exception. First, the paper will discuss co-ops that produce maps
and markings for network discovery: these are substitutes for national or federated Wi-Fi service
maps provided by commercial ISPs. Secondly, it will discuss a software project called NoCatAuth
that allows authentication services for free, open, or co-op network providers. This is meant as a
substitute for the ordinary off-the-shelf gateway software that might be included in a commercial
product such as the 3Com Home Gateway or commercial ‘‘splash screen’’ and credit card
authorization implemented internally by Wi-Fi network providers that charge for service.11 Third,
it will consider Consume, a co-op network operator that attempts to use a cooperative system to
provide transport and technical support as an alternative to a commercial broadband ISP like
British Telecom’s OpenWorld.12 The following presentation of these three cases was generated by
compiling and analyzing public primary source material from these co-ops (what members say to
each other and what the co-ops say about themselves), supplemented where noted by secondary
sources (what news reports say about these co-ops and what other researchers write about
them).13 The paper now turns to the first case study and the accidental discovery of sharing.
3. Case one: ‘‘Warchalking’’ and Wi-Fi mapping as network discovery
Finding Wi-Fi connectivity and contracting for access can be much more confusing than, say,
subscribing to telephone service. On the corporate side, companies like Boingo address that need,
offering the convenience of a national footprint by federating heterogeneous local networks.
‘‘Warchalking’’ is the grassroots equivalent, a decentralized Boingo. Directory service seems like a
strange choice for decentralized action: telephone books are much preferred over collecting the
telephone numbers of a city by word-of-mouth, and yet given that most of the telephone book is
useless to any user most of the time, a local approach to a directory service might have some merit.14
Warchalking began in London on June 24, 2002 with Matt Jones, a former management
consultant who noticed that he could obtain free Wi-Fi at several locations around the city when
he stumbled upon ‘‘open’’ APs. He designed three symbols that—when marked on buildings with
chalk—would indicate that a Wi-Fi AP was near. He posted these on his personal Web site.15 This
ARTICLE IN PRESS
11For instance, the software that matches Wi-Fi users to their billing account when they try to use a Wi-Fi hot spot
run by a commercial ISP; typically these use Web redirection and SSL, RADIUS, or PPP-over-Ethernet authentication.
12 Consume does not charge for service, and thus does not implement any billing.
13The primary source material for each case is extensive. An average co-op in the researcher’s list of 52 might have a
mailing list archive spanning 2 years containing 1000 messages, a large wiki (a Web-based collaboration tool), a chat
channel, and a public Web site. Material was plentiful for the three cases. For instance, Consume (case three) has an
archive of nine mailing lists spanning 4 years: at the end of 2003 this contained over 41MB of plain text.
14This comparison is not meant to be as fanciful as it may appear: in some post-socialist states the reliable telephone
directories of the formerly state-run PTT have stopped appearing and been replaced by word-of-mouth ‘‘service’’
among groups of friends.
15The verb coined by Jones to mean the activity of finding and marking Wi-Fi access, ‘‘Warchalking,’’ is a reference
to ‘‘war dialer’’ software used by hackers (ne!e crackers) to call all of the telephone numbers in a given set of exchanges
looking for the handshaking tones of a modem. The name ‘‘war dialer’’ is itself a reference to the 1983 hacker movie
War Games starring Matthew Broderick.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 585
received worldwide media coverage within a few weeks and spawned ‘‘Warchalkers’’ in most
major cities where Wi-Fi exists.16 Jones was inspired by the diverse lexicon of ‘‘hobo signs’’
prevalent in the depression-era US (see Fig. 1): the Warchalking symbol for a closed node is the
same as the hobo sign meaning ‘‘nothing to be gained here’’ (for a review of hobo signs, see
Richards & Associates, 1974; Vandertie, 1995).
Warchalking started in London, but it has been reported globally by the press and instances
have been documented on the Web in most major cities of the world. Perhaps the most significant
Warchalking occurs not with chalk, but with bits. Web-based geographic information systems
(GIS) have been employed by ‘‘Wi-Fi Mappers’’ using free open-source tools and public map
data.17 These public connectivity directories allow anyone to type in a post code (or ZIP code) and
determine the density of APs in a given geographic area. Individual users are then able to
aggregate unaffiliated networks themselves. Instead of consulting a glossy map issued by a
commercial service provider to see where Wi-Fi access might be found, a user can consult a free
online directory like http://www.wifimaps.com/.
Because these maps promote APs that may be unintentionally public, the practice of Wi-Fi
mapping has been surrounded by controversy: governments are considering whether or not
unauthorized use of Wi-Fi should be considered theft, and whether or not Warchalking is simply
a form of graffiti tagging that criminals use to choose victims. Telecom CEOs have made public
statements urging the criminalization of Warchalking on the grounds that unauthorized users
decrease performance for the network’s owners.
3.1. Mapping databases as directory services
Warchalking symbols and Wi-Fi databases represent a large mass of data that were painfully
collected. As Jones accidentally stumbled upon network access in London by opening his laptop
in the right place, now these co-op network directory services require an army of network
discoverers that will do the same and report back on what they have found through chalk or bits.
The people who compile these directories are wireless enthusiasts with laptops or PDAs, a GPS
device to plot their location, and a Wi-Fi card. Wi-Fi mapping databases (see Fig. 2) are easily
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. A comparison of discovery symbols.
16See for example news coverage such as Hammersley (2002).
17See, e.g., NODEDB at http://www.consume.net/, http://www.wifimaps.com/, and http://www.netstumbler.com/.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602586
able to list APs because each has a unique identifier (the MAC) and may also have a human-
interpretable name (the SSID—for example, ‘‘keepondriving’’) that can be correlated between
reports from many contributors. The database estimates the location of each AP by averaging the
GPS data from multiple samples, and it takes note of whether or not the network is open or
running a simple form of encryption (WEP) that sometimes indicates whether the network is not
available to ‘‘visitors’’ or free riders. The paper will further consider the army that finds these Wi-
Fi APs by examining one Wi-Fi mapserver in more detail. In Fig. 2, APs are plotted on top of a
public domain Chicago street map (the grid of lines with street names in gray), estimated AP
locations are marked by triangles and named by SSID, and estimated coverage areas are marked
by circles.
One of the most comprehensive US Wi-Fi mapping databases, http://www.wifimaps.com/, is
produced by Zhrodague, a Pittsburgh, PA group of computer programmers. Fig. 2 depicts
output from this mapserver. Zhrodague employed open-source software and census data
generated by a University of Minnesota project (funded by NASA), then repurposed these to map
Wi-Fi.18 Maps such as Fig. 2 depend upon the large amount of public domain geodatabase
information available from the government, as well as the wealth of free software for
manipulating it produced by government-subsidized academic research and open-source
developers. For these maps to be filled in with information about Wi-Fi, someone has to drive
around the city discovering Wi-Fi networks. Users anywhere on the Internet are encouraged to
submit data for the mapserver by a system of reputation ranking. The mapserver keeps an alias
for any contributor that submits data and then (in a manner akin to the high score list of a video
game) tabulates the number of APs the person has discovered. All of this is facilitated by
standardization on a few free software packages that are used to gather and store this data: e.g.,
Kismet and NetStumbler. For an overview of the technical details of this mapping, see Byers and
Kormann (2003).
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 2. Sample output from a mapserver: Chicago, IL by Zhrodague.
18The mapserver is a very prominent one—it contains over 100,000 nodes and receives submissions from
Warchalkers far beyond Pittsburgh: e.g., the screen shown is not for Pittsburgh, but for Chicago.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 587
3.2. Motivations for mapping and the ‘‘army of cool’’
While a commercial concern like Boingo might use field representatives to discover Wi-Fi
networks and affiliate them, Zhrodague and wifimaps.com uses strangers and this system of
reputation ranking. By also providing a bulletin board system, contributors can discuss technique,
preferred equipment, and brag about their finds. Some of the reputation systems proposed by
Zhrodague are very sophisticated. Although not implemented at the time of writing, one proposed
way of filling blank areas of the map was to add a weight (or ‘‘bounty’’) to the reputation ranking
of APs discovered in the blank area. In this manner, contributors could rise up the rankings even
faster if they discovered networks in areas where no discoveries had yet been made, as these
discoveries would have more reputation value. Contributors are sometimes referred to as an
invisible ‘‘army.’’ This is an army of enthusiasts who never meet, passing time compiling maps and
uploading them to a co-op database that directs them on their errands.
Just as some of Fischer’s early telephone co-ops did not provide very good service, considered
skeptically, Warchalking does not seem to be a particularly effective directory system.19 Bad
weather might wash away a chalk mark,20 the presence of a chalk mark alerts the network’s owner
that someone is sharing their service, the marks themselves are not particularly easy to see—if
they are drawn on one side of a building and the user approaches from the other side, the
directory service is wholly ineffectual. Furthermore, the mark for a closed network (‘‘nothing to
be gained here’’ in the hobo lexicon) makes the least sense, as it takes effort to make and maintain
the mark, but it conveys no useful information to the wandering Wi-Fi user except ‘‘don’t open
your laptop here.’’ If Warchalking were an effective directory service, the user would not be
tempted to open his or her laptop while wandering the streets in any case, and so the mark is a
wasted effort.
Logically, the more primitive Warchalking appears to be a precursor to the more practical GIS-
driven Wi-Fi map databases like wifimaps.com, but databases like the NetStumbler mapserver
were in operation before Warchalking was conceived. Warchalking received a large amount of
media attention, and it may be that it is entirely a media phenomenon—a clever idea and a good
story that gained wide circulation even though it was not actually happening in the manner that it
was described. While many instances of Warchalking are recorded on personal Web sites (and in
some central repositories like http://www.warchalking.org/), these are often instances of bragging
where the user owns the Wi-Fi AP that was warchalked. Warchalking is then a way to affiliate
with a subcultural community rather than a practical directory service, as predicted by two of
O’Neil’s consequences. First, Warchalking promotes individual empowerment by providing an
excuse and a group practice around which to organize learning about wireless Internet
technology, and it also promotes a sense of community by providing a means of affiliation.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
19The material in this section comes from a mailing list challenge made by the author in November, 2002 to find
people who actually used Warchalking as a meaningful directory service. The author wishes to thank the many
correspondents that answered this challenge. Although none were able to provide a case of Warchalking as a
meaningful directory service, their insights were very helpful. The challenge eventually evolved into a bounty (of $1) for
an example —the bounty remains unpaid. Special thanks go particularly to Jeremy Hunsinger and Ben Partridge for
their assistance in this effort. The bounty is chronicled at: http://www.niftyc.org/bet/.
20The traditional chalk marks used on the walls of Oxford colleges to denote rowing victories are often made on walls
that are unprotected from the elements, and these chalk marks can last for 6–12 years.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602588
GIS-based Wi-Fi databases appear to be more useful than Warchalking, and there are even
reports that commercial providers attempt to ‘‘suck’’ the content of some co-op databases
through repeated automated queries. However, it is remarkable how little discussion on
mapserver bulletin boards is related to using the directory rather than providing it. Most of the talk
centers on equipment, node discovery, and the technical and aesthetic problems of mapping. A
frequent feature of personal Web pages, mailing lists, and discussion boards devoted to these
directories is the exchange of maps, each more beautiful than the last, with a running commentary
describing how the author achieved a glowing, gauzy purple cloud (representing Wi-Fi coverage),
superimposed over an aerial photograph. It is the common practice of all of these directories to
significantly overestimate Wi-Fi coverage by assuming a very large radius of coverage from the
estimated center of each AP. Little comment is given to these fudges, and if the mapservers were
regularly used by people trying to find Wi-Fi access, more discussion of this sort of design choice
would be expected. When finding Wi-Fi service is mentioned in these fora, word-of-mouth and
personal experience trump the mapserver’s database, since the picture drawn by the mapserver is
likely to exaggerate the available coverage.21 This author conjectures that these beautiful maps
serve as the poetry of the Wi-Fi army. Lured by reputation ranking into spending their time
finding Wi-Fi APs, foot soldiers work to refine and trade their maps to demonstrate their exploits,
not to provide a practical directory service for users. Next, the paper will consider the second case,
the authentication function of network, and will turn to a software package that might be used by
a Wi-Fi provider discovered by these mappers and listed in wifimaps.com.
4. Case two: NoCatAuth as an authentication service
Thinking about mapping and ‘‘borrowing’’ Wi-Fi prompts a consideration of selfishness and
altruism: a central concern for all of social science. In the world of Wi-Fi, a Californian wireless
co-op called NoCat is attempting to fix a solution to human selfishness in software code. Named
after a famous Albert Einstein quote explaining the operation of radio,22 NoCat is a Wi-Fi co-op
active in the provision of service in Sonoma County. However, in their experience providing
connectivity, the members of the co-op realized that there were coordination needs beyond
provision that could be realized by cooperative action. As Rob Flickenger, a leader of the project,
explained:
While some node owners are perfectly happy opening their networks to whomever happens to
be in range, most of us hesitate at the thought of paying for our neighbors to use our
bandwidth. After all, apart from using up resources that we’re paying for, anonymous users
could potentially abuse other networks and have their shenanigans traced back to our network!
If we want to provide responsible wireless access, we need a way of securely identifying users
ARTICLE IN PRESS
21Scatter of Wi-Fi signals is quite significant and the actual picture of a Wi-Fi Access point would never be
represented by a circle, as it is represented in a Wi-Fi mapserver.
22 ‘‘You see, wire telegraph is a kind of a very, very long cat. You pull his tail in New York and his head is meowing in
Los Angeles. Do you understand this? And radio operates exactly the same way: you send signals here, they receive
them there. The only difference is that there is no cat.’’
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 589
when they connect, and then only allocate the resources that the node owner is willing to
contribute.23
(NoCat is also profiled briefly in print by Flickenger himself; see Flickenger, 2003.) NoCatAuth
turns a computer running Linux/BSD into an AP and authentication gateway, granting the ability
to provide any visitor with a welcome screen, terms of service page, and/or an authentication
screen. In a manner virtually identical to what happens in a commercial Wi-Fi hotspot, when Wi-
Fi visitors attempt to connect to a network provided from a NoCatAuth server they may see a
splash page inviting them to login. This software functions both as a prioritization service and an
authentication service—NoCatAuth allows ‘‘free riders’’ while removing the cloak of anonymity
from free ridership, but at the same time NoCatAuth allows the owner of the connectivity to
assign priority to their own use, or to prohibit free riders from doing some things with Wi-Fi that
the owners are allowed to do. In technical terms, NoCatAuth intercepts outgoing Web requests
and redirects them to an authentication server. If the visitor is authenticated, the authentication
server provides a cryptographically signed reply. The visitors are then redirected to their original
Web request and subsequent requests pass through the NoCatAuth gateway (for more technical
detail, see Kershaw, 2003).24
The significance of the NoCatAuth project is two-fold. The first and more obvious goal is
allowing authentication on ‘‘open’’ networks. While NoCatAuth allows a local Wi-Fi network to
implement any authentication service that they like (e.g., NoCatAuth could even be used to
authenticate paying users in a commercial network) the NoCat group has greater ambitions. They
also operate a free centralized authentication database (auth.nocat.net) with the aim of hosting
authentication for anyone who would like to participate. As the README file says, ‘‘We hope
NoCatAuth helps you provide unlimited bandwidth everywhere for free.’’ This is the second and
more profound goal of the NoCatAuth project. Despite appearances, the NoCat group does not
really aim to allow any Wi-Fi provider to authenticate their own users; in the documentation for
NoCatAuth they suggest that running your own authentication services are time-consuming and
costly. Instead, they recommend that Wi-Fi providers affiliate with an umbrella authentication
organization. This is NoCatAuth’s larger aim: to build a global authentication framework
wherein any user of a free network can be authenticated centrally.
4.1. The problem with strangers
These goals may seem quite paradoxical. Why would the providers of free networks work so
hard to develop a system of authentication? It seems nonsensical—even sinister—that so much
effort would be expended by free wireless activists to build a global framework for centrally
certifying user logins. In some way the NoCatAuth effort is a response to law—or the idea of law.
It is an attempt to reconcile a new technology with old ideas of private property, and the
discussions about NoCatAuth’s development are also discussions that treat anew the problem of
what, exactly, is meant by ‘‘theft.’’
Wireless activism generally has been dogged by a stigma arising from free ridership. As briefly
highlighted in case one, the wireless activist mantra has been that connectivity should be as free as
ARTICLE IN PRESS
23Taken from Rob Flickenger’s introduction to NoCat at: http://nocat.net/wiki/index.cgi?AuthIntro.
24NoCatSplash is at the time of this writing simply a faster version of NoCatAuth with fewer features.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602590
the air (jokingly epitomized by one activist with the slogan, ‘‘Peace, Love, and Wi-Fi’’). The
problem has been that Wi-Fi, unlike air, is already understood as private property. The boom in
Wi-Fi hot spots and the mushrooming of free APs described in the last section was the result not
of a conscious altruism, it was the triumph of unreflective accidents. The consumer equipment (the
AP) that an individual user purchased for his or her own use came direct from the factory with no
security enabled. Taking an AP out of the box and turning it on would result in the accidental
provision of an ‘‘open’’ Wi-Fi hot spot. In this way, the bulk of open Wi-Fi coverage is open by
default and not by design. The concept of altruism in Wi-Fi (as in anything) has a saintly air, yet
users of these accidentally open hot spots are not taking something that has been freely given. Just
as the Warchalkers were accused of being thieves, the open wireless co-ops like NoCat had to
demonstrate that they were interested in taking only what was freely given. NoCatAuth was a way
to show that they were not taking but trading—cooperating to create a system that benefited all. If
the open wireless community could convince users to run NoCatAuth, it would be convincing
them to make a sharing decision explicit, meaning that free wireless users could always defeat the
charge that they were simple thieves. In this manner, NoCatAuth uses computer software to
facilitate an electronic manifestation of gift-giving.
Nobody knows how many of the accidental sharers would continue to give away connectivity if
the decision to do so was made explicit. Activists rightly fear that the ingrained respect for private
property and the ownership implied by paying the backhaul bill every month (for DSL or a cable
modem) would lead AP buyers to exclude free riders. If the question is phrased as, ‘‘Will you share
your water or power with strangers?’’ the answer seems likely to be ‘‘no.’’ However, if the offered
calculus could be changed so that by giving access away the ‘‘altruistic’’ sharer does not lose
anything, who could refuse? Proponents of NoCatAuth needed to redefine the sharing as
something that would occur at no noticeable cost.25 NoCatAuth thus evolved with a design goal
that the owner should be able to obtain an absolute priority over free riders. As long as AP
owners used a flat-rate monthly broadband Internet service for backhaul, they do not pay for any
usage in addition to their own, and any costs are passed along to their Internet Service Provider.
This idea of eliminating any cost to owners is likely to have resulted (at least in part) from the Wi-
Fi activists’ ongoing attempts at lay jurisprudence. The mailing lists of the Wi-Fi community are
littered with the postings of intelligent engineers and technologists who seek to puzzle out the
legality of what they are doing via the lay interpretation of black-letter law. One of the most
interesting of these is a lengthy review by a non-lawyer (Pozar, 2002) that has achieved wide
circulation. It attempts to cover all conceivable law and FCC regulation that might impact Wi-Fi
co-ops. Despite some of their slogans, these Wi-Fi ‘‘rebels’’ are quite often middle-class technical
experts with a healthy respect for the law and the last thing they wish for is the label, ‘‘thief.’’
4.2. Selling the air vs. giving it away
In an important parallel, Streeter (1996b, introduced above) analyzed the development of
spectrum management in US television broadcasting as a property relation. He demonstrated that
ARTICLE IN PRESS
25A parallel might be made with the trade-off in peer-to-peer file sharing software between bandwidth allocated to
uploads vs. downloads. However, on the file sharing systems in use today, altruism can affect your own use and cost you
slower downloads.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 591
the ether was commodified as something that could be bought and sold because of the dominance
of an ideology of corporate liberalism among business and government elites. In this way of
thinking, proper stewardship of a scarce public resource demanded rules so similar to private
ownership that they were effectively private ownership.26 The case of NoCatAuth is quite
different, in that it demonstrates that property relations can arise ‘‘from below’’ as much as from
above. The idea of wireless connectivity that is ‘‘free as the air’’ appears subversive to property
relations, yet this freedom was implemented in such a way that the intangible of Internet
connectivity is, in the end, something that is agreed by all to be owned. In their (perhaps
unconscious) fear of the law, technologists realized a system of rules in software that paralleled
property relations. They found a nebulously defined practice (wireless Internet) where any claim
of ownership was questionable and solidified it by defining their actions as providing gifts of well-
defined property. They envisioned giving away this gift as the privilege of an owner, and in the
process helped to create wireless Internet as something that could be owned.27
This conception of gifting remains problematic, however, as Internet service is conceptualized
by ISPs as a service and not as a good. ISPs usually have prohibitions in their subscriber
agreements that preclude resale or connection sharing, the latter being the chief occupation of the
co-ops that might use NoCatAuth. ISPs see broadband Internet as a gift only they can give, and
they resist the notion that home users have purchased property by claiming that whatever
property exists remains theirs. NoCatAuth is a move in a larger game where ISPs have tried to use
private law as an instrument to stop those that would give away their bandwidth. This has not
been particularly successful to date: chasing individual altruists has proven to be terrible public
relations, and the terms of service used by many ISPs are filled with ridiculous provisions that
effectively state that the user cannot do anything the ISP does not like at any time. Many
overbroad penalty clauses are likely to be unenforceable.
Here can be seen cooperative action that goes directly against the expectations of the literature.
The co-op behind NoCatAuth does not seem to be engaged in innovation or experimentation: if
anything, the basic features of NoCatAuth as an authentication system were first realized for
commercial ISPs and then borrowed by the co-op, and the technology of NoCatAuth uses readily
available building blocks. Similarly, the co-op has not invested in popularization. O’Neil’s sense of
community consequence of CNs explains this co-op quite thinly. The NoCatAuth mailing lists are
much more practically oriented than the discussion fora of the Warchalkers and Wi-Fi mappers.
Like other successful software development communities, they want to build a ‘‘product’’ that
works. NoCatAuth also seems to be more effective in terms of its own stated goals than
Warchalking. While Warchalking claims to be a directory service but actually does not function
(much) as one, NoCatAuth realizes the authentication system that it attempts. Some explanation
for all this can be found in Fischer’s notion of co-ops as a way of implementing desired features
that vendors do not provide, but here the desire is not for a technical feature but for control of the
authentication system itself. Users of NoCatAuth want their own system of affiliation, and they
want to achieve a system that protects them from the legal epithet ‘‘thief.’’ In this, they have been
ARTICLE IN PRESS
26Spectrum allocation in US law has specifically precluded ownership since the Communications Act of 1934.
27This interpretation is consistent with the scholarship on ‘‘interpretive flexibility’’ in the sociology of technology
(Bijker et al., 1997) and the notion of the ‘‘gift economy’’ found in anthropology. While gift economies are typically
considered as subversive to capitalism, they are not necessarily so.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602592
successful, but on a small scale. Next, this paper will move from authentication to provision and
examine the kind of co-op that might employ NoCatAuth—a co-op dedicated to providing
Internet service using Wi-Fi.28
5. Case three: Consume and Internet provision
The Consume project was founded in London, UK in 1999 as a ‘‘collaborative strategy for the
self-provision of broadband telecommunications infrastructure.’’29 Consume began with discus-
sions between wireless enthusiasts who later assembled a diverse group that shared a passionate
anti-corporate feeling and a talent for aphorisms.30 The Consume slogan is, ‘‘Trip the loop, make
your switch, consume the net’’! and (as in this last phrase) the name Consume most often evokes
the meaning of ‘‘eat’’—meaning literal consumption. Consume means to subsume the Internet, to
internalize it, rather than to purchase it. Consume refused any financial support from members,
accepting only in-kind contributions of provision, expertise, or equipment. In addition, Consume’s
organization belies the word. Although founded in the UK, it admits no boundaries and lives on
the Internet. From the discussions on its mailing lists, it appears to be a very loose confederation
of individuals that pursue whatever projects they wish to pursue. Perhaps the least organized of
the cooperatives examined so far, Consume acts as an information hub whose chief assets are its
mailing lists and Web site. Consume also operates NodeDB, a directory of members that also
functions as a GIS-driven Wi-Fi map similar to wifimaps.com (considered above as case study
one). To ‘‘join’’ Consume you nominate yourself as a node, list your node in NodeDB, and are
presented with a list of nodes that are near you (if any).31 You are then encouraged by the FAQ to
contact nodes near you and arrange some way to interconnect. This is a vision of a mass of people
throughout the UK throwing Ethernet cables over back fences: if enough people follow this set of
steps, an alternative network to the Internet will have been created by cooperative, volunteer
action at very low cost.32
Unusually for provision co-ops, the members of Consume have devoted a large amount of
energy to tackling the legal arrangements required to run a cooperative network infrastructure.
Specifically, they realize that to be useful their network will have to interconnect with the existing
Internet, and so they watch carefully for ISP reaction to connection sharing (introduced earlier in
this paper). The Consume membership also put a significant amount of effort into legally defining
the peering arrangements to be used between Consume nodes, culminating in a formal agreement
called ‘‘PicoPeering’’ that defines the relationship.33 Members have also expended considerable
ARTICLE IN PRESS
28While statistics on this are not kept, it is likely that some of Consume’s many members have installed or
experimented with NoCatAuth to produce splash pages.
29Taken from the Consume GeneralFAQ at http://consume.net/twiki/bin/view/Main/GeneralFAQ.
30Unless otherwise noted the material in this section comes from the Consume mailing list archives at: http://
lists.consume.net/mailman/listinfo and from the Consume wiki at: http://consume.net/.
31This section is based on the author’s experiences joining Consume, constructing a node called ‘‘SpeakersCorner’’,
and using low-cost commercial equipment to provide Wi-Fi coverage to Speaker’s Corner in Hyde Park.
32Admittedly, if this scenario were to come true, the routing difficulties would be daunting.
33See: http://www.picopeer.net/PPA-english.html. Development of the Picopeering agreement has stalled at the time
of writing.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 593
effort in understanding how connectivity to the Internet might flow between Consume nodes. The
usual practice is simply that Internet connectivity is shared with any Wi-Fi user that is within range,
or that the Consume members (illegally) enlist neighbors as users of their broadband connection.
However, Consume members have pondered how to use strategic peering relationships with ISP to
provide backhaul for an envisioned large network of nodes with no backhaul of their own.
Consume and co-ops like it also function as a kind of Consumer Reports for Wi-Fi equipment,
as members subject commercial equipment to a series of tests and much discussion is devoted to
the best equipment (what to use, how to build it, where to buy it). Consume is also partly
responsible for a number of spin-off projects. In addition to PicoPeering, above, it has provided a
general starting point for a number of more focused, local network provision projects such as
Arwain (http://www.arwain.com/), a Welsh provision co-op based in Cardiff.
5.1. ‘‘Death to telco monopolies’’! while peering with them
In terms of motivation, Consume’s public face does not present a particularly well-justified
endeavor. In a way, Consume’s general mission might be seen as attempting to cooperatively build a
new, second Internet without the financing or expertise of the telecommunications companies of the
first Internet. Not only is a volunteer-run, donated Internet infrastructure a very difficult challenge
to set oneself, it does not have any of the immediacy of a need. Most of Consume’s activity occurs in
areas (such as London) that are already well-served, and so the creation of a second Internet takes
on the fanciful air of Don Quixote’s quests. A thread that runs through many discussions is the idea
that commercial network services are presently overpriced, but when compared to the trouble and
difficulty of becoming your own network service provider, participation in a project like Consume is
not likely to save any money for the average participant, or to be an effective price protest. In the
face of direct questioning about motivation, the public documents of Consume dissimulate. The
Consume GeneralFAQ denies having a motivation, claiming that ‘‘[t] here is no single set of reasons
why we should want to do this: one of Consume’s strengths is that it is many different things to
many different people.’’ In another section of the FAQ the response is an ironic and self-effacing
dissembling. In answer to the question of why Consume should be founded to pursue these goals
when so many other co-op organizations already exist to pursue them (see also CNs, above), the
FAQ replies, ‘‘Death to the communications monopolies! May ten thousand autonomous systems
bloom!’’ Yet as discussed above, Consume depends upon these hated monopolies for backhaul
service, and hopes to partner with ISPs in the future.
In another light, the motivation of a Wireless provision co-op like Consume is obvious—to
provide service to users. It is strange, then, that there is little evidence on the mailing lists of
widespread use of Consume services by non-members. Sometimes this realization comes as a
disappointment, as one mailing list post lamented in June 2003:
Editing my dhcpd.conf file—I noticed it was exactly one year old. In that time I’ve not had one
single connection from outside this house. Most recently my box was up for 34 days without a
reboot—so it’s not because I’m never online. And this is urban inner city North London—okay
it’s just an internal antennay Very sad34
ARTICLE IN PRESS
34From: http://lists.consume.net/pipermail/consume-thenet/2003-June/008275.html.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602594
It is certainly not true that no Consume service providers have users—some at least post
tales of bandwidth sharing with neighbors. However, the appearance of this comment
highlights the true essence of Consume as a network service provider—the resources of
Consume exist for the use of members. Consume is not particularly interested in recruiting
novice users as this means more work for their scarce volunteer energy. Public place
provision might be some exception, as users in public places may be transient to the
degree that they are never in the area long enough to figure out who they might contact
for technical support. The jargon-filled mailing lists and confusing Web site are an intimidating
place for the novice, but attract the hobbyist who have some technical skill and an urge to
learn more.
5.2. A public place for a private purpose
What, then, to make of Consume? It could be judged a success as a hub that spawned a
number of more focused projects, but by its own stated goal of collaboratively self-providing
broadband it has not succeeded. Similar to the present analysis of Wi-Fi mapping databases as
network discovery services, the functional benefits of Consume’s activity can be considered
as a community independent of the larger system and found useful. Consume as a social
group may (like Warchalking or Wi-Fi mapping) promote technical knowledge and a
sense of community. Considering Consume in any larger context, however, leaves the
author struggling for a justification. Hughes’s ‘‘stage one’’ activity is apparent: experimentation
in ways that would otherwise be considered pointless or too risky. Overall the effort seems
still to be best explained as a social club for technical elites. The idea of a voluntary cooperative
alternative Internet might yield significant societal benefits as a testbed used to pioneer
alternative technologies and methods, but Consume appears far from realizing such a testbed.
Its members are too dispersed to peer, and uninterested in peering anyway. The average
person is unlikely to join, given the amount of expertise required to even understand what
it is that might be joined. And beyond all of this, Consume has not articulated a compelling
need or service—the frustration that drove rural farm co-ops into self-provision of electricity
and telephones does not exist in most of the areas where Consume is active. Although some
of the discussion in Consume fora is stridently anti-corporate, this opposition does not
manifest itself as concern for the socioeconomically disadvantaged or an organized resistance
to specific corporate practices that are seen as negative. The mailing lists of Consume are filled
with examples that evoke Fischer’s dictum that users adapt technology to their own ends and
introduce new features and services. Consume members were serving public places (see the
‘‘description’’ field of Consume’s node database) at a time when no commercial public hotspots
were available, and they spoke of balconies, patios, streets, and public squares before wireless
commercial ISPs in Britain. It is not possible to determine how often these public place nodes are
used from the data available, but postings on the mailing list generally support the idea that they
were constructed by and for a single Consume member—service in public places was deployed
because it suited the AP owner, and if others stumbled across it that would be an added benefit.
Whether this public place provision remains useful if commercial provision becomes widespread is
another matter, one that returns this inquiry to larger questions about all three cases and the
lessons from this research.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 595
6. Assessing cooperative action in Wi-Fi networking
How are these cooperatives valuable to the development of the communication system as a
whole, or to society? From this evidence, those who hope that these co-ops represent the next
wave of a popular movement will need to readjust their expectations. The chief problem for the
success of any popularization of cooperative self-provision in this area is technical knowledge.
The technical hurdles to realize Consume’s populist uprising and NoCatAuth’s vision of universal
cooperative affiliation and voluntary sharing are profound and striking. While off-the-shelf
equipment is usable in some cases, to be a member of Consume, to operate a NoCatAuth gateway,
or to hunt for Wi-Fi networks requires considerable expertise.
O’Neil’s five-fold typology of consequences of CNs is now telling. While CN consequences
include (1) ‘‘strong’’ democracy, (2) social capital, (3) individual empowerment, (4) sense of
community, and (5) opportunities for economic development, the cooperative action considered
here seems to focus little on democracy, social capital, and opportunities for economic
development. These co-ops function (as any community does) to generate social ties for members,
it is true, and they promote technical knowledge and community in the same way that any
voluntary association devoted to an educational purpose might. Overall, the Wi-Fi co-ops
examined here are inward-looking: they emulate Douglas’s ‘‘cult of the boy operator’’ in radio
before 1920 more than they provide an outward-looking CN that builds its own internal
community through an explicit mission of helping those outside the group that are disadvantaged.
This is not to be seen as a surprising finding, however, as cooperatives have often been vehicles for
self-interest.
6.1. ‘‘Don’t cancel your ISP account just yet’’
The literature reviewed above posited that each different functional role (discovery,
authentication, provision) might trigger related weaknesses (disorganization, unreliability, lack
of expertise) and strengths (flexibility, heightened awareness of public-interest concerns, low cost)
of the cooperative form of organization. Interestingly, Wi-Fi mappers managed to surmount the
traditional co-op weakness of disorganization by centralizing a Web-based system of automated
reputation ranking to direct their activities. All co-ops examined here showed great evidence of
building expertise among those already possessing some expertise. While co-ops are often thought
of as lacking expertise when compared to their professional commercial counterparts, the
discussion boards of these co-ops demonstrate much more expertise than the technical support
personnel of the commercial ISPs with which they interact. Indeed, co-ops are in some cases so
expert that this makes it impossible to imagine their success as a populist movement. Unreliability
was also not the problem one might have expected. While the co-op mapservers are sometimes
unexpectedly unavailable, there are multiple mapservers. While it is difficult to depend on a
volunteer organization, NoCatAuth produces software code that runs. And while the individual
nodes of Consume may not be reliable sources of connectivity, Consume is implemented as a
redundant system, a second Internet. Members are expected to have another source of Internet
connectivity (in the words of GeneralFAQ, ‘‘Don’t cancel your ISP account just yet.’’)
Similarly, while the literature anticipated the cooperative organizational form as more flexible,
sensitive to public-interest concerns, and low in cost than non-co-op counterparts, the results of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602596
this inquiry are mixed. As demonstrated by the above assessment of O’Neil’s typology,
these co-ops were not particularly sensitive to public-interest concerns in practice,
although in their stated goals they often claimed to be.35 Consume did demonstrate
considerable flexibility but it did so by having undefined goals and no internal
organization. The data concerning NoCatAuth examined here did not provide a robust
test of flexibility as compared to a commercial system. In terms of cost, NoCatAuth
and the Wi-Fi mappers provided substitutes for goods that are available in the marketplace.
NoCatAuth replaces an authenticating captive portal that would otherwise have to be
purchased or programmed, while Wi-Fi mapservers very imperfectly replace the directory
service provided by national or federated ISPs. Both co-ops provide these services for free.
Consume is a harder case, providing some network access to users for free but costing its members
a great deal of effort and equipment. These findings are pessimistic only for those who expected
Wi-Fi to be an emancipatory technology empowering everyone to operate their own
telecommunications carrier. If the implications for public policy are considered, promising
avenues for action remain open.
6.2. Co-op policy experiments: the blank spot bounty
This paper’s initial literature review asserts a need for greater telecommunications
policy attention to co-ops. Hughes, Douglas, McChesney, Streeter, and others all implicitly
or explicitly suggest that amateur action in the early moments of a technological system has
been an engine for experimentation, innovation, popularization, and provision of features
or service that are not available from commercial vendors. To be clear: if these case studies
have demonstrated anything it is not that co-ops are ineffectual. Quite the opposite—these
groups appear to be extremely capable: while NoCatAuth is largely a replication of what
already exists in commercial systems, nonetheless it works and it is free. Similarly, the
extensive mapping databases produced by groups like Zhrodague and Consume’s repository
of user information are professionally produced, technically sophisticated and effective in
their own terms—Zhrodague makes beautiful maps. These maps do not work as a
directory service because they were never really intended to, these maps are an aesthetic project
and a community-building hobby. Similarly, Consume’s members deploy Wi-Fi hotspots that
work, but they often deploy them in places where they are unnecessary. The issue is not whether
or not these groups are capable, it is how to align the talents of this skilled population with
society’s needs.
In Wi-Fi, this mismatch between cooperative action and societal goals can be addressed by
public policy. Attempting to mobilize cooperatives is a relatively low-risk, low-cost policy
option—these groups have shown a great willingness to invest large sums of their own effort and
equipment. It appears that co-ops genuinely want to help: beyond Consume’s catchy but
argumentative slogans, the mission statements of most cooperatives include goals directly tied to
public service. Consider this assortment of statements made in public documents: BARWN exists
to build a research testbed, Bristol Wireless will ‘‘reduce the digital divide,’’ CUWiN intends to
ARTICLE IN PRESS
35 In mission statements, statements of goals, and Web pages about these organizations.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 597
promote content production by ‘‘grassroots media-makers,’’ DFW Wireless promotes the use of
wireless technologies, RotterdamWireless is dedicated to ‘‘access for all,’’ NoVAWireless hopes to
bring Internet access to underserved areas, NYCWireless will promote research and development,
Personal Telco plans to build community empowerment by linking public places, RAWUG will
educate users, SF Wireless pledges bandwidth ‘‘to those who need it,’’ TCwireless will document
access locations to promote economic development, TCWUG charges its members to make
resource sharing easier, TWCN hosts a forum for communication between users and service
providers, WSCIC builds wireless services in ‘‘DSL deserts.’’36
Like most areas of public policy, telecommunications have a relatively small, well-known
set of central problems. The present situation in the Wi-Fi cooperatives considered here
suggests a program of targeted subsidy that would rein in the enthusiasms of these amateurs
to the problems of telecommunication policy. Two longstanding societal goals are innovation
in new telecommunication services and access in underserved areas. In the US, the
federal programs that currently exist to support these goals will never mobilize Wi-Fi
co-ops unless changes are made. Specifically, the US Commerce Department’s
Technology Opportunities Program (TOP) exists to support experimentation in services
by non-profit organizations. This might seem a useful channel to promote grassroots
Wi-Fi innovation. (In the 2004 funding round of $12.9 million, TOP declared a special
interest in Wi-Fi.) However, these groups may be organized enough to produce hardware and
software solutions to telecommunications problems, but not organized enough to demonstrate
eligibility for these funds through the Byzantine application process. Moreover, the average TOP
grant far exceeds the scale of most co-ops. Turning to the second goal, access in underserved
areas, at the time of writing both the US and UK are currently perceived to be lagging in the
deployment of broadband.37 The dominant policy approach to increasing deployment in
underserved areas has relied upon cross-subsidy to providers ($5.3 billion in the US in 200238), yet
it would be very difficult for a Wi-Fi co-op to receive these funds even if they provided effective
service. While the co-ops consider themselves providers, public policy considers them to be users,
and ineligible.
It is straightforward to imagine an inexpensive policy instrument that would
succeed. Continuing the example of access in underserved areas, policymakers can borrow a
trick from the Wi-Fi mappers and assign a bounty to blank areas on the map. In ‘‘DSL
deserts,’’ rather than waiting for telecommunications carriers to act,39 public policy can
take Fischer’s autonomous users to heart and encourage the underserved to provide their
own service. This would entail a policy strategy emphasizing education (e.g., a clearinghouse
of instructions for self-provision) and interconnection guarantees (e.g., a clarification of
the Wi-Fi co-op’s status when obtaining backhaul). Additionally, cross-subsidy
mechanisms could be modified so that cooperating groups of ‘‘users’’ would be more
easily recognized as providers eligible for universal service support. Almost all co-ops
ARTICLE IN PRESS
36 Jolene White contributed essential research assistance in gathering these statements.
37This does not mean to imply that the common practice of conceptualizing the deployment of advanced
telecommunications services as a race between competing nations is analytically useful.
38This figure refers to disbursements from the US Universal Service Administrative Company.
39 In the US, the Section 706 Advanced Services Inquiry is the home of this waiting game.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602598
interested in provision also experiment with IP telephony. This presents the possibility that
experimental co-ops could self-provide both high-cost rural local loop service and advanced
broadband service using unlicensed wireless.
6.3. Directions for future research
This study has presented only a first look at cooperative action in Wi-Fi. This research
was conducted in 2003 in an area that changes quickly and this begs a second look
with complementary research methods better able to assess the scope of these co-ops.
At the conclusion of this study, the prospects for cooperative action in Wi-Fi remain
murky. At the least, this work suggests some revision of how co-ops are considered
as an organizational form in telecommunications. The assumption that co-ops are flexible
but inexpert public-interest minded altruists is more stereotype than substance. These co-ops
are varied, and might even be characterized as inflexible, self-interested, inward-looking,
and expert. (However, if the category ‘‘cooperative’’ fails us in cohesive meaning, it does no
worse than the equally broad term ‘‘commercial.’’) Two of the co-ops considered here
served several non-obvious purposes that were not their stated goals. Wi-Fi mappers
seemed uninterested in the actual directory service, while Consume served a diverse variety
of purposes, but the main effect was not the widespread self-provision of broadband.
Further research should more directly address the possibility of co-ops as an important
symbiote to other infrastructure, providing service in commercially undesirable areas.
As an urban organization Consume was a poor test case to choose for the study of
provision if this symbiotic relationship were the chief issue. A valuable future comparison
would consider an urban provision co-op alongside a rural co-op where wireless provides
the only viable broadband infrastructure.40 The provision function, particularly, requires
further study before a firm conclusion can be reached about the value of cooperative
provision. While these cases were selected to inform theoretical understandings of
cooperative action in telecommunications, a pragmatic next step would be to determine
how many provision co-ops are actually building infrastructure and serving users.
Finally, consistent with Hughes, there may be occasions where a co-op’s actions could
be more important than that of commercial organizations for reasons of innovation. These co-
ops did evince widespread experimentation, but this study found no evidence of significant
innovation (and stumbling upon it in such a small sample would be unlikely). Claims of
innovation and experimentation benefits from cooperative action call for a study of the most
innovative Wi-Fi co-ops.
This initial assessment then concludes with further questions, as any first look should. On
cooperative action more generally, Henry David Thoreau famously believed that ‘‘the only
cooperation which is commonly possible is exceedingly partial and superficial.’’ In contrast,
Franklin D. Roosevelt said in an early campaign speech that, ‘‘competition has been shown to be
useful up to a certain point and no further, but cooperationybegins where competition leaves
off.’’ In the area of Wi-Fi, this assessment ends with ambivalence, somewhere between Thoreau
ARTICLE IN PRESS
40For example, the Didcot Ring: http://www.didcotring.uk.net/.
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 599
and Roosevelt, but with the prospect that innovative public policy action can shift cooperation
toward a more recognizably useful future.
Acknowledgements
Fran@ois Bar, Hernan Galperin, Robert Cannon, Anne Hoag, and the journal’s anonymous
reviewers provided valuable comments on this article. Monroe Price and Philip Howard provided
the materials, location, and encouragement for the construction of Consume node ‘‘Speak-
ersCorner.’’ Claire Charbit kindly shared interview transcripts from her own research. Paul David
and the participants in the Bellagio Conference on Public Values, System Design, and the Public
Domain contributed essential ideas to the overall project. The UK portion of this research was
made possible by a visiting fellowship from the Oxford Internet Institute, Oxford University. This
material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-
0308269.
References
Bar, F., & Galperin, H. (2004). Building the wireless Internet infrastructure: From cordless Ethernet archipelagos to
wireless grids. Paper presented at the European Communications Policy Research Conference, Barcelona, Spain.
Bijker, W. E., & Law, J. (Eds.) (1992). Shaping technology/building society: Studies in sociotechnical change. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Bijker, W. E., Hughes, T. P., & Pinch, T. J. (Eds.) (1987). The social construction of technological systems:
New directions in the sociology and history of technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Byers, S., & Kormann, D. (2003). 802.11b access point mapping. Communications of the ACM, 46(5), 41–46.
Chandler Jr., A. D. (1962). Strategy and structure: Chapters in the history of the American industrial enterprise.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chandler Jr., A. D. (1977). The visible hand: The managerial revolution in American business. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press.
Cherry, S. M. (2002). What went wrong at Ricochet? IEEE Spectrum, 39(3), 60–61.
Douglas, S. J. (1989). Inventing American broadcasting, 1899–1922. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Escudero, A. (2003). WLAN (802.11b) and WMAN (802.16a) broadband wireless access: When opportunities drive
solutions. Paper presented to ‘‘The Wireless Internet Opportunity for developing nations,’’ W2i and UN ICT Task
Force, New York.
Fischer, C. S. (1985). Studying technology in social life. In M. Castells (Ed.), technology, space, and society: Emerging
trends. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Fischer, C. S. (1987a). The revolution in rural telephony, 1900–1920. Journal of Social History, 1(21), 5–26.
Fischer, C. S. (1987b). Technology’s retreat: The decline of rural telephony, 1920–1940. Social Science History, 3(11),
295–327.
Fischer, C. S. (1992). America calling: A social history of the telephone to 1940. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Flickenger, R. (2003). Building wireless community networks (2nd ed). Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
Hacking, I. (1999). The social construction of what?. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hammersley, B. (2002). Warchalking. The Guardian Online. Retrieved July 7, 2003 from http://www.guardian.co.uk/
online/story/0,3605,748499,00.html.
Hampton, K. N., & Wellman, B. (1999). Netville on-line and off-line: Observing and surveying a wired suburb.
American Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 475–492.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602600
Hampton, K. N., & Wellman, B. (2000). Examining community in the digital neighbourhood: Early results
from Canada’s wired suburb. In K. Isbister (Ed.), Digital cities: Technologies, experiences, and future perspectives
(pp. 194–208). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Harrison, T. M., & Stephen, T. (1999). Researching and creating community networks. In S. Jones (Ed.), Doing Internet
research: Critical issues and methods for examining the net (pp. 221–241). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
von Hippel, E. (1988). The sources of innovation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
von Hippel, E., & von Krogh, G. (2003). Open source software and the ‘private-collective’ innovation model: Issues for
organization science. Organization Science, 14(2), 209–223.
Hughes, T. P. (1983). Networks of power: Electrification in Western society, 1880–1930. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Hughes, T. P. (1987). The evolution of large technological systems. In W. E. Bijker, T. P. Hughes, & T. J. Pinch (Eds.),
The social construction of technological systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology (pp. 51–82).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. (1999). Wireless LAN medium access control and physical layer
specifications (No. 802.11, 1999 ed.). New York: IEEE Computer Society.
Kahin, B., & Keller, J. (Eds.) (1995). Public access to the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kershaw, M. (2003). Linux-powered wireless hot spots. Linux Journal, 113, 52.
Kling, R. (2000). Learning about information technologies and social change: The contribution of social informatics.
The Information Society, 16(3), 217–232.
Negroponte, N. (2002). Being wireless. Wired, 10 (10). http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/10.10/wireless.html.
Noble, D. F. (1979). America by design: Science, technology, and the rise of corporate capitalism. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
O’Neil, D. (2002). Assessing community informatics: A review of methodological approaches for evaluating community
networks and community technology centers. Internet Research, 12(1), 76–102.
Parsons, T. (1951). The social system. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Parsons, T. (1966). Societies: Evolutionary and comparative perspectives. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Parsons, T. (1971). The system of modern societies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Pozar, T. (2002). Regulations affecting 802.11 deployment, Vol. 1.3. Retrieved December 8, 2003 from
http://www.lns.com/papers/part15/Regulations Affecting 802 11.pdf.
Richards, S., & Associates. (1974). Hobo signs. New York: Barlenmir House.
Rheingold, H. (2002). Smart mobs: The next social revolution. New York: Basic Books.
Rogers, E., Collins-Jarvis, L., & Schmitz, J. (1994). The PEN project in Santa Monica: Interactive communication
equality and political action. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 45, 401–410.
Sandvig, C. (2003). Public Internet access for young children in the inner city: Evidence to inform access subsidy and
content regulation. The Information Society, 19(2), 171–183.
Sawhney, H. (2002). Public telephone network: Stages in infrastructure development. Telecommunications Policy, 16(7),
538–552.
Schmitz, J., Rogers, E., Phillips, K., & Paschal, D. (1995). The Public Electronic Network (PEN) and the homeless in
Santa Monica. Journal of Applied Communication, 23, 26–43.
Schuler, D. (1994). Community networks: Building a new participatory medium. Communications of the ACM, 37(1), 39–51.
Schuler, D. (1996). New community networks: Wired for change. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Silver, D. (2004). The soil of cyberspace: Historical archaeology of the Blacksburg Electronic Village and the Seattle
Community Network. In: Doug Schuler and P. Day (Eds.), Shaping the network society: The future of the public
sphere in cyberspace (pp. 304–324). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smulyan, S. (1994). Selling radio: The commercialization of American broadcasting 1920–1934. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Straubhaar, J., LaPastina, A., Lentz, B., Main, S., & Taylor, J. (2000). Structuring access: The role of public access
centers in the ‘‘digital divide.’’ Report of the Telecommunications and Information Policy Institute. Austin, TX:
The University of Texas.
Streeter, T. (1996a). The ‘‘new historicism’’ in media studies. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 40(4),
553–557.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602 601
Streeter, T. (1996b). Selling the air: A critique of the policy of commercial broadcasting in the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Vandertie, A. (1995). Hobo and tramp art carving: An authentic American folk tradition. New York: Sterling.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics: Or, control and communication in the animal and the machine. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Williams, R., & Edge, D. (1996). The social shaping of technology. In W. H. Dutton (Ed.), Information and
communication technologies: Visions and realities (pp. 53–67). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
C. Sandvig / Telecommunications Policy 28 (2004) 579–602602

