Wireless Research Handbook
Build 5G Wireless with Software Defined Radio
Volume 2
2 | ni.com/sdr 
INTRODUCTION 
James Kimery | Director of RF and Communications, NI
NI software defined radio solutions integrate hardware and software to help scientists and engineers rapidly prototype high-performance 
wireless systems. NI works with researchers worldwide to advance wireless research, and their use cases are fascinating and inspiring. 
This book includes incredible examples of how researchers transformed their novel wireless research ideas into real working prototypes. 
I would like to thank all of our lead users from around the world who continue to inspire us to build and evolve our platforms.  
You set the bar ever higher and ultimately help the wider research community innovate faster!
For additional information on these use cases and ways to innovate faster, please feel free to contact me and visit ni.com/sdr. 
james.kimery@ni.com
About the RF and Communications Team   
With a common goal of rapidly moving from theory to prototype, NI established lead user programs to accelerate 
next-generation research in controls, mechatronics, robotics, and wireless communications. Established in 2010, 
the wireless communications lead user program includes numerous research institutions examining multiple 5G 
communications aspects. Many researchers around the world are making significant contributions to 5G research 
based on the foundational work completed by the lead user program.
Table of Contents
Massive MIMO Measurements in Real Time 
Using a 128-Antenna Testbed ............................................................................ 5
Spatially Adaptive TV Broadcast: Hardware-in-the-Loop 
Operational Analysis ........................................................................................... 7
OFDMA-Based Network Coded Cooperation Testbed: Implementation  
and Performance Results ................................................................................... 9
WiMAC: Rapid Implementation Platform for User-Definable  
MAC Protocols Through Separation ..................................................................11
Non-Contact Breathing Detection Using Passive Radar  ................................. 13
An Implementation of a Fountain Code-Based MIMO-OFDM Receiver  
for Real-Time Wireless Video Streaming ......................................................... 15
ULLA-X: A Programmatic Middleware Enabling Large-Scale  
and Distributed Wireless Experimentation .......................................................17
Forward Collision Vehicular Radar With IEEE 802.11:  
Feasibility Demonstration Through Measurements ......................................... 19
Diversity and Coexistence Within Smart Grid Communications ..................... 21
A Flexible Millimeter-Wave Channel Sounder With Absolute Timing .............. 23
In-Band Full-Duplex Radio Transceiver Architecture  
for 5G Mobile Handsets ................................................................................... 25
Flexible GFDM FPGA Implementation With Support  
to Run-Time Reconfiguration ........................................................................... 27
An LTE-Based Wideband Distributed Spectrum Sharing Architecture ............ 29
Full Duplex SISO/MIMO Radios ....................................................................... 31
High-Throughput FPGA Architectures for Channel Coding .............................. 33
Toucan Wireless SDN Testbed: A Multitechnology Platform ........................... 35
Interference Management in LTE-Based NI Testbed ....................................... 37
©2016 National Instruments. All rights reserved. CVI, LabVIEW, National Instruments, NI, ni.com, NI FlexRIO, and USRP are trademarks of National Instruments. The mark LabWindows is used under a license from Microsoft Corporation. 
Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and other countries. The registered trademark Linux® is used pursuant to a sublicense from LMI, the exclusive licensee of Linus Torvalds, owner of the mark 
on a worldwide basis. Other product and company names listed are trademarks or trade names of their respective companies. 351339B-01 24933
ni.com/sdr | 3
4 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Paul Harris    
Paul Harris received his BEng (Hons) in electronic engineering from the University of Portsmouth 
in 2013 and later joined the CSN group at the University of Bristol to pursue a doctorate in 
communications. He completed two internships at NI in Austin, Texas, most recently in the 
wireless research group to help develop and test several aspects of the latest massive MIMO 
reference design in LabVIEW FPGA. Through his experience working on larger scale LabVIEW 
projects, he became a Certified LabVIEW Architect in 2015. His doctoral research within the 
CSN focuses pragmatically on massive MIMO. Through ongoing use of the NI testbed, he is 
investigating the real-world performance and behavior of the technology and subsequently 
identifying opportunities to implement and test new algorithms. 
Mark Beach    
Mark Beach received his doctorate in 1989 from the University of Bristol for research on the 
application of smart antenna techniques to GPS. He later became a faculty member at the 
university, and was promoted to senior lecturer in 1996, reader in 1998, and professor in 2003. 
He was head of the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering from 2006 to 2010, 
and then spearheaded Bristol’s hosting of the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training (CDT) in 
Communications. He manages the delivery of the CDT in Communications, leads research on 
enabling technologies for the delivery of 5G and beyond wireless connectivity, and serves as the 
school research impact director. He conducts his research activities through the Communication 
Systems and Networks Group, so they form a key component within Bristol’s Smart Internet 
Lab. He has over 25 years of physical layer wireless research experience during which he has 
embraced the application of spread spectrum technology for cellular systems, adaptive or smart 
antenna for capacity and range extension in wireless networks, MIMO-aided connectivity for 
throughput enhancement, and flexible RF technologies for software defined radio modems.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 5
Massive MIMO Measurements in Real Time Using a 128-Antenna Testbed
Professors: Mark Beach and Andrew Nix; Drs. Angela Doufexi, Simon Armour, and Evangelos MelliosResearch  
Students: Mr. Paul Harris, Ms. Siming Zhang, Mr. Henry Brice, Mr. Wael Hasan, and Mr. Benny Chitambira  
Communication Systems and Networks Group, University of Bristol
Our Goals 
■	 Obtain and process massive MIMO channel metrics in real-time
■	 Measure real-time performance in dynamic environments
■	 Develop algorithms that exploit the massive effect to improve the 
efficiency of future systems 
Our System
This is a 128-Antenna Massive MIMO Testbed which operates in real-time 
at 3.51 GHz (20 MHz bandwidth) using an LTE-like TDD PHY. All hardware 
is provided through BristolIsOpen (BIO).
■	 64 USRP RIO Remote Radio Heads (RRHs) performing  
OFDM mod/demod
■	 4 FlexRIO Kintex 7 FPGAs performing 128x12 MIMO Processing
■	 Up to 12 UE clients can be supported
BIO also provides fiber-
optic links allowing us to 
deploy the system with 
a backhaul connection. 
These links will also 
enable the exploration 
of distributed massive 
MIMO research.
Four flexible dual-polar patch antenna panels to allow for a reconfigurable 
array layout and future 4-segment distribution.
First Experimental Trials on March 10, 2016
Initial measurements conducted in an indoor atrium using 3.5 GHz sleeve 
dipoles at both the BS and 12 UE clients. The UEs were placed 20m away 
in a variety of configurations.
Power Delay Profile (PDP) and frequency response can be viewed in real-
time for all 128x12 channels. The received signal level of each user across 
the antenna array can also be visualised along with the eigenvalues (HHH).
Very strong diagonal indicating good spatial orthogonality between users.
1.59 Gbps sum-rate achieved using 256-QAM for all 12 users. On 20 MHz 
of bandwidth, that’s a staggering 79.4 bits/s/Hz. Received constellations 
and throughput display shown below.
Communication Systems and Networks 
Research Group 
Merchant Venturers Building,  
Woodland Road, Bristol. BS8 1TR 
@BristolCSN   
bristol.ac.uk/engineering/research/csn
This work is supported by EPSRC CDT in 
Communications (EP/I028153/1),the University 
of Bristol, Bristol City Council, Bristol Is Open 
(BIO), NEC, NI, and Nokia.
6 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Peter Bagot     
Peter Bagot received his MEng degree in computer science and electronics from the University 
of Bristol in 2011. In early 2016, he completed his doctorate on adaptive broadcast techniques 
from the same institution. He is working as a postdoctoral research assistant at the university 
investigating power amplifier characteristics over wide bandwidths. 
Mark Beach    
Mark Beach received his doctorate in 1989 from the University of Bristol for research on the 
application of smart antenna techniques to GPS. He later became a faculty member at the 
university, and was promoted to senior lecturer in 1996, reader in 1998, and professor in 2003. 
He was head of the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering from 2006 to 2010, 
and then spearheaded Bristol’s hosting of the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training (CDT) in 
Communications. He manages the delivery of the CDT in Communications, leads research on 
enabling technologies for the delivery of 5G and beyond wireless connectivity, and serves as the 
school research impact director. He conducts his research activities through the Communication 
Systems and Networks Group, so they form a key component within Bristol’s Smart Internet 
Lab. He has over 25 years of physical layer wireless research experience during which he has 
embraced the application of spread spectrum technology for cellular systems, adaptive or smart 
antenna for capacity and range extension in wireless networks, MIMO-aided connectivity for 
throughput enhancement, and flexible RF technologies for software defined radio modems.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 7
Spatially Adaptive TV Broadcast: Hardware-in-the-Loop Operational Analysis
Supervisors : Professors Mark Beach, Andrew Nix and Joe McGeehan
Research Student: Mr. Peter Bagot
Communication Systems and Networks Group, University of Bristol
Introduction 
■	 Broadcast antennas are installed and run on 
a ‘one-off’ basis, based on several planning 
assumptions which can never fully reflect  
real-world conditions
■	 This leads to an over engineering of the 
network which decreases the energy efficiency
■	 How the energy efficiency of a digital broadcast 
network can be optimised by adapting the 
coverage in real-time by using beamforming 
techniques based on user feedback
■	 DVB-T Amplifiers are inherently inefficient 
which adds to the energy efficiency problem
Hardware-in-the-Loop Experiment:  
Emulating an Adaptive Broadcast System
Block Diagram of the hardware-in-the-loop experiment 
■	 Multiple USRPs could be utilised to create multiple feedback nodes 
per antenna segment
■	 Channel fluctuations can be compensated per antenna segment
■	 Adaptive broadcast shown to reduce broadcast powers and maintain 
the same level of coverage
■	 DVB-T signal generated and fed into a channel emulator
■	 Emulator defines broadcast channel and signal fluctuations
■	 USRPs define the QoS of the channel
■	 Data fed to LabVIEW  for signal analysis 
■	 Signal analysis fed to Control algorithm
■	 Control alters the broadcast power to overcome the effects of the 
channel variations
■	 Process is repeated and the adaptive system is fully emulated 
An Adaptive Solution 
■	 Internet enabled user equipment will feedback relevant Quality of 
Service (QoS) metric data to a central controller
■	 Based on this feedback data, the broadcast powers and beam 
patterns can be altered to optimise the energy efficiency of the 
broadcast network
■	 This system is designed to not require every user in an area to be 
able to feedback data, limiting infrastructure overheads
Live TV Signal Analysis 
■	 72 hour, power in band recording of a live TV Broadcast, taken using 
a NI-USRP 2920 
■	 Intensity charts and Spectrum measurements constructed in LabVIEW
■	 Enabled the power fluctuations over time to be evaluated and 
then modelled within a channel emulator for the hardware in the 
loop experiment
Predicted Energy Savings  
to the UK DTT Network 
■	 Through this research it was shown that an adaptive system could 
reduce the ERP of a broadcast tower by between 20% and 35%
■	 Applying the estimated ERP reductions to the largest 49 UK 
broadcast sites would 
result in the yearly 
network savings shown 
in the table
■	 This shows a substantial 
reduction in the carbon 
footprint of the UK 
network, and would 
result in significant 
monetary savings
Predicted ERP 
Reductions
20% 35%
Electricity 
Reduction 
55,994,880
kWh
97,928,040 
kWh
Emission 
Reductions
25,863,635 kg 
CO2e
45,261,361 kg 
CO2e
Carbon
Reductions
7,060,772 kg 12,356,352 kg
Money Saved £6,155,547 £10,772,084
Equivalent carbon dioxide, kg CO2e, is the UK measure for the equivalent 
greenhouse gasses released into the atmosphere; it includes gases other 
than CO2, such as methane and nitrous oxide.
Communication Systems and Networks 
Research Group 
Merchant Venturers Building,  
Woodland Road, Bristol. BS8 1TR 
@BristolCSN   
bristol.ac.uk/engineering/research/csn
This work is supported by EPSRC (EP/
I028153/1), the University of Bristol, and BBC 
Research and Development
8 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Selahattin Gökceli    
Selahattin Gökceli received a bachelor’s degree in electronics and communication engineering 
from Istanbul Technical University (ITU) in Turkey in 2015. He is working on his master’s degree 
in telecommunication engineering at the same university. He has served as a member of the 
ITU Wireless Communication Research Laboratory since 2014. He is an NI Certified LabVIEW 
Associate Developer, and he has used LabVIEW as a programming tool in projects such 
as software defined radio implementations of OFDMA-based NCC systems, cooperative 
communication, and 5G techniques like full-duplex communication. His research interests 
include cooperative communication networks and 5G techniques. 
Semiha Tedik Basaran     
Semiha Tedik Basaran received bachelor’s and master’s degrees in telecommunication 
engineering from Istanbul Technical University in 2011 and 2014, respectively. She is working on 
a doctorate in telecommunication engineering at the university. Her research interests include 
full-duplex communication, power minimization of relay-aided transmission, network coding, and 
general communication theories.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 9
OFDMA-Based Network Coded Cooperation Testbed: Implementation  
and Performance Results
Selahattin Gökceli, Semiha Tedik Basaran, Günes Karabulut Kurt
Electronics and Communication Engineering, Istanbul Technical University
System Model 
■	 Network coding implies combining the received packets at intermediate 
nodes, and it can improve the transmission reliability or transmission 
rate, according to the soft forwarding technique [1]. Due to the broadcast 
nature of wireless networks, cooperative gain is inherently obtained 
in the network coding system, leading to network coded cooperation 
(NCC) systems [2].
■	 Transmission of multiple nodes can be ensured by using time-division 
multiple access (TDMA) or frequency-division multiple access (FDMA). 
As an efficient implementation of FDMA, orthogonal frequency-division 
multiple access (OFDMA)  can be used to serve multiple nodes under 
the condition of frequency-selective channels that may be encountered 
in both phases. 
■	 We investigated the performance of an NCC-OFDMA system through 
image transmission by using software defined radio nodes. The 
implementation details are given in [3]. As indicated with measurements, 
NCC is a very powerful technique for improving transmission quality. 
The proposed NCC-OFDMA scheme based on packet transmission 
significantly improves BER performance, according to direct 
transmission, and images can be received successfully. 
Model Parameters
Testbed and Implementation 
Results
References
[1] R. Ahlswede, N. Cai, S.-Y. R. Li, and R. W. Yeung, “Network information flow,” IEEE Trans. Inf. 
Theory, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1204–1216, July 2000.
[2] H. Topakkaya and Z. Wang, “Wireless network code design and performance analysis using 
diversity-multiplexing tradeoff,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 488–496, Feb. 2011.
[3] S. Gökceli, H. Alakoca, S. Tedik Basaran, G. Karabulut Kurt, “OFDMA-based Network Coded 
Cooperation: Design and Implementation Using Software Defined Radio Nodes,” EURASIP 
Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, EURASIP, 2016, November.
 
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank COST Action 1104 and The Scientific and Technological Research 
Council of Turkey-TUBITAK for funding this project (Grant ID: 113E294).
Figure 2. Received Images at Direct Link Figure 3. Received Images at Network Decoder Figure 4. Link Performance 
Comparison for Source Nodes
10 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Simon Yau      
Simon Yau received his bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Texas A&M University 
in College Station, Texas, and is pursuing his doctorate at the same institution. His research 
interests include prototyping Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols for wireless networks, 
with a focus on protocols involving real-time and QoS constraints, and cross-layer designs 
between the networking layer and the MAC layer. 
Ping-Chun Hsieh     
Ping-Chun Hsieh received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electronics engineering 
from National Taiwan University in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He is a doctoral candidate in 
the Department of ECE at Texas A&M University. His research interests focus on wireless 
communication networks, with an emphasis on MAC for wireless networks, wireless video 
streaming, and queueing theory. In addition to theoretical research, he is interested in the 
experimentation of wireless MAC protocols, especially for IEEE 802.11 WLANs.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 11
WiMAC: Rapid Implementation Platform for  
User-Definable MAC Protocols Through Separation
Simon Yau, Liang Ge, Ping-Chun Hsieh, I-Hong Hou, Shuguang Cui, P.R. Kumar Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Texas A&M University
Abstract 
This demo presents WiMAC, a general-purpose wireless testbed for 
researchers to quickly prototype a wide variety of real-time Medium 
Access Control (MAC) protocols for wireless networks. As the interface 
between the link layer and the physical layer, MAC protocols are often 
tightly coupled with the underlying physical layer, and need to have 
extremely small latencies. Very few MACs have ever been implemented 
even though dozens of new MAC protocols have been proposed. To 
enable quick prototyping, we employ the Mechanism versus Policy 
separation to decompose the functionality in the MAC layer and the 
PHY layer. Built on the separation framework, WiMAC achieves the 
independence of the software from the hardware, to offer a high 
degree of function reuse and design flexibility.
Motivation  
■	 In most of today’s 802.11 implementation, the MAC and PHY layers 
are very tightly coupled
■	 New protocols have to be redeveloped from the ground up, which 
presents two problems: 
■	 Long development time
■	 MAC developers have to implement PHY layer features (which lie 
outside their area of expertise)
■	 As a result, most protocols do not get tested beyond simulations
■	 Without testing protocols with over-the-air transmissions, we do not 
know how well these protocols actually work
■	 Our goal is to develop a platform that:
■	 Reflects 802.11 performance realistically
■	 Reduces protocol prototyping time
■	 Is capable of supporting a large class of MAC protocols
■	 Is upgradeable for future MAC designs (for example multichannel, 
directional antenna support)
WiMAC  
■	 Uses a Mechanism vs. Policy separation framework 
■	 Mechanism: Low-level operations that handle the real packet 
transmissions over the network
■	 Policy: High-level schemes for channel contention and packet 
scheduling)
■	 Features of WiMAC:
■	 Independence of software from hardware
■	 Enable protocol changes on-the-fly
■	 Supports cross-layer design
■	 Quick prototyping
What Protocals Have We Implemented?
■	 We have implemented 3 different protocols on our testbed  
as a starting point:
■	 CSMA [1]: most widely used protocol
■	 CHAIN [2]: improves uplink efficiency
■	 Weighted Transmission [3]: takes into account delay constraints/QoS
■	 This has given us valuable insights on some of the common 
mechanisms used in most MACs
Implementation Details
■	 Based on LabVIEW Communications System Design Suite 802.11 
Application Framework
■	 Used USRP-2953R for development
Future Work
■	 Examine other mechanisms that could be used in MAC protocols
■	 Implement more MAC protocols using the separation framework
■	 Enable all mechanisms to be controlled in software
Acknowledgements  
This material is based on work partially supported by AFOSR Contract FA9550-13-1-0008, NSF under 
Contract Nos. CNS-1302182, Science Technology Center Grant CCF-0939370, CNS-1343155, ECCS-
1305979, CNS-1265227, DoD with grant HDTRA1-13-1- 0029, and by grant NSFC-61328102.  
References
[1] L. Kleinrock and F. A. Tobagi, “Packet Switching in Radio Channels: Part I-Carrier Sense   
 Multiple-Access Modes and Their Throughput-Delay Characteristics” in IEEE Transactions on  
 Communications, Vol. Com-23, No. 17, December 1975, pp. 1400–1416.
[2] Z. Zeng, Y. Gao, P. R. Kumar, and K. Tan, “CHAIN: Introducing Minimum Controlled Coordination  
 into Random Access MAC” in Proc of IEEE INFOCOM 2011, April 2011, pp. 2669–2677.
[3] I. Hou and P. R. Kumar, “Utility Maximization for Delay Constrained QoS in Wireless” in  
 Proc. of INFOCOM 2010, March 2010, pp. 2426–2434.
Figure 1. Illustration of the Separation Framework
Figure 2. WiMAC Architecture
12 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Wenda Li      
Wenda Li received his master’s degree in electrical engineering from the University of Bristol in 
2013. He is a doctoral student in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the same university. 
His research interests include signal processing, indoor localization, and e-healthcare applications. 
Mark Beach    
Mark Beach received his doctorate in 1989 from the University of Bristol for research on the 
application of smart antenna techniques to GPS. He later became a faculty member at the 
university, and was promoted to senior lecturer in 1996, reader in 1998, and professor in 2003. 
He was head of the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering from 2006 to 2010, 
and then spearheaded Bristol’s hosting of the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training (CDT) in 
Communications. He manages the delivery of the CDT in Communications, leads research on 
enabling technologies for the delivery of 5G and beyond wireless connectivity, and serves as the 
school research impact director. He conducts his research activities through the Communication 
Systems and Networks Group, so they form a key component within Bristol’s Smart Internet 
Lab. He has over 25 years of physical layer wireless research experience during which he has 
embraced the application of spread spectrum technology for cellular systems, adaptive or smart 
antenna for capacity and range extension in wireless networks, MIMO-aided connectivity for 
throughput enhancement, and flexible RF technologies for software defined radio modems.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 13
Motivation 
■	 Non-contact breathing detection is valuable in intensive care 
monitoring, long term monitoring as well as in other non clinical fields 
such as the case of workers health monitoring (i.e. airplane pilots, 
firefighters, etc.)
■	 The passive radar enables the detection system to be both device-
free and source-free
Passive Radar System Model
■	 Source
■	 Energy harvesting 
transmitter 
■	 Receiver
■	 Data acquired from 
two  USRP-2921 
devices
CAF Mapping With Batch Processing
■	 CAF mapping is 
used for searching 
the target’s range 
and Doppler 
information
■	 Batch processing 
can reduce the 
computational power 
■	 Formula:
■	 τ – delay 
■	 fd – Doppler shift
■	           - is the surveillance and reference signal received from USRP
 Micro Doppler Extraction
■	 The traditional CAF spectrogram is 
unable to display the breathing signal
■	 The micro Doppler extraction 
compares the shape difference of 
each pulse in CAF mapping
■	 Traditional CAF Spectrogram: 
■	 Micro Doppler Extraction: 
Real System
Experiment Layout
Measured Result
We exam the performance of different distance between chest to 
surveillance antenna. Then compare with chest belt signal and calculate 
the mean square error and correlation coefficient.
■	 The proposed breathing detection system provides 
high correlation breathing signal up to 60 cm and 
correct breathing rate up to 100 cm. 
■	 The proposed system is a real-time design with an 
output rate of 5 reading per second
Non-Contact Breathing Detection Using Passive Radar
Supervisor: Dr. Robert. J. Piechocki  & Dr. Bo Tan 
Research Students: Mr. Wenda Li 
Communication Systems and Networks Group, University of Bristol
■	 Advantages
■	 Low-cost, no dedicated 
transmitter
■	 No dedicated frequency 
allocation
■	 Fast update
■	 Flexible deployment
■	 Disadvantages
■	 Operate in complicated 
geometry
■	 No direct control on  
transmit signal
■	                 - find the column 
contains maximum Doppler 
shift value 
■	   - the size of column length 
■	     - output the sign of value
Communication Systems and Networks Research Group 
Merchant Venturers Building,  
Woodland Road, Bristol. BS8 1TR 
@BristolCSN | bristol.ac.uk/engineering/research/csn
This work is supported by SPHERE IRC 
funded by the UK Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).
14 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Yi-Pin Lu    
Yi-Pin Lu received his bachelor’s degree in ESS from National Tsing Hua University in Hsinchu in 2002 and his master’s degree in electrical 
engineering from National Taiwan University (NTU) in Taipei in 2005. He has worked at Himax and Retronix (subsidiary of Renesas Electronics) 
for five years as a digital circuit design engineer for digital TV SOC solutions. From 2012 to 2013, he was an intern at Broadcom Inc. His research 
interests include MIMO detection algorithms and architectures, signal processing for digital communications, wireless multimedia streaming 
systems design, and digital integrated circuit design. In 2016, he received his doctorate degree from the NTU Graduate Institute of Electronics 
Engineering under the guidance of Tzi-Dar Chiueh for his research on next-generation wireless video streaming and prototyping using the 
FlexRIO SDR platform. 
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 15
An Implementation of a Fountain Code-Based MIMO-OFDM Receiver  
for Real-Time Wireless Video Streaming
Professor: Tzi-Dar Chiueh, MicroSystem Research Lab., Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University 
Student: Yi-Pin Lu, Yi-Feng Cheng, and Wei Lan
Objective 
Providing a prototype for how a real-time wireless video streaming 
system that includes low-latency RaptorQ code will function.
Wireless Video Streaming System Using 
Fountain Code  
Multimedia streaming is the major application for next-generation 
wireless transmission.
Real-time streaming cannot be realized because of the inefficient 
wireless network methodology. 
Fountain code can exclude the retransmission; it only gathers sufficient 
packets to decode, which is suitable for multimedia streaming.
RaptorQ code, the most advanced solution for fountain code, is used by 
the wireless video streaming system.
An FPGA implementation of both a RaptorQ decoder and a MIMO-OFDM 
receiver is realized using NI FPGAs.
In addition to an RF front end via a USRP-2943 device and a progressive 
video codec implemented via software, we developed the prototype for 
a high-performance real-time wireless video streaming system.
The resulting PSNR gain for the proposed scheme compared to 
the conventional ARQ scheme was more than 6 dB higher using the 
“Lena” pattern.
Design and Implementation of the Wireless 
Video Streaming System
Real-Time Wireless Video Streaming 
Prototype Powered by NI Products
Demonstration link: http://dodger.ee.ntu.edu.tw/video.htm
16 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Avishek Patra    
Avishek Patra received his M.Sc. degree in communications 
engineering from RWTH Aachen University in Germany and his 
B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering 
from Heritage Institute of Technology in India. He is pursuing an 
engineering doctorate degree at RWTH Aachen University, where 
he is working as a research assistant. His research interests are 
mmWave communication systems, future network architectures, 
and network management. 
Andreas Achtzehn     
Andreas Achtzehn received his engineering doctorate degree 
from RWTH Aachen University. He holds a diploma degree 
in computer engineering and a diploma degree in business 
administration and engineering from the same university. He 
is a study coordinator and senior researcher at the Institute 
for Networked Systems. His extended research interest is 
the system-wide design and optimization of next-generation 
communication networks, with a focus on radio-environment 
modeling, techno-economic assessments, and scalability issues 
in ultradense network deployments. 
Marina Petrova    
Marina Petrova is an assistant professor of electrical engineering 
and information technology at RWTH Aachen University. She 
is also a chief research scientist at the Institute for Networked 
Systems. Her research interests focus on cognitive radios 
and cognitive wireless networks, adaptive wireless systems 
technologies, and resource optimization problems in wireless 
networks. She has actively participated in several EU-funded 
international cooperative projects and industry projects in the 
field of wireless communications and cognitive radios. Moreover, 
she is involved in research on prototyping the implementation of 
resource management solutions for cognitive radios. She holds 
a degree in electrical engineering and telecommunications from 
Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Macedonia, and an 
engineering doctorate degree from RWTH Aachen University.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 17
ULLA-X: A Programmatic Middleware Enabling Large-Scale  
and Distributed Wireless Experimentation
Avishek Patra, Andreas Achtzehn, and Marina Petrova
Institute for Networked Systems RWTH Aachen University Aachen, Germany 
Motivation 
The control and automation of wireless experimentation can be tedious. 
It often slows down researchers and practitioners aiming to evaluate new 
algorithms and RF designs in distributed and large-scale setups.
Wireless systems research in particular often requires pervasive 
reconfiguration capabilities, but is hampered by heterogeneous control 
facilities and domain-specific control tools.
We aim to bridge this pertinent gap with a new middleware that 
enables network-based control through easily accessible, generic, 
and powerful interfaces. 
Our Proposal
We propose ULLA-X, a middleware that:
■	 Resides in between custom user applications and technology-
dependent radio implementations
■	 Provides easy, generic, and centralized access to lower layer 
configurations for higher layer research applications
■	 Enables the automation of recurring configuration and logging tasks 
with automatic event handling
■	 Offers a domain-specific declarative programming language that 
allows users to specify tasks in a unified and simple manner
Architecture 
The ULLA-X core interacts with user 
applications through a standard network 
protocol. It schedules monitoring tasks, 
collects device statistics, and reacts to 
state changes based on  trigger events.
The core connects to the different 
radio systems through vendor-specific 
connector modules that transform read 
and write statements into the respective 
query and configuration commands. For 
integrating reference design specifics, 
simple description and configuration files 
are employed.
ULLA-X offers advanced management 
capabilities, or example auto discovery 
and distributed control schemes.
ULLA-X and NI Products 
Through connectors for the NPSV 
subsystem of LabVIEW, ULLA-X 
integrates seamlessly into the NI 
products ecosystem.
Controls for new and existing reference 
designs can be easily made accessible 
through exposure in the LabVIEW design 
software. This allows for rapid prototyping 
with custom radio reference designs.
In recent demonstrations, we have shown 
the wide application space of ULLA-X, for 
example by simultaneously monitoring 
and reconfiguring USRP-2952R devices 
acting as IEEE 802.11 transceivers and 
FlexRIO-controlled NI 5791 RF front ends 
emulating LTE.
18 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Enoch Yeh      
Enoch Yeh is a doctoral student in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at 
The University of Texas at Austin under the supervision of Robert W. Heath Jr. He received 
his bachelor’s in electrical engineering from UT-Austin in 2014. His research interests include 
wireless communications, communications and radar in vehicular networks, and wireless 
networking. He is working on improving a prototype of a joint radar and communications 
framework for 802.11p (DSRC) that is designed specifically for forward collision warning and 
avoidance in automotive radar. 
Robert W. Heath Jr.     
Robert W. Heath Jr. received his doctorate in electrical engineering from Stanford University in 2002. 
From 1998 to 2001, he was a senior member of the technical staff and then a senior consultant at 
Iospan Wireless Inc. in San Jose, California. There he worked on the design and implementation 
of the physical and link layers of the first commercial MIMO-OFDM communication system. 
Since January 2002, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
at The University of Texas at Austin where he is a Cullen Trust for Higher Education endowed 
professor and a member of the Wireless Networking and Communications Group. He is also 
president and CEO of MIMO Wireless Inc., chief innovation officer at Kuma Signals LLC, and a 
member of the executive team at PHAZR Inc. His research interests include several aspects of 
wireless communication and signal processing: limited feedback techniques, multihop networking, 
multiuser and multicell MIMO, interference alignment, adaptive video transmission, manifold 
signal processing, and millimeter wave communication techniques. He is a coauthor of the book 
Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications published by Prentice Hall in 2014.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 19
Forward Collision Vehicular Radar With IEEE 802.11: 
Feasibility Demonstration Through Measurements
Enoch R. Yeh, Robert C. Daniels, and Robert W. Heath, Jr. | Wireless Networking and Communications Group 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Motivation 
■	 NTSB mandate requiring frontal collision detection and avoidance on all  
new vehicles [NTSB15]
■	 mmWave RADARs are expensive, susceptible to spoofing, and do not accompany a 
communication network[CB87]
■	 IEEE 802.11 devices are widely available and compatible with IEEE 802.11p [JD08]
■	 Implementation possible with low-bandwidth requirement: 20 MHz at 5 GHz band 
Range Estimation Algorithm
■	 Predefined set of frequency and phase offset candidates
■	 Brute force minimization matches received channel estimate to the cosine  
signal model
■	 Returns range arguments associated with the best fit cosine with the least residuals
■	 Demonstrated meter-level accuracy up to 50 m in simulated environment
■	 Figure 2. RMS Range Error Using IEEE 802.11 Packets in a 20 MHz Channel With  
a Single Target With Variable Range (5–50 m) in a Simulated Environment
Two-Path Link Model 
■	 Complex-Baseband Link Model
■	 OFDM Channel Estimate
■	 Mean-Normalized Channel Energy
Measurements and Results Platform 
NI Hardware: USRP RIO (2953R)
NI Software: LabVIEW FPGA 2014
Future Work
Optimization Performance via Design, Multitarget Localization, Extensions for Pedestrian Targets, 
Compact Vehicular Implementation and Design
Figure 1. Illustration of Link Model: The IEEE 802.11p 
PHY is connected to separate transmit (TX) and 
receive (RX) RF chains. Path 2 is the reflected path 
from the ranging target. 
Table 1. Hardware Specifications for Measurement Platform
Figure 2. RMS Range Error Using IEEE 802.11 Packets 
in a 20 MHz Channel With a Single Target With Variable 
Range (5–50 m) in a Simulated Environment 
Figure 4. IEEE 802.11 RadCom Link Setup for Measurements: 
During measurements, the antenna edges were separated by 
a minimum of 0.5 m. 
Figure 3. Block Diagram Description of RF Components in the 
Measurements Campaign
Table 2. Implementation Parameters
Figure 5. RMS range error on a single target with variable 
range from 5 to 30m. Post-calibration estimates are presented.
Table 3. Range Estimate Statistics
References:
[NTSB15] “Use of Forward Collision Avoidance Systems to Prevent and Mitigate Rear-End Crashes,” National Transportation Safety Board, 2015.
[CB87] N. Currie and C. Brown, Principles and applications of millimeter-wave radar, Artech House, 1987.
[JD08] Daniel Jiang and Luca Delgrossi, “IEEE 802.11p: Towards an international standard for wireless access in vehicular environments,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 2008, pp. 2036–2040.
Acknowledgements:
This research was partially supported by the U.S. Department of Transportation through the Data-Supported Transportation Operations and
Planning (D-STOP) Tier 1 University Transportation Center and by the Texas Department of Transportation under Project 0-6877 entitled
“Communications and Radar-Supported Transportation Operations and Planning (CAR-STOP)”. Dr. Daniels is also with Kuma Signals, LLC.
20 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Naofal Al-Dhahir  
Naofal Al-Dhahir is an Erik Jonsson Distinguished Professor at 
The University of Texas at Dallas. He earned his doctorate degree 
in electrical engineering from Stanford University.  From 1994 
to 2003, he was a principal member of the technical staff at GE 
Research and AT&T Shannon Laboratory. He is coinventor of 40 
issued US patents, coauthor of over 300 papers, and corecipient 
of four IEEE best paper awards. He is editor-in-chief of IEEE 
Transactions on Communications and an IEEE Fellow. 
Brian L. Evans   
Brian L. Evans is the Engineering Foundation Professor at 
The University of Texas at Austin. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering and computer science from 
the Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology and master’s and 
doctorate degrees in electrical engineering from Georgia Tech. 
From 1993 to 1996, he was a researcher at the University of 
California, Berkeley. His research and teaching efforts bridge 
signal processing theory and real-time implementation of digital 
communications and image/video processing systems. He has 
published 240 papers and three books, and has graduated 26 
doctoral students. Through students, publications, and software 
releases, his research has had a significant impact on HP, Intel, 
NI, NXP, Qualcomm, Schlumberger, Texas Instruments, and 
Xerox, among other companies. An IEEE Fellow, he has won 
three best paper awards and three teaching awards. 
Mostafa Sayed   
Mostafa Sayed received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees 
in electrical engineering from Cairo University, Giza, in 2008 
and 2013, respectively. He is working on his doctorate degree 
in electrical engineering at The University of Texas at Dallas. 
From 2008 to 2013, he was a system design engineer at Varkon 
(Wasiela) Semiconductors in Cairo, where he worked on the 
design of hardware-oriented digital signal processing algorithms 
for wireless communications receivers. As an intern at Texas 
Instruments in Dallas during summers 2014 and 2015, he 
worked on PHY layer algorithm design for low-power powerline 
and wireless smart grid communications. His current research 
interests include smart grid communications, the design of 
wireless and powerline communication systems, and the 
implementation of hardware-efficient signal processing algorithms.
Ghadi Sebaali   
Ghadi Sebaali received her bachelor’s degree in computer and 
communication engineering from the American University of Beirut 
(AUB) in 2014. She is pursuing her master’s and doctorate degrees 
in electrical and computer engineering at The University of Texas 
at Austin. Her research interests include interference cancellation 
and coexistence algorithms for wireless communication systems    
in Austin, Texas, during summer 2015, she worked with the 
Microcontrollers Connectivity Team on modeling communication 
systems and verifying radio board specifications. She is the recipient 
of several awards: Nikola Tesla Electrical Engineering Scholar Honor 
(declined) of Columbia University, Mudarri Scholar Fund from the 
Boston University Study Abroad Office, Merit Scholarship, Creative 
Achievement Award, and a Best Paper Award from AUB. 
Junmo Sung    
Junmo Sung received bachelor’s degrees in electrical engineering 
from Kyungpook National University and The University of Texas 
at Dallas in 2010 through a dual-degree program. He received his 
master’s degree from The University of Texas at Dallas in 2012. 
From 2012 to 2015, he worked for NI in Seoul, South Korea, 
where he designed and implemented a real-time frequency 
division MIMO receiver on an FPGA and conducted research 
on 5G cellular communications systems. He is pursuing his 
doctorate degree in electrical and computer engineering at The 
University of Texas at Austin. His research interests include 
interference mitigation techniques, heterogeneous wireless 
networks, and multiuser MIMO systems. 
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 21
Diversity and Coexistence Within Smart Grid Communications
Prof. Brian L. Evans, Wireless Networking and Communications Group, The University of Texas at Austin
Students: Ms. Ghadi Sebaali and Mr. Junmo Sung 
Current Collaborators: Prof. Naofal Al-Dhahir (UT Dallas) and Mr. Mostafa Sayed (UT Dallas)Past Collaborators: Dr. Jing Lin (Qualcomm), 
Dr. Marcel Nassar (Samsung), Dr. Aditya Chopra (NI)
Sponsors: Semiconductor Research Corporation GRC under Task Id 1836.133 (from Freescale and Texas Instruments)
1. Project Overview 
Focus
Neighborhood-area smart utility network between a data concentrator 
and smart meters along two paths
Current Work
■	 Add simultaneous wireless communication to the PLC testbed
■	 Evaluate communication performance versus complexity trade-offs 
for wireless diversity methods
Project Webpage: http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~bevans/projects/plc/index.html
2.1. Wireless/PLC Diversity
■	 Nonidentical channel, noise, and interference statistics
■	 Maximal ratio combining is a maximum likelihood optimal technique 
for AWGN
■	 OFDM transmission with 256 subchannels and BPSK modulation
■	 0.4 MHz sample rate
■	 Wireless link noise model: Gaussian mixture with two components
■	 PLC noise model: cyclostationary noise
2.2. Coexistence Mechanisms
2.3. Testbed
Objective: Improve reliability of smart grid communications
Goal 
Integrating customers in the grid
■	 Scale voltage with energy 
demand
■	 Bill customer using real-time rates
■	 Analyze customer load profiles
■	 Improve system reliability
Limitations 
Signal attenuation in propagation 
channel
■	 Reflections at impedance 
discontinuities 
■	 Noise or interference
■	 Frequency selectivity
■	 802.11ah and 802.15.4g standards share the 900 MHz ISM band
■	 Path loss (PL) model used is outdoor large-zone model
■	 Interference model is used as follows: d(Rxv, Txv) = dD and d(Rxi, Txi) = dU
■	 Metric used is desired/undesired signal ratio
■	 A real-time hardware/software testbed for wired MIMO OFDM 
communication 
■	 Algorithms evaluated: bit allocation, time equalization, far-end 
crosstalk cancellation (zero-forcing and successive interference)
Project Components 
■	 Interference mitigation
■	 PLC/wireless diversity
■	 Coexistence mechanisms
■	 PLC/wireless testbed
22 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
George R. MacCartney Jr.     
George R. MacCartney Jr. received his bachelor’s and master’s 
degrees in electrical engineering from Villanova University in 
2010 and 2011, respectively. He is pursuing a doctorate degree 
in electrical engineering at the New York University (NYU) 
Tandon School of Engineering under the supervision of Theodore 
Rappaport with the NYU WIRELESS Research Center. He has 
authored or coauthored over 20 technical papers in the field of 
millimeter-wave (mmWave) measurements and models. His 
research interests include mmWave channel sounder prototyping 
and mmWave measurements, models, and analysis for 5G 
communications. 
Shu Sun     
Shu Sun received a bachelor’s degree in applied physics from 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China in 2012 and a master’s 
degree in electrical engineering from the NYU Tandon School 
of Engineering in 2014. She is pursuing a doctorate degree 
in electrical engineering under the supervision of Theodore 
Rappaport at NYU while conducting research at the NYU 
WIRELESS Research Center. She has authored or co-authored 
over 20 technical papers in the field of mmWave wireless 
communications. Her current research interests include mmWave 
mobile communications and the analysis of MIMO systems for 
mmWave channels. 
Theodore (Ted) S. Rappaport     
Ted Rappaport is the David Lee/Ernst Weber Professor of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering with the NYU Tandon School of 
Engineering and the founding director of the NYU WIRELESS 
Research Center. He also holds professorship positions with the 
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and the NYU School of 
Medicine. In addition to the NYU WIRELESS Research Center, he 
founded major wireless research centers at the Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University (MPRG) and The University of Texas 
at Austin (WNCG). He also founded two wireless technology 
companies that were sold to publicly traded firms. He is a highly 
sought-after technical consultant who has testified before the 
US Congress and served the ITU. He has advised more than 100 
students. He holds more than 100 patents issued and pending and 
has authored or coauthored several books, including the best-seller 
Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice (Second Edition, 
Prentice Hall, 2002). His latest book, entitled Millimeter Wave 
Wireless Communications (Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2015), is the first 
comprehensive text on the subject.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 23
A Flexible Millimeter-Wave Channel Sounder With Absolute Timing
George R. MacCartney Jr., Shu Sun, and Theodore S. Rappaport (Advisor)
I. Channel Sounder Transmitter 
■	 FPGA–generated PN sequence via leap-forward linear feedback shift 
register state machine with PXIe-7966R FlexRIO FPGA
■	 200 Mcps to 500 Mcps ! 400 MHz to 1 GHz RF null-to-null bandwidth
TX System Block Diagram
TX LabVIEW Front Panel and Block Diagram
II. Gimbal and Track Control  
■	 Full control of gimbal and linear track via PS3 remote through LabVIEW 
with controls for AGC, signal acquisition, and antenna positioning
III. Channel Sounder Receiver
■	 IQ baseband acquisition with NI-5771R and PXIe-7966R FlexRIO 
FPGA for high-speed continuous acquisition into DRAM
■	 Real-Time undilated power delay profiles (PDPs)
■	 Option for time-dilated PDPs via traditional sliding correlation method
■	 Absolute propagation delay PDPs with synchronized Rubidium 
references via 1 PPS and time-based digital trigger with PXI trigger lines
■	 Automatic azimuth sweeps and linear track sweeps
■	 Sliding correlator oscilloscope AGC control and live feedback for 
acquisitions outside linear range
■	 Future Work:
■	 Control of TX from RX over WiFi
■	 Estimate channel Doppler
■	 Full AGC control   
RX System Block Diagram
RX LabVIEW Front Panel
IV. Dynamic Human Blocking Measurements
■	 NI-based channel sounder allows for high-speed acquisition of 
periodic PDPs to understand channel dynamics and human blocking 
attenuation over short time frames
■	 Current system can record 41,000 consecutive PDPs in a minimum 
period of 32.752 µs with a multipath time resolution of 2 ns
■	 Measurements (41-49) conducted with human blocker walking 
perpendicular to LOS point-to-point link (5 m T-R separation distance) 
at 0.5 m increments from 0.5 m to 4.5 m
LOS Bin Power
■	 Increases in signal strength up to 2 dB on average when entering 
blockage region (di˙raction/constructive interference)
■	 Portions of small-scale fading when in the shadow/blockage region, 
with signal attenuated by only 14 to 17 dB for the 2.5 m measurement 
(halfway between TX and RX) compared to the other cases
■	 Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2FllwyyQKb8
24 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Leo Laughlin     
Leo Laughlin received an M.Eng. degree in electronic engineering 
from the University of York in the UK in 2011. Between 2011 
and 2015, he was a doctoral student at the University of Bristol, 
where his work on novel transceiver architectures for 4G and 
5G mobile devices was sponsored by u-blox AG. From 2009 to 
2010, he worked at Qualcomm on physical layer DSP for GSM 
receivers. In 2011, he worked on radio geolocation systems at 
Omnisense Ltd. He received funding to continue his research 
activities beyond his doctorate as a senior research associate in the 
Communications Systems and Networks Laboratory working on 
self-interference cancellation technologies for in-band full-duplex 
and tunable frequency-division duplexing applications. He received 
the York Probe Prize for best M.Eng. graduate in 2011 and won 
the Technology Everywhere category at the 2015 EPSRC UK ICT 
Pioneers competition. 
Chunqing (Jack) Zhang     
Jack Zhang received a master’s degree in telecommunication and 
information systems from Beijing Jiaotong University in China in 
2004. Since 2014, he has pursued a doctorate at the University of 
Bristol, where he is working on a novel transceiver architecture for 
4G and 5G mobile devices under the supervision of Mark Beach 
and Kevin Morris. He also worked as a research assistant for the 
Communication Systems and Networks Group in the Department 
of Electrical and Electronic Engineering. Between 2004 and 2014, 
he worked in the R&D and testing departments of Datang Mobile 
Telecommunication Equipment Co. Ltd. in Beijing. 
Mark Beach     
Mark Beach received his doctorate in 1989 from the University 
of Bristol for research on the application of smart antenna 
techniques to GPS. He later became a faculty member at the 
university, and was promoted to senior lecturer in 1996, reader in 
1998, and professor in 2003. He was head of the Department of 
Electrical and Electronic Engineering from 2006 to 2010, and then 
spearheaded Bristol’s hosting of the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral 
Training (CDT) in Communications. He manages the delivery of the 
CDT in Communications, leads research on enabling technologies 
for the delivery of 5G and beyond wireless connectivity, and 
serves as the school research impact director. He conducts his 
research activities through the Communication Systems and 
Networks Group, so they form a key component within Bristol’s 
Smart Internet Lab. He has over 25 years of physical layer wireless 
research experience during which he has embraced the application 
of spread spectrum technology for cellular systems, adaptive 
or smart antenna for capacity and range extension in wireless 
networks, MIMO-aided connectivity for throughput enhancement, 
and flexible RF technologies for software defined radio modems.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 25
In-Band Full-Duplex Radio Transceiver Architecture for 5G Mobile Handsets
Supervisors: Professor Mark Beach and John Haine , Dr Kevin Morris
Researcher Students: Mr Leo Laughlin and Mr ,Chunqing (Jack) Zhang
Communications Systems and Networks Group, University of Bristol
Motivation 
■	 In-band Full Duplex allows simultaneous Tx and Rx on the same 
frequency, potentially doubling spectral efficiency, but requires high 
levels of self-interference cancellation.
Goal 
■	 Implement self-interference cancellation using low cost, small form 
factor implementation technologies to enable in-band full duplex 
operation in mobile devices.
Traditionally, co-channel self-interference has been avoided: TDD and 
FDD avoid self-interference using separate channels for Tx and Rx.
Instead, self-interference can be cancelled to enable  
In-band Full Duplex
Tunable balancing impedance is adjusted to cause signals to cancel out in 
a hybrid junction
■	 Signal processing for cancellation and hardware control 
implemented in LabView
■	 Interfaced with 2x Vector Signal Transceivers which 
implement Tx, Rx, and cancellation signal generation
Communication Systems and Networks Research Group 
Merchant Venturers Building,  
Woodland Road, Bristol. BS8 1TR 
@BristolCSN | bristol.ac.uk/engineering/research/csn
Novel Self-Interference Cancelling Transceiver Architecture 
Combines Electrical Balance Duplexing With Active Cancellation
After the first stage of cancellation in the hybrid junction there is still 
some residual interference
■	 Residual self Interference reduced by actively injecting a  
cancellation signal
■	 Suitable for small form factor multiband mobile devices: requires just  
one antenna, can be implemented using low cost technologies
■	 Can be tuned over wide frequency ranges
Residual self Interference reduced by actively injecting cancellation signal
[1] L. Laughlin, et. al., “Passive and active electrical balance duplexers,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: 
Express Briefs., vol. 63, no. 1.   
[2] L. Laughlin, et. al., “A widely tunable full duplex transceiver combining electrical balance isolation and active analog 
cancellation,” in Proc. VTC 2015 Glasgow, May 2015.
This work is supported by 
EPSRC (EP/I028153/1), the 
University of Bristol, and u-blox.
Achieves >80 dB self-interference cancellation
■	 Uses half the spectral resources 
compared to TDD and FDD
■	 Up to double the capacity
■	 Requires high levels of self-
interference cancellation
Hardware Prototype
26 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Gerhard P. Fettweis      
Gerhard P. Fettweis earned his doctorate under H. Meyr’s 
supervision from RWTH Aachen University in 1990. After one 
year at IBM Research in San Jose, California, he moved to TCSI 
Inc. in Berkeley. Since 1994, he has served as the Vodafone Chair 
Professor at TU Dresden, Germany, and has been conducting 
research on wireless transmission and chip design with the 
sponsorship of 20 companies from Asia, Europe, and the United 
States. He coordinates two German Research Foundation (DFG) 
centers at TU Dresden, cfaed and HAEC. He is an IEEE Fellow, a 
member of the German academy acatech, and a recipient of the 
Stuart Meyer Memorial Award from IEEE VTS. In Dresden, he 
created 11 startups and set up funded projects worth nearly half 
a billion euros. He has helped organize IEEE conferences, most 
notably as TPC chair of ICC 2009 and of TTM 2012 and as general 
chair of VTC Spring 2013 and DATE 2014.
Martin Danneberg       
Martin Danneberg received his master’s degree in electrical 
engineering from Technische Universität Dresden in 2013. From 
2008 to 2012, he worked as a student assistant for the Vodafone 
Chair on the EASY-C project. His final thesis focused on the 
development of a backplane for a phased array. He serves as 
a member of the Vodafone Chair Mobile Communications 
Systems department and participates in several research and 
industry projects, for example, eWINE, SATURN, and the NI Lead 
User Program. His professional interests include FPGA-based 
prototyping of communication systems, cognitive radio, and novel 
applications of flexible waveforms in future 5G networks.
Nicola Michailow     
Nicola Michailow received his Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical 
engineering with a focus on wireless communications and 
information theory from Technische Universität Dresden in 2010. 
From 2008 to 2009, he developed signal processing algorithms 
for sensor data analysis for the R&D department at Asahi Kasei 
Corporation in Japan. Since 2010, he has served as a research 
associate for the Vodafone Chair. He received his Dr.-Ing. degree 
in 2015, and his professional interests include nonorthogonal 
waveforms for future 5G cellular systems, new applications 
like the Internet of Things and the Tactile Internet, and the 
FPGA-based prototype implementation of flexible multicarrier 
modulation schemes. He currently focuses on software defined 
radios for NI.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 27
Flexible GFDM FPGA Implementation With Support to Run-Time Reconfiguration
Martin Danneberg, Nicola Michailow and Prof. Dr. Gerhard Fettweis–Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
Motivation 
Innovative 5G applications will challenge future cellular systems with new 
requirements. The OFDM-based 4G standard cannot address all of them. 
Generalized frequency-division multiplexing is a flexible multicarrier waveform 
with additional degrees of freedom. This poster presents a strategy toward a 
flexible FPGA implementation of GFDM [1], which is reconfigurable at run time 
using the LabVIEW Communications System Design Suite.
Flexible GFDM Transmitter Algorithm
Results
■	 Flexible FPGA design
■	 Parameters configurable 
on run time:
■	 Subcarriers K
■	 Subsymbols M
■	 Pulse shaping filter
■	 Time window
■	 Cyclic prefix
■	 Resource map
■	 Trainings sequence
Generalized Frequency-Division Multiplexing 
(GFDM)
Flexible Resource Grid
Pulse Shaping Filter
Prototype
Harware and Software Platform
FPGA Implementation
Further Reading
1] N. Michailow et. al, “Generalized Frequency Division Multiplexing for 5th Generation Cellular 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3045–3061, 2014.
28 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Mingming Cai        
Mingming Cai received a bachelor’s degree in automation engineering from Nanjing University 
of Aeronautics and Astronautics in China in 2011 and a master’s degree in electrical engineering 
from the University of Notre Dame in Indiana in 2014. He is pursuing his doctorate in electrical 
engineering at Notre Dame. His research interests include wireless communication, cognitive 
radios, software defined radios, and millimeter wave communication. 
J. Nicholas Laneman      
J. Nicholas Laneman is founding director of the Wireless Institute in the College of Engineering, a 
professor of electrical engineering, and a fellow of the John J. Reilly Center for Science, Technology, 
and Values at the University of Notre Dame. He joined the faculty in August 2002 shortly after 
earning a doctorate in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. His research and teaching interests include communications architecture (a blend of 
information theory), error-control coding, signal processing for communications, network protocols, 
and hardware design with an emphasis on wireless systems.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 29
An LTE-Based Wideband Distributed Spectrum Sharing Architecture 
Mingming Cai (mcai@nd.edu) and J. Nicholas Laneman (jnl@nd.edu) University of Notre Dame
Abstract 
A radio architecture is developed for distributed spectrum sharing among 
secondary users (SUs) in a localized area and a wide band of frequencies. 
Based on an OFDM physical layer, the architecture allows multiple pairs 
of SUs to utilize one or more subchannels within the band without 
causing harmful interference to each other. A prototype implementation 
of the architecture has been developed using NI USRP RIO devices and 
the LabVIEW Communications System Design Suite and LTE Application 
Framework System tests show that the spectrum sharing efficiency of 
the implemented distributed spectrum sharing system is close to an 
upper bound when signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is high enough.
System Architecture
Flexible Physical Layer
LTE Application Framework Modifications:
■	 Channelize 100 physical resource blocks (PRBs) into 10 PRB groups 
(PRBGs) in PHY
■	 Energy detection for wideband spectrum sensing
■	 Various multichannel random access protocols, for example,  
CSMA, MRAH
■	 Multiple sync loops for immediate rendezvous
■	 Single demodulation and decoding loop to save FPGA resources
■	 More details in paper
Spectrum Analyzer
■	 Spectrum sensing based on energy detection
■	 Side lobes and IQ imbalance cause detection issues requiring fine tuning
MAC: Multichannel CSMA
■	 Spectrum sharing efficiency[2] increases as N increases
■	 System has better performance when N ≥ M
References
[1] M. Cai and J. N. Laneman, “Database- and sensing-based distributed spectrum sharing: 
Flexible physical layer prototyping,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems, and Computers, 
Monterey, CA, Nov. 2015.
[2] M. Cai and J. N. Laneman, “An LTE-based wideband distributed spectrum sharing 
architecture,” in Proc. SDR WInnComm, Washington, DC, Mar. 2015.
Scenario Considered
Physical Layer Structure 
Spectrum Analyzer Structure 
Side Lobe and IQ Imbalance 
30 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
MinKeun Chung     
MinKeun Chung received his bachelor’s degree in electrical and electronic engineering from 
Yonsei University in Korea in 2010. He is a doctoral candidate in the Mobile Communication 
Laboratory and the Convergence Communications Networking Laboratory at Yonsei University 
under the joint supervision of Dong Ku Kim and Chan-Byoung Chae. He was a research intern 
with the Advanced Wireless Research Team at NI in Austin, Texas, in summers 2013 and 2015. 
His main research interests are future wireless communication systems design and FPGA-based 
physical layer real-time prototyping. He was a corecipient of the Samsung Humantech Paper 
Award in 2016. From 2004 to 2009, he also received a scholarship for engineering students 
from the Korea Student Aid Foundation (KOSAF). From 2010 to 2015, he was awarded a full 
scholarship from the Samsung Electronics academic-industrial collaboration program. 
Chan-Byoung Chae      
Chan-Byoung Chae is an Associate Professor in the School of Integrated Technology, College of 
Engineering, Yonsei University, Korea. He was a Member of Technical Staff (Research Scientist) 
at Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent, Murray Hill, NJ, USA from June 2009 to Feb 2011. Before 
joining Bell Laboratories, he was with the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, USA as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow under the supervision of Vahid 
Tarokh. He received the Ph.D. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from The University 
of Texas (UT), Austin, TX, USA in 2008 under the supervision of Robert W. Heath, Jr., where 
he was a member of the Wireless Networking and Communications Group (WNCG). Prior to 
joining UT, he was a Research Engineer at the Advanced Research Lab., the Telecommunications 
R&D Center, Samsung Electronics, Suwon, Korea, from 2001 to 2005. He was a Visiting 
Scholar at the WING Lab, Aalborg University, Denmark in 2004 and at University of Minnesota, 
MN, USA in August 2007 to work with Nihar Jindal. While having worked at Samsung, he 
participated in the IEEE 802.16e standardization, where he made several contributions and filed 
a number of related patents from 2004 to 2005. His current research interests include capacity 
analysis and interference management in energy-efficient wireless mobile networks and nano 
(molecular) communications.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 31
Full Duplex SISO/MIMO Radios
MinKeun Chung, Min Soo Sim, Dong Ku Kim, Chan-Byoung Chae
Introduction
Motivation 
■	 A candidate for creating a new 
breakthrough to alleviate the 
spectrum crunch
■	 Theoretical throughput doubling
Objective 
■	 Prototyping a real-time full duplex SISO / MIMO radio system for 
5G wireless networks
■	 Practical throughput doubling achievement
Proposed Full Duplex SISO/MIMO Architectures
PHY Parameters
Prototype Setup
Analog Self-Interference Canceler
■	 Dual-Polarization Based Full  
Duplex Antenna
Digital Self-Interference Canceler
■	 NI PXIe-1082 Chassis
■	 NI PXIe-8135 Real-Time Controller   
■	 NI 5791R RF Transceiver
■	 NI PXIe-7975 FlexRIO FPGA Module
Demo Results
Full Duplex SISO Radios
Full Duplex MIMO Radios * Full duplex MIMO: Partially collaborated with LG Electronics
M. K. Chung, M. Sim, J. Kim, D.-K. Kim, and C.-B. Chae, “Prototyping Real-Time Full Duplex 
Radios,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 56-63, Sep. 2015.
"Real-Time Full Duplex SISO System" Demo 
at IEEE Globecom '14
32 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Swapnil Mhaske        
Swapnil Mhaske received his bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from the University of 
Pune in India and his master’s degree from Rutgers University in Piscataway, New Jersey. He 
is a graduate assistant in the Wireless Information and Networking Laboratory (WINLAB) at 
Rutgers, where he is working on his doctorate under the guidance of Predrag Spasojevic. His 
area of research is design and implementation of efficient channel-coding schemes for wireless 
systems. He has interned with the Advanced Wireless Research and the Software R&D groups 
at NI, where he worked on the development of channel-coding systems on the FPGA. 
Predrag Spasojevic       
Predrag Spasojevic received his Diploma of Engineering degree from the University of Sarajevo 
School of Electrical Engineering in 1990 and his master’s and doctorate degrees in electrical 
engineering from Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas, in 1992 and 1999, respectively. 
From 2000 to 2001, he worked as a Lucent postdoctoral fellow at WINLAB in the Electrical and 
Computer Engineering Department at Rutgers University. He is an associate professor in the same 
department, and his research interests include communication and information theory and signal 
processing. He was an associate editor of the IEEE Communications Letters from 2002 to 2004 
and served as a cochair of the DIMACS Princeton-Rutgers Seminar Series in Information Sciences 
and Systems from 2003 to 2004. He served as a technical program cochair for the IEEE Radio and 
Wireless Symposium in 2010. From 2008 to 2011, he was publications editor of IEEE Transactions of 
Information Theory.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 33
High-Throughput FPGA Architectures for Channel Coding
Swapnil Mhaske, Predrag Spasojevic, Rutgers University  
Hojin Kee, Tai Ly, Ahsan Aziz, National Instruments
Impact of 5G Requirements
Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) Decoding
Standard Acceptance
Architecture-Aware Design
Research Methodology
Prototyping in LabVIEW Communications
High-Throughput Architecture
Strategies for Channel Coding
■	 Develop code structures that result in low encoding and decoding latency
■	 Algorithmic Optimization:
■	 Identify algorithmic dependencies and parallelize
■	 Develop algorithmic approximations to reduce complexity
■	 Develop efficient methods for rate adaptation to implement  
rate-compatible architecture
2.5 Gb/s LDPC Decoder
Algorithmic Description Schematic [4], [5]
Resource Utilization [4]   Error-Rate Performance [4]
Design Choices
Main References
[1] “5G Radio Access,” Ericsson, 2014.
[2] METIS Deliverable D2.1, “Requirement analysis and design approaches for 5G air interface,” 2013.
[3] S. Mhaske, H. Kee, T. Ly, A. Aziz, and P. Spasojevic, “High-Throughput FPGA-based QC-LDPC Decoder   
 Architecture,” in VTC Fall, 2015 IEEE 82nd, Sep 2015, pp. 1–5.
[4] S. Mhaske, D. Uliana, H. Kee, T. Ly, A. Aziz, and P. Spasojevic, A 2.48Gb/s FPGA-based QC-LDPC Decoder:   
 An Algorithmic Compiler Implementation,” in Sarnoff Symposium, 36th IEEE, Sep 2015.
[5] H. Kee, D. Uliana, S. Mhaske, N. Petersen, T. Ly, and P. Spasojevic, “Demonstration of a 2.06Gb/s  
 LDPC Decoder on NI USRP,“ in IEEE GLOBECOM Expo Floor, Dec 2014. 
■	 1000X capacity over 
current cellular (LTE)
■	 10 Gb/s peak 
throughput user 
experience
■	 < 1 ms Latency
■	 High-throughput PHY 
processing
■	 Spectrum and power 
efficient hardware 
architectures
■	 Overall reduction in cost 
per bit 
■	 Pending standardization
■	 Consensus building in 
progress
■	 Change in PHY specs 
impact development
■	 Potential for design 
change
■	 Hardware platform 
must be reconfigurable
■	 Shorter development 
cycles necessary for 
iterative design
■	 Potential for several 
GHz of spectrum
■	 Relatively unstable 
channel needs 
significantly more 
processing
■	 Reliable channel codes 
necessary
■	 PHY processing 
budget for channel 
coding further reduced
10 Gigabit Ethernet (10GBASE-T)  
Code rate: High 
Code length:  2048 bits (fixed) 
Throughput:  6.4 Gb/s
Digital Video Broadcasting  
Code rate: 11 different rates 
Code length: High (-S2: 16 k-64 kb) 
Throughput: 135 Mb/s
Wi-Fi (802.11n), WiMAX (802.16e) 
Code rate: 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6 Code 
length: 648, 1296, 1944 bits 
Throughput: ~350 Mb/s
HOST: PXIe-8133 
■	 Generates input and sends over channel modeled
■	 Computes BER by comparing FPGA output to 
known input
■	 Cycle-accurate comparison of single-cycle Timed  
Loop (SCTL) output with host simulation output
FPGA: Xilinx Kintex-7 on PXIe-7975R
■	 Time-critical algorithmic processing
■	 HLS provides SCTL implementation
■	 USRP-2953R used for real-world verification 
of wireless systems 
Strategies for High Throughput [3]
■	 Reduced complexity check-node 
processing
■	 z-fold parallelization of node 
processing
■	 Compact representation of PCM
■	 Multi level pipelining on account of 
modification for reduced complexity 
check-node processing
Resource Utilization [3]
LDPC decoder IP FPGA resource utilization and throughput on the 
Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA (1x is the non-pipelined version and 2x is the 
pipelined version.) [3]
QC-LDPC Codes
Serial MSA 
Iterative Decoding
FPGA-Based 
Implementation
LabVIEW 
Communications
■	 Parallelism 
offered by LDPC 
codes
■	 Structure 
simplifies 
decoder 
architecture
■	 Wide standard 
acceptance
■	 Single node 
processing
■	 Reduced memory 
storage
■	 Requires fewer 
decoding 
iterations
■	 Scalable and 
flexible solution 
for evolving 
requirements
■	 Develop IP 
without expert-
level RTL/
HDL domain 
knowledge 
■	 Rapid prototyping 
of research: 
theory to 
hardware
■	 Shorter 
development 
cycles for 
iterative design 
modifications
34 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Dr. Li Li         
Li Li received his doctorate degree in communications from the University of Bristol in 2013, 
and is working as a postdoctoral researcher in the CSN group at the university. His main 
research interests include software-defined networking (SDN), wireless network virtualization, 
and self-organization and self-configuration in wireless communication networks. He is using 
NI equipment to build a real-world SDN wireless testbed to investigate the convergence of 
different and heterogeneous wireless network domains. 
Imad Al-Samman        
Imad Al-Samman received his MSc (Hons) in mobile broadband communications from Lancaster 
University in 2012 and joined the CDT program at the University of Bristol in 2013 to obtain a 
doctorate degree in communications. In 2012, he completed an LTE test engineer internship at 
Aeroflex-Stevenage, where he tested the TM500 network tester and developed validation scenarios. 
His research focuses on SDN, Cloud-RAN, and network virtualization. For the TOUCAN project, he is 
helping to build a testbed of NI equipment for real-world SDN measurements and the integration of 
different wireless technologies in one architecture.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 35
Toucan Wireless SDN Testbed: A Multitechnology Platform
Supervisors: Professor Mark Beach & Dr Angela Doufexi
Researchers: Dr. Li Li & Mr. Imad Al-Samman 
Communication Systems and Networks Group, University of Bristol
TOUCAN Vision and Objectives
■	 To achieve ultimate network convergence enabled by a radically new technology agnostic architecture 
targeting a wide range of applications and end users services.
■	 To facilitate optimal interconnection of network technology domains, networked devices and data sets with 
high flexibility in data through-put, high adaptability, resource and energy efficiency.
■	 To break conventional barriers between hardware infrastructure and services by including network   
infrastructure and its control as part of the end-to-end service delivery chain.
■	 To Seamlessly converge heterogeneous technology domains.
■	 To Support very high bandwidth granularity range and capacity
TOUCAN Wireless SDN Testbed
■	 Part of TOUCAN LAB, a unique, largescale multi-technology experimental platform, to validate, refine  
and showcase the novel solutions developed in TOUCAN technical challenges.
■	 A converged wireless, optical, and IT experimental platform that is integrated at both Hardware and 
Software level.
■	 A multi-technology emulation facility able to support various TOUCAN technologies at scale and at real-time.
■	 An experimental platform which is open for experimentation across all layers and domains offering 
researchers full control and programmability in order to create a feature-rich unique research environment
Real System Testbed
Future Work
■	 Design wireless resource description model, resource abstraction & virtualization 
■	 Integration with mmWave and LiFi test-beds
■	 Implement SDN applications: wireless resource management, roaming in multi-domain, traffic offloading
Communication Systems and Networks Research Group 
Merchant Venturers Building,  
Woodland Road, Bristol. BS8 1TR 
@BristolCSN | @ToucanNetwork | toucan-network.ac.uk/
This work is supported by EPSRC grant (EP/L020009/1):  
Towards Ultimate Convergence of All Networks (TOUCAN).
36 | ni.com/sdr 
USER PROFILE
Yue Tian      
Yue Tian received his bachelor’s degree from the Beijing University 
of Posts and Telecommunications in 2007 and his master’s 
degree in wireless communication and signal processing from the 
University of Bristol in 2011. He is pursuing a doctorate in electrical 
engineering at the University of Bristol. His research focuses 
on 5G communication system techniques such as interference 
alignment, massive MIMO, and nonorthogonal multiple access. 
Vaia Kalokidou     
Vaia Kalokidou graduated from the University of Reading in 
2005 with a master’s degree in electronic engineering. Her final-
year project was based on WPANs (“Development of high level 
functions in a UWB system”). In 2011, she started the four-year 
program at the Centre for Doctoral Training in Communications 
at the University of Bristol. In 2015, she completed her doctorate 
on interference management techniques for 5G networks. It 
focuses on blind interference alignment, topological interference 
management, and nonorthogonal multiple access. She works 
as a research associate for the H2020 5G-Xhaul project, which 
includes mmWave beamforming, channel estimation, and 
C-RAN architectures. 
Mark Beach     
Mark Beach received his doctorate in 1989 from the University 
of Bristol for research on the application of smart antenna 
techniques to GPS. He later became a faculty member at the 
university, and was promoted to senior lecturer in 1996, reader in 
1998, and professor in 2003. He was head of the Department of 
Electrical and Electronic Engineering from 2006 to 2010, and then 
spearheaded Bristol’s hosting of the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral 
Training (CDT) in Communications. He manages the delivery of the 
CDT in Communications, leads research on enabling technologies 
for the delivery of 5G and beyond wireless connectivity, and 
serves as the school research impact director. He conducts his 
research activities through the Communication Systems and 
Networks Group, so they form a key component within Bristol’s 
Smart Internet Lab. He has over 25 years of physical layer wireless 
research experience during which he has embraced the application 
of spread spectrum technology for cellular systems, adaptive 
or smart antenna for capacity and range extension in wireless 
networks, MIMO-aided connectivity for throughput enhancement, 
and flexible RF technologies for software defined radio modems.
National Instruments  ni.com/sdr | 37
Interference Management in LTE-Based NI Testbed
Supervisors: Professors Mark Beach and Andrew Nix, Dr. Robert Piechocki 
Researchers. Mr. Yue Tian and Dr. Vaia Kalokidou
Communication Systems and Networks Group, University of Bristol
Introduction 
■	 Interference management is one of the main challenges of wireless 
communication networks.
■	 Interference alignment (IA), as a revolutionary technique, can improve 
the capacity of MU-MIMO.
■	 We propose and evaluate a relay-aided IA (RIA) scheme over a  
low-complexity LTE-based multiuser interference testbed featuring  
NI USRP devices. 
Interference Alignment
■	 IA exploits the availability of multiple 
antennas/frequency block/time slots.
■	 Our goal is to align interfering signals 
at each Rx into a low-dimensional 
subspace by linearly encoding signals 
in multiple dimensions.
■	 At each Rx, three interferers collapse 
to appear as two, which enables 
interference-free decoding in a 
desired signal subspace[1].
Relay-Aided Interference Alignment
■	 RIA[2] and[3] can overcome outdated 
channel state information at the 
transmitter (CSIT) in source-to-
destination channels.
■	 The base station (BS) designs 
include beamforming to the relay 
system, and the relay designs include 
beamforming to users.
■	 All Rxs have the same linear 
combination for interference signals by 
exploiting current and outdated CSI.
IA From Theory to Practice
■	 We have built an LTE MU testbed with LabVIEW and USRP-2920 
devices and implemented IA algorithms on it.
■	 We can switch each USRP device, which uses ADC/DAC/RF front 
ends and drives two antennas (one rx and one tx), between rx’ing 
and tx’ing mode.
■	 Different USRP devices can be connected via a MIMO cable to build 
MIMO/MISO Txs and Rxs.
■	 A two-antenna BS (laptop) is connected through a TCP/IP Ethernet 
link to the corresponding USRP device
MIMO Relay Testbed and LabVIEW Structure
■	 To realize RIA, we designed a two-user (two antennas each) system 
with two multiple antenna relays.
■	 The BS and its desired mobile station (MS) are separately connected 
to two PCs.
■	 The CSI of the interfering MS is fed back to the BS, through the Ethernet 
line, so that the BS can perform interference avoidance precoding.
Interference Mitigation Schemes in the NI Testbed
■	 We implemented zero forcing (ZF), singular value decomposition 
(SVD), and signal-to-leakage-and-noise ratio (SLNR) in the testbed.
■	 All three interference mitigation techniques reduce the impact 
of interference.
■	 We computed SLNR, a prior probability that is not always completely 
accurate, for a precoding matrix. SLNR works optimally when CSI can 
be easily predicted, such as in a reliable communication environment, 
and it works poorly in an environment with large CSI fluctuations, 
such as a busy city or a high-mobility user (car).
■	 ZF and SVD (block diagonalization) drive the interference power  
closer to zero.
Conclusions/Future Work
■	 Build DL distributed cooperative relay testbed.
■	 Model delayed feedback scenarios (for source-to-destination, 
source-to-relay, relay-to-destination channels) in RIA communication 
networks.
■	 Evaluate performance of RIA in this environment.
■	 Implement opportunistic IA[4] and topological interference 
management[5] with NI USRP devices’ multiuser testbed.
References
[1] O.E. Ayach, S.W. Peters, and R.W. Heath, “The Practical Challenges of Interference Alignment,” IEEE Wireless  
 Communications, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 35–42, Feb. 2013.
[2] Y. Tian, A. Nix, and M. Beach, “Interference alignment in distributed cooperative relay system with delayed CSIT,”  
 General Assembly and Scientific Symposium (URSI GASS), 2014 XXXIth URSI, Beijing, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[3] Yue Tian, M. Beach, and A. Nix, “A novel relay-based interference alignment strategy for multi-user networks,”  
 Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), 2015 IEEE 16th International Workshop on,  
 Stockholm, 2015, pp. 630–634.
[4] Hu Jin, Sang-Woon Jeon, and Bang Chul Jung, “Opportunistic Interference Alignment for Random Access  
 Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 5947–5954, Dec. 2015.
[5] V. Kalokidou, O. Johnson, and R. Piechocki, “A hybrid TIM-NOMA scheme for the SISO Broadcast Channel,”  
 Communication Workshop (ICCW), 2015 IEEE International Conference on, London, 2015, pp. 387–392.
Contacts: 
Professor Mark Beach: M.A.Beach@bristol.ac.uk 
Yue Tian: yue.tian@bristol.ac.uk 
Vaia Kalokidou: vaia.kalokidou@bristol.ac.uk
@BristolCSN | bristol.ac.uk/engineering/research/csn

