telecommunications
Shrinking the world with communication
TELECOMMUNICATIONS is all about the devices, systems, 
and techniques that enable people to communicate with 
each other over distances.
In early civilisations drums, signal fires, and smoke signals 
were used to link tribal communities. Today we use 
massive computer networks, optical fibres, and all manner 
of voice, data and video technologies. Innovation in the 
telecommunications industry is accelerating at a breakneck 
pace and the opportunities for skilled people in this sector 
are outstanding. 
Otago’s Bachelor of Applied Science (BAppSc) in 
Telecommunications allows you to ride this wave. You’ll learn 
how information is transmitted over various media, and how 
networks are organized; all that plus a suite of other skills!
“ When I’m selecting a new employee, I know that their CVs wouldn’t be  
 on my desk if they didn’t have strong technical skills. It’s the person  
 with broader skills in communication, innovation and business nous  
 who’ll get the job.”
Alan Murch
General Manager for Technology Development, Vodafone
YOUR PLACE IN THE WORLD
www.otago.ac.nz/sciences
DIVISION OF SCIENCES
UNIVERSITY OF OTAGO
0800 80 80 98  |  www.otago.ac.nz
txt 866  |  university@otago.ac.nz
Reasons for studying 
Telecommunications
~ You’ll learn the ins and outs of 
the hardware and software of 
telecommunications networks and 
mobile phone technology, in all their 
many and varied configurations.
~ You’ll be in a great position to become 
a technical innovator in a rapidly-
advancing industry. 
~ There’s a serious shortage of scientists 
and technologists in this field, and, as 
new businesses emerge, this demand 
will only increase.
Career opportunities
Whereas advances in transportation reduce 
the time it takes us to get from here to 
there, advances in telecommunications 
mean here and there are virtually one 
and the same!  It follows, then, that 
telecommunications are considered vital 
to any country’s economic future. New 
technology lowers barriers to marketplace 
entry, enabling companies to communicate 
directly with their customers – wherever 
in the world they happen to be. This 
creates new business opportunities for 
telecommunications professionals worldwide.
In New Zealand, telecommunications 
has opened up to a new and exciting 
competitive climate. Wireless technology 
has created opportunities both for existing 
organisations and for those wishing to start 
up their own enterprises.
Entry-level telecommunications positions 
include broadband network engineering, 
network design, network management, 
system maintenance and test engineering. 
Positions are also available in wireless 
applications engineering, new product 
development, and telecommunications 
research and development.
You could be employed by an equipment 
supply company involved in the 
manufacture and supply of network 
component equipment, telecommunications 
switching equipment, or cell-phone and 
wireless communication equipment. 
You could work for a service provider 
responsible for installing, commissioning, 
regulating, and managing communication 
networks and services.
You might be employed by an organisation 
that relies on a large amount of 
telecommunications technology. Given 
how widespread telecommunications has 
become, this could see you working in just 
about any industry, including banks, insurance 
companies, utilities, manufacturers, retailers, 
financial institutions, e-commerce service 
providers, internet companies and more.
As the world embraces telecommunications, 
the opportunities for people with 
telecommunications expertise are exciting, 
and virtually endless.
Background required
There is some flexibility in entry requirements 
for Telecommunications, but demonstrated 
strength in Year 13 Mathematics is 
recommended for entry to MATH 160, and 
demonstrated strength in Physics is needed 
for PHSI 131, 132 or 191 and also for 
completion of COMP 160. 
What is the Bachelor of Applied 
Science?
The strength of the Applied Science 
programme is its outward focus – developing 
market-ready graduates with wide-ranging skills 
and practical experience in the workplace.
Applied Science  is a three-year undergraduate 
degree with open entry at 100 level. An Honours 
year is offered to those students who achieve 
an appropriate academic standard. This will be 
offered at the end of the undergraduate degree. 
Every Applied Science degree has a compulsory 
minor or second major, in a subject area that’s 
directly relevant and will deliver complementary 
skills. The programme encourages real-world 
business awareness, enabling you to apply what 
you have learned to any organisation you work for.
What will I study?
To major in Telecommunications you must 
complete 126 points (seven papers) in your 
first year, including:
COMP 160 Computer Programming
MATH 160 or 170 
One of PHSI 131, 132, 191 (PHSI 131   
recommended)
From second year, you’ll study networks, 
network design, optical communication, 
advanced broadband communications 
and wireless networking. You’ll also add to 
your knowledge of Telecommunications by 
taking related papers in information science, 
electronics and physics. 
Every Applied Science degree has a second 
minor or major, and there is a list of suggested 
options in both the Guide to Enrolment and on 
the Applied Science Website. 
NB: Check the Guide to Enrolment for the latest 
enrolment material each year.
What will I learn?
You’ll gain a thorough and practical 
understanding of current theories and 
techniques for the design, implementation, 
and verification of distributed communications 
systems. You’ll learn about network design and 
management, taking into account things like 
reliability and privacy. 
How will I study?
As well as learning theory in lectures, you’ll gain 
hands-on experience in practical classes in the 
University’s well-equipped laboratories. 
If you continue on to Honours, in your fourth 
year, you’ll undertake a major research project. 
This could involve solving an industry-based 
problem, looking at issues such as mobile 
telecommunication or network security, or taking 
on a multi-media project such as techniques for 
video streaming over broadband networks.
Can I combine my Telecommunications 
study with other subjects?
A minor or second major is compulsory for 
the Bachelor of Applied Science. Your first 
year course is very flexible and you can select 
papers that keep your options open for second 
year – for example you can tailor a course that 
will also cover the prerequisites for most of the 
other BAppSc subject majors, including Design 
for Technology, Electronics, Environmental 
Management or Telecommunications; or you 
could carry on with a BSc in Energy Studies, 
Mathematics or Physics.
The minor or second major you choose will 
tailor your studies to match your own particular 
strengths and passions, but also match demand 
from industry, for the skill-sets most needed.
DANIEL KERSE
“Technology has always fascinated me, especially 
the sort that’s capable of sending information 
around the world at the speed of light. Applied 
Science helped me gain not only the expertise 
necessary for a technical role at one of NZ’s 
major telcos, but also the wider scope to help 
me understand how the business as a whole 
operates.”
Dan Kerse completed his Bachelor of Applied 
Science majoring in Telecommunications and 
a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science in 
2005. Dan works in the Operations department 
of TelstraClear, and is based in central 
Wellington.
Dan adds “The technical papers I took gave 
me a good understanding of the wide variety 
of technologies used at TelstraClear. A general 
understanding of the underlying maths and 
physics also makes it much easier to grasp 
new concepts as they emerge. Basic computer 
programming skills and an understanding of 
Unix are two things I find very useful in my 
role.”
Dan’s team is focussed on TelstraClear’s 
IP (Internet Protocol) Operations and is 
involved with all aspects of TelstraClear’s core 
IP infrastructure. This includes provisioning 
(connecting) larger customers, infrastructure 
maintenance, and issues related to 
infrastructure and/or larger customers. 
Doing the business papers have given Dan 
a wider understanding of how the business as 
a whole operates. He adds “It’s quite useful to 
have a grasp of the reasons behind some of the 
business decisions that impact on the company, 
regardless of whether it directly relates to my 
business unit.” 
“I think the research focus at Otago University  
was very important. Although my research 
had little to do with my current position it 
still helped shape my way of thinking and the 
approach I take to tackle a problem.”
profile
For questions about Telecommunications
Tel 0800 80 80 98
Email university@otago.ac.nz
www.appsci.otago.ac.nz
telecommunications
Shrinking the world with 
communication
M
ay
 2
01
1

