Department for
Culture, Media &
Sport
Research into
consumer
understanding and
management of
internet cookies and
the potential impact
of the EU Electronic
Communications
Framework
Report
April 2011
In December 2010, the Prime Minister decided that competition issues relating to the
media, broadcasting, digital and telecoms sectors would transfer from the Department for
Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport
(DCMS) to whom this report will now be issued. The machinery of government change has
since taken place and responsibility has been transferred for these areas, which includes
telecommunications policy and the implementation of the EU Framework.
This report was compiled for PwC by David Lancefield, Mark Ambler, Michael Rauber and
Roshan Patel. For further information on this report, please contact Mark Ambler
(mark.d.ambler@uk.pwc.com).
Contents
Summary and conclusions.............................................................................................................................................1
1 Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................... 10
2 Background ............................................................................................................................................................. 11
3 Consumer impacts ..................................................................................................................................................17
4 Business case studies............................................................................................................................................. 34
5 Overall impacts ......................................................................................................................................................49
Appendix A: Consumer survey questionnaire ...........................................................................................................62
Appendix B: Business case study framework ............................................................................................................ 76
Appendix C: Business statistics..................................................................................................................................84

Summary and
conclusions
PwC 1
Summary and conclusions
Requirements set by DCMS
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC) was commissioned by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport
(DCMS)
1
to undertake research into the potential impact of further regulation of internet cookies as a result of
revisions to the EU Electronic Communications Framework (ECF). Internet cookies are small text files that can
be saved on an internet user’s computer when visiting a website; effectively, they act as a memory of what has
happened previously when the computer has interacted with that website.
The two key objectives of our research were:
 to analyse the response of internet users to the proposed changes envisaged as a result of implementing
the ECF; and
 to analyse, and where possible quantify, the potential impacts of the changes on business.
The results of our research are intended to inform DCMS’ Impact Assessment of the options for implementing
changes to the ECF.
Background to the research
Article 2 of Directive 2009/136/EC (the Directive) amends the E-Privacy Directive 2002/58/EC (the E-Privacy
Directive) setting out the fundamental rights and freedoms of EU citizens when using electronic
communications. Of particular note for our work is the change to Article 5(3) of the E-Privacy Directive: in
future, internet users will be expected to give consent when information is stored or accessed on their terminal
equipment whenever this is not strictly necessary for a service explicitly requested by the user. The previous
requirement was to offer users “the right to refuse”.
This amendment affects the use of internet cookies. Internet cookies can expire after a web session or persist
and last beyond the current web session. They can also be separately categorised as either first party internet
cookies, which originate from the domain being visited by the user, or third party internet cookies, which
originate from a domain other than the one visited by the user.
EU Member States are required to adopt and publish the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
necessary to comply with the Directive by 25th May 2011.
In September 2010, Government published a consultation paper which set out its proposed approach to
implementing the provisions of the revised ECF. The paper, which was accompanied by an interim Impact
Assessment, considered two options for implementing the provisions of the amended Directive as they relate to
internet cookies:
 A full ‘Opt-in’ system whereby internet users would have to accept each internet cookie placed on their
computer. This would require repeated pop-up windows or other virtual labels on every web page visited
by a user where internet cookies are in use. Each pop-up would need to give details about the individual
internet cookies in order to help internet users make informed decisions.
 ‘Enhanced browser settings’ which would provide internet users with enough information and the
capability to make an informed decision when deciding which internet cookies their browser should
accept. It would mean that browser settings would need to be more visible to internet users who would
need to be provided with clear and comprehensive information about internet cookies and how to opt-out
of them if they wish. It might also require browser vendors to change the actual options presented
1
In December 2010, The Prime Minister decided that competition issues relating to the media, broadcasting, digital and telecoms sectors
would transfer from the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) to
whom this report will now be issued. The machinery of government change has since taken place and responsibility has been transferred
for these areas, which includes telecommunications policy and the implementation of the EU framework.
PwC
(including how distinctions are made between different types of internet cookie or their use) and/or the
default option.
The consultation paper indicated that Government’s preferred option was ‘Enhanced browser settings’ beca
“it allows the UK to be compliant with the E
‘Opt-in’ regime
2
. Subsequently, during the course of our work, a third option has emerged which would involve
internet users being provided with increased levels of information and notice regarding individual internet
cookies. For example, it might entail the use of a device similar to the ‘eye icon’ which is currently being tested
in the behavioural advertising sector. The icon, which is pres
informs users of the presence of behavioural tracking internet cookies and enables them to access more detailed
information on the internet cookies as well as giving them the option to opt
intermediary’s internet cookie. Such an ‘Enhanced information’ option might be implemented as part of a self
regulatory initiative, for example by online publishers, advertisers, online retailers or other cookie users.
Framework used in research
At the outset, we developed an impact framework. This set out the evidence we required to assess the potential
costs and benefits of the proposed (or possible) legislative options, both for users of the internet and for those
businesses which supply products and services over the internet and which make use of internet cookies. To
populate this framework, we undertook consumer research and business case studies. Below, we summarise
the results and our assessment of the likely impacts of the three options.
Figure 1: Stakeholders in Impact Assessment
Source: PwC
Consumer research
We conducted an online survey of 1,012 individuals in February 2011. The sample was drawn randomly from
Research Now’s online panel, drawn from across the
anticipated, respondents were relatively intensive internet users.
Our survey showed that:
 More than three quarters of the survey respondents (77%) said they were concerned about internet
security.
 About one third of respondents (32%) indicated that they had actively changed their privacy settings on
their internet browser to give more privacy but 28% did not check the privacy settings at all and another
20% of respondents reviewed their browser sett
default settings to give them less privacy.
 Respondents who expressed concerns about internet security were most often concerned about catching
a virus or other computer infection (88%), incurring a
the abuse of personal information sent over the internet (75%).
 The large majority of respondents (85%) were not aware of any of the existing internet cookie ‘opt
solutions. Only 6% of respondents ind
are aware of anonymous browsing. 29% of those respondents who are aware of the ‘opt
had not used them.
2
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business
impact.pdf , page 146.
-Privacy Directive without the permanent disruption caused by an
ented by adverts on online publishers’ websites,
-out of each advert
UK and all age and socio-economic groups. As might be
ings but did not change them. Only 1% changed their
financial loss due to fraudulent payment (82%) or
icated that they are aware of TACO for Firefox and 9% that they
-sectors/docs/i/10-1133-implementing-revised-electronic-communications
2
use
ising
-
-out’
-out’ possibilities
-framework-
PwC 3
 Most respondents (83%) indicated that they are not aware of forthcoming changes to the way in which
use of internet cookies will be regulated.
 Respondents recognised that they had limited knowledge and understanding of internet cookies: only
13% of respondents indicated that they fully understand how internet cookies work and 45% indicated
that they had some understanding of them. In contrast, 37% had heard of internet cookies but did not
understand how they work and 2% of people had not heard of internet cookies before participating in the
survey.
 Testing of respondents’ knowledge of internet cookies confirmed their limited understanding: Only for
one out of sixteen internet cookies related statements a majority of respondents knew the correct answer
with other respondents either selecting the incorrect answer or indicating that they did not know the
answer.
 Just fewer than one in five respondents (18%) stated that they accept all internet cookies whilst 36%
accept only selected internet cookies and 9% do not accept any internet cookies. Over one third (37%) do
not know how they manage internet cookies on their computer.
 Survey respondents who indicated that they only accept selective internet cookies were asked what types
of internet cookies they currently accept. The results indicate that they are more likely to accept an
individual internet cookie when the site is frequently visited, rejection of the cookie will incur a loss of
functionality or the company has a good reputation. Only 17% of respondents indicated that they read
the privacy statement of a website.
 Nearly two thirds of respondents (62%) think that it is very important to know the purpose of an internet
cookie and 56% think it is very important to know how to delete internet cookies. Roughly 40% of
respondents indicate that the contents, issuer and impact on functionality are very important pieces of
information when deciding how to manage internet cookies.
 When asked what time they would spend deciding whether or not to accept an internet cookie, almost a
quarter of respondents (23%) indicated that they would decide instantly whether to accept the internet
cookie. The majority of respondents (59%) said that they would need some time to read the information
presented and would then decide whether to accept an internet cookie and 18% said that they would need
some time to read the provided information and do additional research and/or ask for help.
Respondents were asked about the impact of the three regulatory options on their decision whether or not to
accept internet cookies:
 They generally indicated that the ‘Opt-in’ option would lead to the largest change in behaviour followed
by the ‘Enhanced information’ approach and the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option.
 Roughly one third of respondents indicated that they were unsure how their behaviour with regard to
internet cookies would change.
 Overall, most respondents preferred the ‘Opt-in’ option followed by the ‘Enhanced information’ approach
and, finally, the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option. A large number of respondents indicated that they
have only limited a priori knowledge of internet cookies.
 Finally, survey respondents were asked about their willingness to pay if their Internet Service Provider
could manage the internet cookies delivered to their computer precisely according to their preferences.
On average respondents reported that they were willing to pay an amount equivalent to about 5-6% of
their total payments for internet services (£0.67-£0.78 per month depending on calculation) for
management of internet cookies including 57% of respondents who stated that they would be unwilling to
pay anything for this service. On this basis, the overall willingness to pay for the UK adult online
population is estimated to be about £300 -£380 million per annum. This estimate however, should be
considered as indicative as survey participants were relatively heavy internet users and the figure is based
upon stated as opposed to revealed willingness to pay.
Business case studies
In addition to the online survey of internet users, we also conducted a series of 20 case studies with businesses.
The choice of case studies was developed in conjunction with DCMS which had previously identified those
sectors that are most likely to be impacted by implementation of the proposed changes to the E-Privacy
Directive. We also used available data on the pattern of internet use by business to inform our choice of
PwC 4
sectors.
3
The sectors identified have been broadly categorised as: hardware vendors; internet browser vendors
and other software vendors; the advertising industry (including various kinds of intermediaries between
advertisers and online publishers); online retailers; and online publishers (including B2B and B2C in both the
private and public sectors).
No interviewed company was able to provide quantitative estimates of the direct costs they would expect to
incur in complying with each of the regulatory options. We understand this was due to the following reasons:
 There is ambiguity associated with the wording of the Directive: this has a bearing on the likely costs of
compliance because it affects the extent to which firms may need to change their business strategy and
operations.
 Few (if any) companies were fully prepared with plans on how to implement potential changes.
 There is no ‘leading response’: no one firm or sector has stepped forward to lead or coordinate a response
and there is a lack of clarity as to where the responsibility lies.
 Costs depend significantly on browser vendors’ behaviour and whether they act uniformly. For example,
costs for cookie users are likely to increase if browser vendors do not act uniformly.
 The change in user behaviour associated with some of the options is expected to have a significant
bearing on some industries and companies (but is itself difficult to predict).
Although no quantification was possible, our discussions showed that business expects four factors to drive
costs:
 The precise legislative requirements (the most important factor).
 Whether, and if so, how, browser vendors respond.
 The number of companies which need to implement the changes (which depends on how browser
vendors respond).
 The extent to which there are displacement effects and efficiency losses.
Finally, the results of the business case studies fed directly into our (sector specific) assessment of overall
impacts (alongside the results of the consumer survey). Some general overarching insights from the business
case studies were:
 The ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option was seen as the least disruptive for the general management of
internet cookies. Generally, the view was that this method would be preferable in terms of maintaining
the online user experience. The selection of default options is seen as a critical determinant of consumer
behaviour.
 Browser vendors are commonly seen as the potential ‘first mover’ in providing the technical framework
for the communication of information and settings with websites. Standardisation in browser settings
and format across browsers is seen as desirable to minimise the costs for other businesses.
 It would be desirable to provide consistent presentation of information to end users.
 Enhanced information/‘eye icon’ for third party behavioural advertising is seen as a special case and
greater regulation and information were generally seen as justified.
 The speed of response required for implementation (late May 2011) is extremely challenging for business:
interviewees cited the extended planning/implementation period required (typically over six months).
Conclusions
Finally, we draw together the evidence we have from both the business case studies and the consumer survey to
compare the expected benefits and costs of the three regulatory options. For the reasons explained above,
much of our analysis is necessarily based on qualitative evidence, rather than quantified estimates of the costs.
It is important to consider the potential benefits of the amended E-Privacy Directive for consumers: over three
quarters of the respondents in our online survey stated that they are concerned about internet security.
Furthermore, 42% respondents stated that there are activities they do not undertake because of internet
security concerns. The amended E-Privacy Directive is likely to increase consumer control, trust and
3
E-commerce and ICT activity 2009, Statistical Bulletin, ONS.
PwC 5
confidence. All of these are benefits are likely to transpose into economic benefits (which are however, difficult
to measure).
‘Opt-in’
Compared to the other options, the ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to impose the largest total costs on the UK economy
for the following key reasons:
 The ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to give rise to direct costs for all cookie users and especially the large number
of online publishers.
 Internet users will potentially incur large time costs managing their use of internet cookies. If each user
had to manage (only) 200 internet cookies per annum, then the consumer survey suggests that the total
cost of would be around £190- £235 million per annum at current prices. Furthermore, their online
experience could also be significantly disrupted. However, the results of the online survey in which the
‘Opt-in’ option was ranked first by most consumers contrast these calculations and seem to document a
wish for more control with regard to internet cookies. It is, however, unclear whether the above time
costs have been fully considered by survey participants.
 The ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to lead to the largest displacement effects as business shifts from online
channels to offline channels. Although offline business will benefit from these effects, there will be
associated efficiency losses (unrealised sales, additional consumer and business costs) which represent
economic costs.
The costs are likely to be non-uniformly distributed across the business community. Businesses with websites
which rely most heavily on the use of internet cookies will be most affected. Furthermore, internet cookies are
most likely to be accepted if they come from large, well known companies and public sector institutions which
are most trusted by consumers.
The ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to increase the overall level of trust of internet users and this might increase the
volume of certain online transactions.
The following table summarises the main effects by industry.
Table 1 - ‘Opt-in’ effects by industry
Group Main effects
Browser vendors  Costs incurred in creating information standards for internet cookies.
 Costly reengineering of browser functions might be necessary.
 Different technical implementation by vendors increases costs of cookie users.
Online publishers  Information on cookies is readily available, but a large number of companies and
bodies in the public sector would need to provide and submit information which
would increase total costs.
 Reengineering of website functionalities and management of session cookies
would increase costs.
 Displacement effects would lead to redistribution: traditional publishers (offline)
would be likely to benefit whereas internet publishers would be likely to lose
business as consumers switch to ‘offline’ media. Costs are incurred as a result of
efficiency losses.
Specific industries
Online advertising  Large reduction of behavioural advertising volume and potentially online
advertising volume due to ‘opt-out’.
 Displacement effects: traditional forms of advertising would be likely to benefit
whereas online advertising would be likely to lose business. Economic costs
because of efficiency losses.
Web analytics  Large reduction in web analytics volume and therefore business due to ‘opt-out’.
PwC 6
Group Main effects
 Displacement and efficiency losses (see online advertising).
Online retailing  Basic web basket functionality of online retailers is likely to stay functional
because of ‘strictly necessary’ provision.
 Reengineering of other website functionalities and management of session
cookies would increase costs.
 Reduction in user online experience and therefore traffic and sales.
 Displacement effects: ‘high-street shopping’ would benefit whereas online
retailers would be likely to lose business. Costs are incurred as a result of
efficiency losses.
Hardware  Potentially costly reengineering of warranty and update processes.
 Obtaining consent for preloaded cookies might be necessary.
Source: PwC analysis
‘Enhanced information’
The ‘Enhanced information’ option would be likely to lead to relatively small overall economic costs.
 The option is industry specific (targeted towards behavioural advertising and web analytics) and only a
limited number of companies would incur direct costs. It seems not feasible to use this option as an
overarching approach as is the case for the other two regulatory options.
 Initial trials show that the approach would not lead to large scale consumer reactions.
A general benefit of the ‘Enhanced information’ approach would be the presentation of information in context,
i.e. the user would be able to request additional information on internet cookies when they were in use. This
would be likely to have positive implications for users in terms of enhanced trust.
The ‘Enhanced information’ option does not seem feasible in a wider context for publishers due the large
number of companies and associated coordination problems and the diverse use of cookies. Nevertheless, it
potentially can be applied in a ‘mixed implementation’ strategy for behavioural advertising (and web analytics).
Industry specific impacts are summarised in Table 2 below.
Table 2: 'Enhanced information’ effects by industry
Group Main effects
Browser vendors  No immediate impact.
Online publishers  No immediate impact as it is unlikely to be feasible for large and
diversified group of online publishers.
Specific industries
Online advertising  Direct costs incurred for creation of platform and management of cookies.
 Small displacement effects shifting business from behavioural advertising
to other forms of online and offline advertising. Small efficiency losses.
Web analytics  If included in approach see online advertising effects.
Online retailing  No immediate impact as a cross-industry initiative would be unlikely to be
feasible.
Hardware  No immediate impact as a cross-industry initiative would be unlikely to be
feasible.
PwC 7
‘Enhanced browser settings’
The cost incurred by the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option would depend significantly on the precise
implementation and requirements of the option. For example, if browsers were already deemed to be
compatible with the amended E-Privacy Directive then no costs would be incurred by the implementation of
this option. However, if browser vendors were required to reengineer their browsers, this would entail direct
costs for vendors and potentially associated technology costs for cookie users who must coordinate with the
underlying browser technology framework(s). The costs could become substantial. We estimate the economic
costs of this option to be in general lower than the costs incurred by the ‘Opt-in’ option for the following
reasons:
 ‘Enhanced browser settings’ would concentrate the requirements for regulatory compliance onto a
small number of stakeholders; direct costs could be limited to browser vendors.
 The option would generally lead to one-off consumer costs as opposed to recurring costs of the ‘Opt-in’
option.
The consumer response to this option would be dependent on the information provided and the default options
(as shown in consumer research) and could have a significant impact on economic costs as business adapted to
this response.
Currently internet browsers make a distinction between first party and third party cookies. If browser vendors’
interpretation of ‘Enhanced browser settings’ involved blocking third party cookies by default, this would entail
large costs on the advertising and web analytics industries. In addition, costs would be incurred by the
advertising industry if users were provided the option to block behavioural tracking cookies
4
in browser
settings, perhaps even by default. Online retailers and hardware vendors rely less critically on these kinds of
cookies and are therefore less exposed to changes in browser settings.
5
Generally, ‘Enhanced browser settings’ could potentially provide a solution for most internet cookies in use. The
option could be refined by the ‘Enhanced information’ option or the ‘Opt-in’ options for specific internet
cookies uses and/or industries.
Industry specific impacts are qualitatively summarised in Table 3 below.
Table 3: 'Enhanced browser settings effects by industry
Group Main effects
Browser vendors  Costs would depend on precise requirements: whether browsers are
already compliant/it would be necessary to provide additional
information/it would be necessary to reengineer browsers?
Online publishers  No immediate impact.
Specific industries
Online advertising  Impact dependent on interaction with the ‘Enhanced information’
approach and specified default settings.
 If advertisers’ third party or behavioural cookies are blocked effects similar
to the ‘Opt-in’ option’.
Web analytics  See online advertising.
Online retailing  No immediate impact.
Hardware  No immediate impact.
Source: PwC analysis
4
Behavioural tracking cookies are cookies that track a user’s behaviour across a number of sites such as to display advertisements that
are most likely to lead to a sale.
5
It is unlikely that ‘Enhanced browser settings’ would require all cookies to be blocked by default.
PwC 8
Overarching conclusion
Having looked at the three options, the implementation of a mixed approach is likely to be sensible. Whereas
‘Enhanced browser settings’ could be a sensible and time-saving approach for day-to-day management of
cookies, consumers’ wish for more control could potentially be accounted for by the ‘Enhanced information’
option or the ‘Opt-in’ option in specific circumstances.
PwC 9
Main report
PwC 10
1 Introduction
Requirements set by DCMS
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC) was commissioned by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport
(DCMS)
6
to undertake research into the potential impact of further regulation of internet cookies as a result of
revisions to the EU Electronic Communications Framework (ECF). The two objectives of our research were:
 to analyse the response of internet users to the proposed changes envisaged as a result of implementing
the ECF; and
 to analyse, and where possible quantify, the potential impacts of the changes on business.
The results of our research are intended to inform the Impact Assessment being prepared by DCMS of the
options for implementing changes to the ECF.
Report structure
The rest of our report is structured in four further Sections:
 Section 2 reviews the context for, and objective of, the research and describes our approach to meeting
the objectives;
 Section 3 summarises the key results of our consumer research;
 Section 4 describes the key findings from our business case studies; and
 Section 5 draws together the evidence from our research and case studies to assess the overall impact of
the different regulatory options.
Three appendices contain further information:
 Appendix A provides the questionnaire which underpins our consumer research;
 Appendix B contains the framework we used to structure the business case studies; and
 Appendix C provides background data on the UK business population potentially affected by the
regulation.
6
Our work has been undertaken under the engagement letter between PwC and the Department for Business, Innovation and Sills (BIS)
dated 22nd December 2010. However, in December 2010, the Prime Minister decided that competition issues relating to the media,
broadcasting, digital and telecoms sectors would transfer from BIS to DCMS to whom this report is issued. The machinery of government
change has since taken place and responsibility has been transferred for these areas, which includes telecommunications policy and the
implementation of the EU Framework.
PwC 11
2 Background
Introduction
In this Section of the report, we set out the background to the project. We start by describing the context for the
research and then outline the key elements of the framework within which we have gathered and collated
evidence relating to the potential impact of further regulation of internet cookies. We then briefly summarise
how we have approached the research and analysis.
Context
We start by considering the proposed changes to EU legislation regarding internet cookies, in particular the
requirement for consent from users. We then briefly outline some important distinctions between types of
internet cookies, and some typical applications for each. Finally, we summarise the previous Impact
Assessment and highlight three key regulatory options which inform the overarching structure of our analysis.
EU Electronic Communications Framework (ECF)
In 2002, EU Member States reached agreement on a regulatory framework for electronic communication
networks and services which covers telecommunications (fixed and mobile), e-mail, access to the internet and
content related broadcasting. Its aim was to harmonise regulation governing the provision of e-
communications across the EU and lead to the creation of an internal EU market.
The ECF contained an in-built review mechanism and, consequently, the European Commission put forward
proposals for changes in November 2007. These were agreed in November 2009 and need to be implemented
by Member States by 25th May 2011.
One part of the ECF - the E-Privacy Directive 2002/58/EC (the E-Privacy Directive) - sets out the fundamental
rights and freedoms of EU citizens when using electronic communications. The E-Privacy Directive was
amended by Directive 2009/136/EC (the Directive). The changes to Article 5(3) are especially relevant to
internet cookies and strengthen users’ rights with regard to information storage and access on their terminal
equipment (e.g. their computers).
Change to Article 5(3)
Article 2 of the Directive amends the E-Privacy Directive on privacy and electronic communications. Of
particular note are the changes to Article 5(3)
7
. An important change is the requirement for the user to give
consent when information is stored or accessed on their terminal equipment whenever this is not strictly
necessary for a service explicitly requested by the user. Previously, the requirement was to offer users “the right
to refuse”.
Recital 66 to the Directive includes some further guidance and clarification of the meaning of Article 5(3).
Importantly, it states that:
‘Where it is technically possible and effective, in accordance with the relevant provisions of Directive
95/46/EC, the user’s consent to processing may be expressed by using the appropriate settings of a browser
or other application.’
This change has implications for the use of internet cookies.
7
‘Member States shall ensure that the storing of information, or the gaining of access to information already stored, in the terminal
equipment of a subscriber or user is only allowed on condition that the subscriber or user concerned has given his or her consent, having
been provided with clear and comprehensive information, in accordance with Directive 95/46/EC, inter alia, about the purposes of the
processing. This shall not prevent any technical storage or access for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication
over an electronic communications network, or as strictly necessary in order for the provider of an information society service explicitly
requested by the subscriber or user to provide the service.’ Article 5(3), Directive 2009/136/EC.
PwC 12
Internet cookies
Internet cookies are small text files that can be saved on a user’s computer when visiting a website.
8
They can
be session based and expire after a session or persist beyond the current web session:
 Session internet cookies are used to ‘maintain state’ and allow websites to remember the actions of a user
across a website during a particular session. For example, an online retailer may use session internet
cookies to store information on items that have been added to the ‘basket’ ready to be purchased together
with other items in a single transaction.
 Persistent internet cookies are stored on end users’ devices beyond the current session. They send
information to the webpage (server) whenever the user visits the site until the internet cookies’ expiry
date. These internet cookies allow websites to remember the actions of a user across a website (or a
number of websites) and across sessions. For example, persistent internet cookies enable websites to
remember settings for personalised content.
Internet cookies can also be separately categorised as either first party or third party. First party internet
cookies are those that originate from the domain being visited by the user. Third party internet cookies are
those that originate from a domain other than the one being visited by the user. Advertising companies with
adverts on many different websites may use persistent third party internet cookies to allow them to track a user
across websites to enable the company to understand consumer behaviour and select the most appropriate
adverts.
Internet cookies do not identify an individual user. Rather, they identify a single browser on a single device that
was used to access the website. Internet cookies do not read information saved on a user’s hard drive; they can
only transfer, and only contain, as much information as the user has disclosed to a certain website. Internet
cookies are not computer programmes and, therefore, cannot be executed as code and they cannot be used to
disseminate computer viruses.
UK implementation plans
In September 2010, the UK Government published a consultation paper setting out its proposed approach to
implementing the provisions of the revised ECF
9
, as well as questions for stakeholders on the areas where it has
some discretion in implementation.
10
The paper, which was accompanied by an interim Impact Assessment,
identified and considered two options for implementing the amended Directive
11
:
 A full ‘Opt-in’ system whereby consumers would have to confirm every internet cookie placed on their
computer. This would require repeated pop-up windows or other virtual labels on every web page visited
by a user. In order to make these decisions informed, each pop-up would need to give users details about
the individual internet cookies.
 ‘Enhanced browser settings’ which provide consumers with enough information for them to make an
informed decision about whether to accept internet cookies. It would mean that browser settings would
need to be made more visible to users, and users would need to be provided with clear and
comprehensive information about internet cookies and how to opt-out of them if they wish.
The consultation paper indicated that Government’s preferred option was ‘Enhanced browser settings’ because
“it allows the UK to be compliant with the E-Privacy Directive without the permanent disruption caused by an
‘Opt-in’ regime
12
. Subsequently, during the course of our work, a third option has emerged which would involve
internet users being provided with increased levels of information and notice regarding individual internet
cookies (‘Enhanced information’ option). For example, it might entail the use of a device similar to the ‘eye
8
Cookies are placed on a user’s machine usually by small bits of code.
9
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/i/10-1132-implementing-revised-electronic-communications-framework-
consultation.pdf
10
The deadline for responses was 3rd December 2010.
11
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/i/10-1133-implementing-revised-electronic-communications-framework-
impact.pdf
12
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/i/10-1133-implementing-revised-electronic-communications-framework-
impact.pdf , page 146.
PwC
icon’ which is currently being tested in the behavioural advertising sector. The icon, which is presented by
adverts on online publishers’ websites, informs users of the presence of b
and enables them to access more detailed information on the internet cookies as well as giving them the option
to opt-out of each advertising intermediary’s internet cookie. Such an ‘Enhanced information’ option might
implemented as part of a self-regulatory initiative, for example by online publishers, advertisers, online
retailers or other cookie users.
Impact Assessment framework
As we have noted earlier, the primary purpose of our research was to generate evidenc
strengthen Government’s initial Impact Assessment which it prepared to support the consultation
developing our approach, therefore, it was important to take account of the basic principles which underlie
robust Impact Assessments and apply them to the proposed (or possible) regulatory changes.
Key principles
At the outset, we developed an impact framework. This set out the evidence we required to assess the potential
costs and benefits of the proposed (or possible)
businesses which supply products and services over the internet and which make use of internet cookies. To
populate this framework, we undertook consumer research and business case studies.
Figure 2: Stakeholders in Impact Assessment
Source: PwC
Impact Assessment guidance
14
recommends that:
“The relevant costs and benefits to the UK economy of all regulatory options should be valued, where it is
proportionate to do so, and the net benefits or costs calculated.”
The guidance identifies five different levels of analysis which might be expected in an Impact Assessment (see
Table 4). The minimum requirement is Levels 1 and 2; whether Level 3 or above is needed depends on the
nature and scale of the impacts and is a matter of considering proportionality. It also depends on the stage the
proposal has reached: it is expected that the q
as a (new) regulation moves through the policy making process.
13
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business
impact.pdf
14
http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file44544.pdf
ehavioural tracking internet cookies
e which DCMS can use to
legislative options, both for users of the internet and for those
uality and depth of analysis in an Impact Assessment will increase
-sectors/docs/i/10-1133-implementing-revised-electronic-communications
13
be
13
. In
-framework-
PwC 14
Table 4: Summary assessment of coverage of existing Impact Assessment
Level Description of analysis required
Level 1 Describe who will be affected by the proposals - business, public sector and consumers
Level 2 Fully describe the costs and benefits
Level 3 Quantify the costs and benefits
Level 4 Value (some of) the costs but not the benefits; use qualitative, non-monetised costs and benefits to
fill gaps
Level 5 Monetise fully all the costs and benefits
Source: PwC based upon Impact assessment guidance.
Based on our discussions with the Department, we understood that our research was intended to enable the
Department to produce an updated Impact Assessment which fully describes the expected costs and benefits
and, if possible, quantifies them (i.e. moves the evidence base closer to Level 3 than the initial Impact
Assessment) and to inform the Government’s decision with respect to implementation of Article 5(3).
Defining the baseline
A key feature of an Impact Assessment is that it focuses on those costs and benefits that are additional to those
that would have been incurred if no action were taken (i.e. the marginal costs and benefits of the proposed
legislative changes). This means that they need to be defined against a baseline or counterfactual.
In the case of the transposition of EU legislation, such as the Directive, the baseline is a notional ‘do nothing’
scenario in which no additional regulatory action is taken, even though this is not a feasible option (legally).
Thus, the marginal costs and benefits of the regulatory options are those over and above a notional baseline of
no change to the existing UK law which transposes EU Directive 2002/58/EC. The complexity, however, arises
because the baseline or counterfactual will not be static: this is especially relevant in the context of regulation
affecting the way in which the internet can be used where the development of the technology is a key factor
shaping the underlying market forces and, in turn, driving important changes in the nature and structure of a
wide range of markets.
This point can be illustrated by reference to the evolution of internet browsers where new products are already
being developed in response to consumers’ preferences (as well as regulatory requirements) which offer users
the opportunity to adjust their browser settings to determine which and/or how many internet cookies they
receive and whether they would like notification of them before they are saved on their computer. Likewise,
although information about internet cookies is potentially available to anyone who wishes to find out about
them, internet users may not fully understand the benefits and risks of internet cookies with the result that they
know little or nothing about how to control their use. As they become more aware and informed, it is quite
possible that the way in which they manage internet cookies will also evolve. Both instances point to the need
to consider the baseline carefully.
Understanding the relevant impacts
The analysis of the costs and benefits needs to consider how the regulatory options could potentially impact on
different sectors and groups within the UK economy, recognising that some may experience beneficial impacts
whilst others suffer negative impacts. We have focused on identifying where different regulatory options would
impact on different groups and considering whether the options change the distribution within and between
groups. In practice, we have considered:
 Which specific industries and firm types (e.g. businesses of different sizes) are likely to be affected by
each of the options: this was decided initially by consulting with relevant trade associations such as the
Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB) and the British Retail Consortium (BRC);
PwC 15
 Where impacts could be different for different parts of the industry (e.g. internet advertisers and
advertisers which use other channels); and
 How markets might be affected by each of the regulatory options.
The relevant costs and benefits that have been covered by our research are those that arise directly from the
regulation (i.e. first-round effects) and the indirect impacts (i.e. second-round effects), especially where the
latter are significant. In practice, we have considered:
 How much additional cost vendors of internet browsers will incur and how far they will be able to pass
the cost onto their customers;
 Costs to other businesses which specifically rely on the internet (for example, online publishers, online
retailers and advertisers); and
 Whether certain regulatory options will lead to consumers switching transactions offline: in this case, it
will be important to segment internet users based on their likely response to the different options.
We have distinguished two categories of costs and benefits: transition costs and benefits which are transient, or
one-off, costs or benefits that normally relate to the implementation of the regulation, and recurring costs and
benefits, that arise while the regulation remains in force (and may occur periodically, although the scale of the
impact may change over time).
We have focused our analysis around the policy costs. These are the essential costs of meeting or complying
with the policy objectives. We recognised, however, that the regulatory options might also give rise to
(additional) administrative costs, although we did not anticipate that these would be significant.
Table 5 summarises our a priori assessment of the key potential costs and benefits of the different options. We
have used research to understand the significance of the costs and benefits.
Table 5: Potential costs and benefits of regulatory options
‘Opt-in’ system for internet
cookies
Consent to the use of
internet cookies in browser
settings
Industry self-regulation
Costs Benefits Costs Benefits Costs Benefits
Users Users of
internet
     
Non-users
of internet
  
Hardware
suppliers
  
Browser owners  
Online publishers
(including public
sector)
  
Retailers Online   
Offline  
Advertisers Internet
advertisers
  
Other
advertisers
  
Web
analytics/Research
Online
research
  
Other
research
  
Source: PwC analysis
Approach
Finally, Figure 3 briefly summarises our approach to the research which has involved four key stages. Although
the stages are shown as sequential, in practice there have been some important feedbacks between the activities
which mean that they have been undertaken in parallel to some extent. In the following two sections, we
provide further details of our approach to the consumer and business research.
PwC
Figure 3: Summary of our approach
Source: PwC
Desk based research
In conducting our desk based research, we have briefly reviewed existing sources to und
of the relevant costs and benefits they might provide. Our review has considered:
 Evidence on internet users’ understanding of the role of internet cookies and how they can manage them,
including the recent US study on internet users
 The importance and value internet users attach to privacy and trust and how it affects their use of the
internet and the benefits which use of the internet can bring, including a consumer survey by the Office
of Fair Trading
16
investigating consumers’ knowledge, experience and views of online targeted
advertising;
 ONS statistics on internet usage by households and business
 Potential sources of evidence on the scale of the markets likely to be affected by
internet advertising market and, to a lesser extent, online sales).
Our review has highlighted some sources which may be potentially useful. These include:
 The various surveys of the reasons why people do and do not use the
 Analyses of the benefits of internet access, for example our study for the Digital Champion on the benefits
of digital inclusion
18
;
 More recent work (by PwC) for the Internet Advertising Bureau on the scale of internet adve
(compared to other media)
19;
; and
 The publicly available consultation documents.
Overall, however, our review suggests that there are important information gaps which relate to internet users’
likely response to the regulatory changes which would
consequent impact on businesses.
15
McDonald, A and Cranor, L, ‘Beliefs and Behaviours: Internet Users’ Understanding of Behavioural Advertising’ (August 2010)
16
Office of Fair Trading ‘Online Targeting of Advertising and Prices
17
ONS, Statistical Bulletin, ‘Internet Access 2010’; ONS, Statistical Bulletin,’E
18
Champion for Digital Inclusion, ‘The Economic Case for Digital Inclusion’,
http://raceonline2012.org/sites/default/files/resources/pwc_repor
19
http://www.iabuk.net/media/images/iabresearch_adspend_adspendfctshthh12010_7139.pdf
Desk based research
Primary consumer research
Primary business research
Analysis & reporting
’ understanding of behavioural advertising
17
; and
the Directive (e.g. the
internet for different purposes;
result from implementation of the Directive and the
– a Market Study (Annexe B – a Consumer survey)’ (2010)
-commerce and ICT activity 2009’.
t.pdf
• Elaborate impact framework
• Define relevant parameters
• Review existing literature
• Develop research questions/hypotheses
• Design consumer survey - questionaire and sample
• Pilot consumer survey
• Refine questionnaire (as necessary)
• Roll out full survey
• Design business case studies
• Undertake business case studies
• Condense evidence
• Derive hypotheses
• Analyse consumer survey responses
• Analyse business research evidence
• Prepare report
16
erstand what evidence
15
;
rtising
PwC 17
3 Consumer impacts
Introduction
In this Section, we summarise the results of the consumer survey we have undertaken. We begin by outlining
the current pattern of internet use in the UK. We then present the findings from our survey on the use of the
internet, attitudes to the internet, understanding of internet cookies, management of internet cookies, impact of
the suggested regulatory approaches, awareness of policy changes, the information on cookies perceived as
most relevant, decision-making on internet cookies, and potential responses to different policy options. We
briefly summarise the main findings in the final part.
Background information
The existing pattern of internet use by adults in the UK is well evidenced. The ONS estimates that 60% of the
UK adult population (30.1m people) use the internet every day or almost every day and 77% of the UK adult
population (38.3m people) access the internet overall
20
. Table 6 shows that adults use the internet most often to
send and receive e-mail across all age groups (90%)
21
. The second most frequent purpose is finding information
about goods and services (75%), followed by using travel and accommodation related services (63%). There are
significant differences across age groups: for example, travel and accommodation services are most often used
by respondents in the age bands between 45 and 54 and 55 to 64 years of age whereas those aged 16-24 are
much more likely to post messages to chat sites, social networking sites and blogs.
Table 6: Internet activities by age group (%, 2010)
22
16-24 25-44 45-54 55-64 65+ All
Sending/receiving e-mails 88 90 89 91 87 90
Finding information about goods and services 64 76 80 83 72 75
Using services related to travel and accommodation 50 64 70 72 62 63
Internet banking 45 63 54 53 34 54
Reading or downloading online news, newspapers or
magazines
52 53 51 47 40 51
Listening to web radio or watching web television 59 47 45 34 24 45
Posting messages to chat sites, social networking sites,
blogs
75 49 31 19 8 43
Playing or downloading games, images, films or music 61 43 32 24 17 40
Seeking health related information 27 42 39 44 36 39
Uploading self created content to any website to be shared 50 43 28 29 22 38
Consulting the Internet with the purpose of learning 47 34 34 30 27 35
Looking for information about education, training or courses 47 36 27 19 7 32
Downloading software (other than games software) 35 34 23 27 18 30
Looking for a job or sending a job application 38 32 23 11 1 26
Telephoning or making video calls (via webcam) over the
Internet
30 25 22 17 15 23
Selling goods or services over the Internet 16 28 20 18 9 21
Donating to charities online 10 13 15 13 7 12
Doing an online course 11 8 7 5 3 8
Source: Internet Access 2010, Statistical Bulletin, ONS (August 2010).
20
Individuals using the internet in the three months prior to the survey.
21
See for example Internet Access, 2010, Statistical Bulletin, ONS
22
Base: UK adults who accessed the Internet in the last three months
PwC 18
As can be seen in Table 7, people most often purchase clothes and sports goods over the internet (52%),
followed by films and music (47%), holiday accommodation (44%) and household goods (43%). Again,
significant age differences are visible: for example, films and music are purchased by 50% of respondents below
age 44 and only 25% of the 65 and over.
Table 7: Purchases over the internet by age group, (%, 2010)
23
16-24 25-44 45-54 55-64 65+ All
Clothes, sports goods 58 45 46 43 38 52
Films, music 50 50 33 27 25 47
Holiday accommodation (e.g. hotels) 46 53 54 47 44 44
Household goods (e.g. furniture, toys) 52 41 46 39 37 43
Books, magazines, newspapers (including e-books) 40 43 39 41 40 39
Other travel arrangements (e.g. transport tickets, car hire) 36 42 48 35 32 36
Tickets for events 37 40 34 21 19 35
Electronic equipment (including cameras) 31 24 22 14 15 25
Food or groceries 32 25 16 17 17 24
Video games software and upgrades 30 20 9 8 8 23
Share purchases, insurance policies and other financial services 24 23 18 13 11 20
Other computer software and upgrades 18 17 23 22 20 18
Telecommunication services 17 14 16 13 13 15
Computer hardware 13 15 14 11 10 13
e-learning material 8 5 2 2 2 6
Medicine 6 6 9 12 10 6
Other 4 6 7 5 5 5
Source: Internet Access 2010, Statistical Bulletin, ONS (August 2010).
Consumer survey
In this part of the Section we describe our approach to the online consumer survey we conducted and the key
results.
Sample
In total 1,012 individuals participated in the online survey. The sample was drawn randomly from Research
Now’s online panel. All respondents are from the UK. Half (51%) of respondents are female and respondents
are distributed across all age groups.
24
Respondents are from all regions within the UK with most being from
London (13%), Scotland and South East (12% each) and North West (11%). Based on the occupation of the
household head, 62% of respondents belong to socioeconomic groups ABC1 and 38% to socioeconomic groups
C2DE. The survey was conducted in February 2011.
More intensive internet users are overrepresented in the sample compared to the general population given that
survey sample was taken from an online panel. In other respects, the sample is broadly representative of the
UK population of internet users. Moreover, as frequent internet users represent the majority of UK internet
users and these users are likely to be most affected by further regulation of internet cookies, the survey design is
consistent with the overall objective of the research. In interpreting the results of the survey, however, it is
important to keep in mind that the sample is representative for the population of more frequent UK internet
users and not the overall UK population.
23
Base: UK adults who had bought or ordered online in the last twelve months
24
14% are between 16-24 years old, 17% between 25-34, 19% between 35-44, 16% between 45-54, 14% between 55-64 and 19% over
65.
PwC
Use of the internet
Overall, 95% of respondents in the consumer survey indic
every day. This is above the average for UK internet usage and reflects the fact that the survey was conducted
online based on an online panel.
25
The most popular activities of respondents in the intern
information on products/services (83%), buying products and services online (82%) and internet banking
(74%). This is broadly in line with top activities identified by ONS (2010) and shown in
The most popular products purchased a few times a month over the internet include food and groceries (20%)
and films and music (16%). Respondents state that th
arrangements (67%) a few times a year.
Nearly all respondents (98%) access the internet using a personal computer whilst 28% indicated that they also
use their mobile phone to access the internet. Finall
main browser (see Figure 4) and just under half (43%) use multiple browsers to access the internet.
Figure 4: Main internet browser used (% of respondents) (Q5)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Survey respondents were asked how confident they are as internet users, and to rank their confidence on a scale
from 1 (not at all confident) to 10 (totally confident). Most respondents are relatively confident when using the
internet as can be seen in Figure 5: The most common response (the mode) was 8.
surprising given that respondents were frequent internet users. Nonetheless, it is impor
confidence of an internet user is likely to be higher if they perceive themselves as having a higher level of
information and, therefore, able to give proper consent.
25
ONS (2010) reports that 60% of adults aged 16 or over use the internet every day and a further 13% use the internet weekly.
26
This high average confidence level is likely to be influenced by the survey being conducted online.
27
Note also that it might be more difficult to inform individuals if they describe themselves as being confident.
3.8%
11.3%
ated that they use the internet every day or almost
et are sending and receiving e-
ey buy holiday accommodation (66%) and other travel
y, about 60% of respondents use Internet Explorer as their
26
This is not altogether
27
59.6%
19.6%
1.7% 4.2%
19
mails (93%), finding
Table 6 above.
tant since the
Internet Explorer
Safari
Mozilla
Chrome
Don't know
Other
PwC
Figure 5: Confidence in use of internet (Q13)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Attitudes to the internet
Respondents were asked a series of questions about their attitudes to the use of the internet. As can be seen in
Figure 6, more than three quarters of the survey respondents (77%) are concerned about internet security.
Generally, we would expect that less frequent users are likely to be more concerned about internet security
which makes this estimation conservative (i.e. the percentage of people concerned in the UK population is likely
to be higher).
Figure 6: Concerns about internet security (Q14)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Only 32% of respondents actively changed privacy settings of their browser to give more privacy (see
28% did not check the privacy settings at all. Another 20% of respondents rep
browser settings but did not change them, 19% could not remember what they had done and only 1% reportedly
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Not 2 3
20.6%
orted that they reviewed their
4 5 6 7 8
77.2%
2.3%
20
Figure 7).
9 Totally
Yes
No
Don't know
PwC
changed the default settings to give them less privacy.
are common although few users adjust default privacy settings actively.
Figure 7: Browser privacy settings (Q7)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Interestingly, when split according to main browser in use, nearly one third (32%) of respondents using
Internet Explorer indicated that they did not check default settings whereas the respective percentages for users
of other browsers were lower: 13% for
Table 8 : Whether changed privacy settings on internet browser by main bro
Browser Left default settings
Internet Explorer 32.2%
Safari 13.2%
Firefox 23.2%
Chrome 25.4%
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Respondents who expressed concerns regarding internet security were
virus or other computer infection (88%)
abuse of personal information sent over the internet (75%). The results are shown in
28
It seems likely that respondents who ‘cannot remember’ did not change the settings.
29
When related to internet security concerns we see that people having concerns more ofte
vs. 25% of people not concerned). However, in both groups 28% of people left the default settings without checking. Over one
respondents (27%) who were not concerned reviewed the default settings w
reviewed and did not change settings. This is consistent with people being more concerned changing settings more often if the
review them.
30
This might be explained, for example, by the possib
downloaded are more likely to be proficient users and, therefore, more likely to check settings.
31.9%
0.8%
19.2%
28
These results suggest that internet security concerns
29
Safari, 23% for (Mozilla) Firefox and 25% for Chrome (see
wser used (Q7 by Q5)
Reviewed but did
not change
Changed more
privacy
Changed less
19.7% 29.0%
31.6% 42.1%
21.7% 37.9%
22.8% 36.0%
most often concerned about catching a
, incurring a financial loss due to fraudulent payment (82%) or the
Figure
n changed settings to obtain more privacy (34%
ithout changing whereas only 18% of concerned people
ility that those respondents who use (not preinstalled) browsers that have to be
27.9%
20.3%
I left the default settings without checking
them
I reviewed the default settings but did not
change them
I changed them to give me more privacy
I changed them to give me less privacy
I cannot remember
21
Table 8)
30
.
privacy
Cannot remember
0.7% 18.4%
0.0% 13.2%
1.0% 16.2%
1.8% 14.0%
8.
quarter of
y decide to
PwC
Figure 8: Aspects of internet security which are of concern (Q15)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: Based upon 781 respondents.
Finally, 42% of respondents indicated that
concerns. These respondents were asked regarding the respective activities and the results are shown in
9. As can be seen, sharing personal information with communities (67%), the use of public computers and
internet cafes for personal transactions (57%) belong to activities most often not undertaken.
Figure 9: Activities not undertaken because of interne
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: Based upon 429 respondents.
Survey respondents were presented with a number of statements about their (possible) attitude to data security.
The statements are shown in Table 9 together with an indication of the degree to which they agreed with the
statement. We have highlighted those statements for which there is a significant level of
disagreement (i.e. where the two most common responses are ‘agree somewhat’ or ‘totally agree’ and vice
versa).
0% 10%
Catching a virus
Fin. loss (payment)
Abuse of personal info.
Unsolicited emails
Fin. loss (fake websites)
Fin. loss (messages)
Other privacy violations
Children (websites)
Children (persons)
0%
Communicating (public services)
Buying goods or services
Wireless connection (ex. home)
Banking activities
Downloading software, etc.
Using public computers
Pers. info. to communities
they do not undertake certain activities because of internet security
t security concerns (Q17)
20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%
10% 20% 30% 40% 50%
22
Figure
agreement or
80% 90% 100%
60% 70% 80%
PwC 23
Table 9: Attitudes towards data security (Q19)
Issue Totally
disagree
Disagree
somewhat
Neutral Agree
somewhat
Totally
agree
Concerned about companies collecting private data 1% 5% 17% 41% 33%
Happy giving personal information if it helps to increase choice 13% 27% 30% 24% 5%
Happy giving personal information if it helps to get discounts 10% 23% 30% 29% 6%
Happy giving out personal information if it saves time 17% 33% 27% 19% 3%
No clear view about the types of personal data companies are able to collect 3% 12% 24% 38% 19%
Only provide personal information to companies I trust 2% 3% 13% 42% 39%
Only happy for data to be used if it is anonymised 4% 9% 26% 37% 21%
Too much of personal information is stored on the internet 2% 7% 29% 38% 21%
No personal benefit to companies storing personal information 8% 20% 26% 23% 18%
Companies should be punished for breaking privacy laws 2% 1% 6% 16% 73%
Watch what I do online more carefully if companies collect data 2% 6% 24% 39% 28%
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: ‘Do not know’ category is omitted
Two interesting observations can be made based on comparisons of respondents’ reactions:
 The five statements for which we observe a high degree of agreement are all ‘positive’ statements with
regard to the protection of privacy: individuals express that they are concerned about collection of private
data, that they only provide information online to companies they trust, that companies breaking privacy
laws should be punished and that they would watch more carefully what they do online if they knew that
companies would collect data.
 Respondents seem generally more neutral or show some degree of disagreement when privacy is traded
off against an increase in choice, discount or time savings.
Furthermore, with regard to privacy, 15% of respondents reported that they are very concerned with their
online privacy when using the internet, 53% report they are fairly concerned and 28% report that they are not
very concerned. Only 4% of respondents are not concerned at all (Q 20).
Question 21 of the survey explicitly asked respondents what they considered to be private data. Five options
were considered: personal details, internet protocol (IP) address, the contents of e-mails, the websites that were
visited (history) and what respondents did when visiting a website. The respective findings are shown in Table
10. Most respondents attached more importance to the contents of e-mails than to personal details like their
name and address. Over 60% of respondents also considered the history and activities on a website as being
private. Finally, 54% considered even the IP address as being private
31
.
Table 10: Elements of data considered to be private data (Q21) and importance attributed to each element
(Q22)
Whether or not private (Q21) Importance attached to privacy (Q22)
Yes No Don't
know
Not at all
important
Very important
Personal details (name, address) 70% 24% 6% 1% 7% 25% 66%
Internet protocol (IP) address 54% 31% 15% 3% 15% 35% 40%
The contents of e-mails 88% 8% 4% 1% 4% 22% 73%
The websites I have visited (history) 61% 30% 8% 3% 23% 42% 30%
What I did when visiting a website 68% 24% 8% 3% 18% 42% 36%
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: ‘Don’t know’ category is not shown for importance scale.
Understanding of internet cookies
Respondents were asked about their understanding of internet cookies. Our expectation was that the better was
users’ existing knowledge of internet cookies, the more precisely they would be able to evaluate the different
regulatory options. On the other hand, if the results indicated that users’ understanding of internet cookies was
poor, then this would suggest that the challenges and, hence, the costs of informing users such that they are
able to properly consent as required by the Directive would be larger.
31
This is interesting as the IP address itself does not contain any personal information.
PwC
As can be seen in Figure 10, 13% of respondents indicated that they fully understand how internet c
45% indicated some understanding of internet cookies, 37% had heard of internet cookies but did not
understand how they work and 2% of people had not heard of internet cookies before the participating in the
survey. These results indicate that – on their own admission
a limited understanding of internet cookies. As our sample consists mainly of frequent internet users, it is likely
that understanding of internet cookies is lower across the w
Figure 10: Understanding of how internet cookies work (Q24)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
To test for internet cookie related knowledge more objectively, respondents were also
of statements regarding the function and purpose of internet cookies and asked whether they thought that each
of the statements was true or false.
32
The responses are summarised in
shown in bold.
As can be seen, only for one out of the sixteen statements a majority of respondents knew the correct answer.
For all but the first statement, only a minority o
are small bits of data stored on my computer’)
indicating that they did not know the answer.
We conclude from these observations that the majority of respondents have only a (very) limited a priori
knowledge and understanding of the function and purpose of internet cookies.
Table 11: Understanding of internet cookies (Q25)
Cookies are small bits of data stored on my computer
Cookies let websites display more quickly
Cookies let me stay logged in over time
Cookies enable personalised advertising...
Cookies are no different to my internet browser history
Advertisers can use cookies on multiple websites to learn which websites I visit
Cookies may be combined with other data that identifies me by name
If I do not accept cookies, websites cannot tell where
Cookies enable personalised content...
Cookies contain information from when I first purchased my computer (incl...)
Cookies let browsers forward and backward arrows work correctly
32
The respective statements were extracted from McDonald A. M. And L.F. Cranor (2010), Beliefs and Behaviors: Internet Users’
Understanding of Behavioral Advertising.
33
Interestingly, when compared to the research conducted by McDonald and Cran
knowledge of cookies. In McDonald and Cranor 7 out 16 questions were answered correctly.
37.5%
2.2% 2.5%
- a significant proportion of respondents have only
hole of the UK population.
presented with a number
Table 11 with the correct answers being
f respondents selected the correct response (‘Internet cookies
33
with other respondents either selecting the incorrect answer or
Yes
63%
39%
41%
47%
14%
47%
40%
I am physically located 18%
31%
13%
21%
or, respondents in our survey seem to exhibit a lower
12.7%
45.2%
I understood fully how they work
I had some understanding of how they work
I had heard of cookies, but did not
understand how they work
I had not heard of cookies before today
Don't know
24
ookies work,
No Unsure
6% 31%
20% 41%
16% 43%
8% 45%
42% 43%
7% 46%
9% 51%
31% 51%
16% 53%
33% 53%
31% 48%
PwC
Cookies are a type of spyware
A website I visit can read every cookie I have ...
Cookies let people send me spam
Cookies change the colour of hyperlinks to websites I have already visited
By law, cookies may not contain credit or debit card information
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results, statements based upon McDonald and Cranor (2010). Note: Answers printed in b
are correct.
Further analysis of the responses shows that the majority of respondents who indicated that they fully
understand the functionality of cookies (N=129) correctly identified whether 11 out of 16 statements were true
or false. These respondents, therefore, a
At this point in the survey, all respondents were provided with some basic information on the functionality of
internet cookies. Nevertheless, we believe that some caution is needed when interpreting
subsequent questions because of respondents’ limited a priori knowledge of the topic.
Management of internet cookies
As can be seen from Figure 11, 18% of respondents stated that they accept all internet cookies, 36% accept only
selected internet cookies, 9% do not accept any internet cookies and 37% of respondents do not know how
internet cookies on their computer are managed. This is consistent w
indicated that they have only a limited or no knowledge of internet cookies. It should be noted, however, that
the number of people only accepting selective internet cookies (36%) seems relatively high and could not be
confirmed during business case studies where the number was generally estimated to be much lower. The
results should, therefore, be interpreted with some caution.
in the pattern of answers: 55% of people wh
people who indicated that they have some understanding of cookies stated that they only accept selected
cookies. A much smaller proportion of people who had heard of cookies or never heard
selective acceptance (21% and 18%, respectively).
Figure 11: Number of internet cookies accepted on own computer (Q27)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
34
The relatively high percentage of people indicating selective acceptance of cookies might, for example, be due
distinguishing between cookie related browser message and other security related pop
9.1%
36.9%
Yes
37%
17%
32%
21%
34%
ppear to have a better knowledge of internet cookies.
ith the large proportion of people
34
We note, however, that there is some consistency
o indicated that they fully understand how cookies work and 45% of
-ups.
17.9%
36.2%
25
No Unsure
26% 38%
24% 59%
24% 44%
21% 58%
9% 57%
old
the responses to the
of them indicated
to some people not
I accept all cookies
I accept only selected cookies
I do not accept any cookies
Don't know
PwC
Survey respondents who indicated that they
up question what types of internet cookies they currently accept. The results are depicted in
answers possible):
 63 % of respondents accept internet cookies from sites they frequently visit;
 63 % of respondents accept internet cookies necessary for functionality;
 49% indicated a good reputation of the company is a reason; and
 17% of the respondents read the privacy policy.
The results indicate that respondents are more likely to accept an individual internet cookie when the site is
frequently visited, the company has a good reputation or rejection of the cookie will incur a loss of f
This suggests that it might be easier for large and established
internet cookies accepted. As only 17% of respondents indicated that they read the privacy statement of a
website, internet cookie consent might be more difficult to gain for ‘smaller’
show a lower initial level of trust.
Figure 12: Basis for selecting internet cookies onto computer (Q28)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: Only a subsample of 366 respondents included
Respondents indicating that they accept all internet cookies were asked whether they take any further action
regarding the internet cookies they accept on their computer. As can be seen in
respondents (51%) take no further action, about 30% stated that they delete them automatically and 20% delete
the internet cookies by hand.
17%
3%
0% 10%
Frequent
visits
Necessary
for
function…
Good
reputation
Read
privacy
policy
Depends
only accept selective internet cookies (N=366) were asked a follow
websites with a high number of visitors to get
websites where people potentially
Figure
49%
20% 30% 40% 50%
26
-
Figure 12 (multiple
unctionality.
13, half of the
63%
63%
60% 70%
PwC
Figure 13: Action taken with internet cookies accepted onto own computer (Q29)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: Only a subsample of 181 respondents included
Finally, there are already ‘opt-out’ solutions for internet cookies available. Survey respondents were asked
whether they are aware of any of these ‘opt
are not aware of any ‘opt-out’ possibilities. Only 6% of respondents indicated that they know TACO for Firefox
and 9% that they are aware of anonymous browsing.
The respondents who are aware of any options most often use anonymous browsing or the TACO add
Firefox (see Figure 15) which is in line wit
respondents say that they have not used the ‘opt
them.
Figure 14: Awareness of websites and software which
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey result.
35
Knowledge of these options is likely to be lower in the overall UK internet population as respondents are mostly frequent int
29%
20%
85%
-out’ solutions. As can be seen from Figure
35
All other options are only known by 1
h the answers to the previous question. Interestingly, 29% of
-out’ possibilities although they are aware of at least one of
helps internet users to opt-out (Q31)
51%
I take no further action
I delete them automatically (by software)
I delete them by hand
2% 2%
6%
9% 1%
youronlinechoices.com
NAI- Network Advertising Initiative
TACO (for Firefox)
Anonymous browsing
Other
None of these
27
14, 85% of respondents
-2% of respondents.
-on for
ernet users.
PwC
Figure 15: Use of opt-out (Q31A)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey result based on 147 respondents
Impact of suggested approaches to reg
As we discussed in the previous Section, the Government is currently considering changes to the way in which
the use of internet cookies is regulated. It has identified three possible elements of its approach:
 Approach 1 - ‘‘Opt-in’ for Individual
confirm that they wish to accept an internet cookie placed on their computer before the internet cookie is
placed there. Under this option, users might see a pop
where an internet cookie is about to be used. This pop
cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would be used. It would then give the
user the option to accept or reject the int
 Approach 2 – ‘Enhanced Information about Individual Internet Cookies’
to internet users where internet cookies are being used and enable them to find out more about them.
Under this option, users would see an icon appear on every web page they visit where an internet cookie
is being used. By clicking on this icon, users would be able find out more about the purpose of the
internet cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would b
explain how the user can accept or reject the internet cookie.
 Approach 3 - ‘Enhanced Internet Brower Settings’
internet cookies via their internet browser settings. It would mean t
be made more visible to internet users and they would need to be provided with clear and comprehensive
information about internet cookies and how they can use their browser settings to opt
wish either on a case by case basis or collectively.
Our survey asked a series of questions to understand respondents’ awareness of potential changes in policy
towards internet cookies and the potential impact of the different policy options.
Awareness of policy changes
Survey respondents were first asked whether they are aware of any policy changes with regard to internet
cookies: most respondents (83%) indicated that they are not aware of changes to the way in which the use of
internet cookies will be regulated and only 9% stated that they are aware of changes.
39%
5%
29%
ulation
Internet Cookies’: this would require internet users to
-up window appear on every web page t
-up would explain the purpose of the internet
ernet cookie before it is used.
: this would allow users to consent to the use of
hat browser settings would need to
10%
10%
27%
youronlinechoices.com
NAI- Network Advertising Initiative
TACO (for Firefox)
Anonymous browsing
Other
None of these
28
hey visit
: this would highlight
e used. It would also
-out of them if they
PwC
Relevant information regarding internet cookies
Regarding internet cookie related information, 62% of respondents think that it is very important to know the
purpose of an internet cookie, 56% find inform
indicate that the contents, issuer and impact on functionality are very important pieces of information.
Table 12: Level of importance attached to different types of
The information contained in the cookie (contents)
The organisation responsible for the cookie (Issuer)
How the information will be used (Purpose)
Impact on functionality
How to delete cookie
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results. Note: ‘Don’t know’ category not shown
Decision on internet cookies
When asked whether they need time to decide whether or not to accept an internet cookie, the majority of
respondents (59%, see Figure 16) say that they would need som
would then decide whether to accept an internet cookie. Almost a quarter of respondents (23%) indicated that
they would decide on internet cookies instantly whereas 18% would need some time to read the provided
information and do additional research and/or ask for help.
Figure 16: Basis for deciding whether or not to accept an internet cookie (Q36)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
The time respondents would be willing to
seconds and more than 30 seconds (Figure
same website they would need less time for subsequent decision (47%) or indicate this would depend on the
type of internet cookie (31%, Q 38).
58.9%
18.4%
ation on how to delete cookies as very important. Roughly 40%
information within internet cookies (Q35)
Not at all
important
Not very
important
2% 4%
1% 7%
1% 2%
1% 4%
1% 4%
e time to read the information presented and
spend on a decision is roughly uniformly distributed between 5
17). Furthermore, if respondents receive internet cookies fro
22.7% I would decide instantly without
reading the information provided
each time
I would need some time to read
the information presented each
time
I would need some time to read
the information presented and do
additional research / ask for help
29
Quite
important
Very
important
40% 43%
36% 45%
25% 62%
41% 42%
28% 56%
m the
PwC
Figure 17: Time internet users prepared to spend deciding whether or not to accept
(Q37)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Based on the survey results, internet users will potentially incur large time costs managing their use of internet
cookies. If each user had to manage (only) 200 internet cookies p
consumer survey, we estimate that the total cost would be around £190
this estimate is indicative as it is based upon stated (through a survey) as opposed to revealed (through
observed data) time requirements and the survey sample consists of frequent internet users.
Furthermore, online experience could also be negatively impacted. However, the results of the online survey in
which the ‘Opt-in’ option was ranked first by most
document a wish for more control with regard to internet cookies. It is, however, unclear whether the above
time costs have been fully considered by survey participants.
Potential responses to different
Survey respondents were asked about the impact of the three policy options on their decision whether or not to
accept internet cookies. Respondents generally indicated that the ‘Opt
change in online behaviour (see Figure
‘Enhanced browser settings’ option. However, roughly one third of all responden
unsure how their behaviour with regard to internet cookies would change. Given that many respondents
appear to be poorly informed about internet cookies (which is reflected in the large proportion of ‘unsure’
responses), the different impacts on behaviour of the three options are not pronounced.
36
For the calculations of time requirements we assumed time requirements as bandwidth midpoints (for example for up to 5 seconds we
assumed on average 2.5 seconds). The average time requirement in the sample for each internet cookie is therefore 0.0063 hou
assume 200 internet cookies per year and a value of non
Guidance (Source: http://www.dft.gov.uk/webtag/documents/expert/pdf/unit3.5.6.pdf). We then multiply by 36.6 million
internet users (or 40.1 million if we include all internet users) to generate a value of £170 million (£189 million). Finall
to adjust the value of time to 2010 prices using the GDP deflator.
30.9%
31.7%
er annum, then, based on the results of the
- £235 million per annum.
consumers contrast these calculations and seems to
policy options
-in’ option would lead to the largest
18). This is followed by the ‘Enhanced information’ option and the
ts indicated that they are
-working time of £3.68 per hour at 2002 prices based on Department for Transport
10.6%
26.8%
Up to 5 seconds
Between 5 and 10 seconds
Between 10 and 30 seconds
More than 30 seconds
30
an internet cookie
36
Note that
rs. We
weekly or daily
y, we multiply by 1.23
PwC 31
Figure 18: Would users change their behaviour with each of the approaches
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
When asked whether they would be likely to increase or reduce the number of internet cookies they accepted,
respondents did not expect that their behaviours would differ significantly according to the approach to
regulation. Table 13 shows the percentage of people agreeing (somewhat or totally) with the statements
presented. We observe that for some statements like ‘I would feel more secure’ differences are larger (67% for
agreement for the ‘Opt-in’ option versus 46% of agreement for ‘Enhanced browser settings’).
Table 13: Impact of regulatory options (% of respondents agreeing somewhat or totally)
Please indicate how far you agree with the following statement. Opt in Enhanced
information
Enhanced
browser
settings
I would feel more secure 67% 57% 46%
I would find it difficult to know how to set my browser without knowing how
each internet cookies will be used
- - 45%
I would think more about privacy issues 68% 60% 50%
My online experiences would be hindered 30% 23% 22%
I would be more willing to perform personal transactions on the web 40% 34% 30%
I would find this approach too time consuming 33% 28% 27%
I would find it more difficult to navigate on websites 27% 19% 19%
I would spend less time on the internet 14% 12% 11%
I would spend more time on the internet 17% 16% 15%
I would find it more difficult to find products I like 15% 14% 16%
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Respondents’ overall assessment of the three options is shown in Table 14.
37
Most respondents ranked the ‘Opt-
in’ option as preferable to the other two options, followed by the ‘Enhanced information’ approach and, finally,
the ‘Enhanced browser settings’.
38
Again, it is important to see these results in the context of a large number of
respondents indicating that they have only limited a priori knowledge of internet cookies. Taking this into
consideration, the differences are not overly pronounced in favour of one of the approaches. We note however,
that some of the differences are statistically significant.
39
37
Note that respondents were required to answer this question as no do not know category was shown.
38
User confidence does not seem to affect option preference significantly. Furthermore, an analysis of preferences towards options
according to the stated understanding of cookies does not reveal significant differences across (most) groups.
39
For simplicity we calculated a mean rank for each option (1.82 for ‘Opt-in’, 1.88 for ‘Enhanced Information’ and 2.3 for ‘Enhanced
Browser settings’) and used a standard t-test to test for mean equality. Mean response for ‘Enhanced Browser settings’ is significantly
different from the other two options (p value below 1%). For ‘Opt-in’ and ‘Enhanced information’ options p-value is slightly above 0.1.
47.2
38.5
29.3
23.7
29.1
33.3
29.1
32.4
37.4
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Opt in
Enhanced information
Enhanced browser settings
Yes No Don't know
PwC
Table 14: Overall ranking of policy options (Q53)
Approach 1 - Opt In for individual internet cookies
Approach 2 - Enhanced information about internet cookies approach
Approach 3 - Enhanced browser settings approach
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Finally, survey respondents were asked about their willingness to pay for their Internet Service Provider to
manage the internet cookies delivered to their computer precisely according to their preferences (see
Interestingly, 57% of respondents indicate that they would not be willing to pay for this service. This tends to
indicate that people in general do not attribute much importance to internet cookies
note that the mean willingness to pay per month is between £0.67 and £0.78
monthly payment to the Internet Service Provider of £13.01 for the provision of internet access). The
willingness to pay for the service is, therefore, on average about 5
overall willingness to pay for the UK adult online population is estimated to be between £300 million and £380
million per annum.
42
This estimate, however, should be consid
relatively heavy internet users and the figure is based upon stated (through a survey) as opposed to revealed
(through observed data) willingness to pay. Also, our sample consists largely of frequent internet
willingness to pay for other groups seems ambiguous: Because of less frequent use, average willingness to pay
could be lower however, internet security concerns might be more pronounced in this group which tends to
increase willingness to pay.
Figure 19: Willingness to pay for service to manage internet cookies (Q54)
Source: PwC analysis based upon survey results
Summary
The main conclusion from the consumer survey are as follows:
 Respondents generally have privacy relat
 Most respondents have no knowledge of changes
 Respondents show a low degree of awareness of internet cookies
40
If (conservative) bandwidth means (for example £0.25 for the £0
whereas if point estimates are used the resulting value is £0.78.
41
User confidence does not seem to affect willingness to pay for a cookie management service as the pe
positive willingness to pay does not vary largely by level of confidence.
42
The lower band is derived by multiplying annual willingness to pay (£ 0.67 x 12) by 36.6 million weekly or daily internet use
bound is derived by using point estimates and the total number of internet users (including monthly or less use): (£0.78 x 12) x 40.1 mill
users.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
£0 £0.50 £1.00
%
o
f
re
s
p
o
n
d
e
n
tr
s
Rank 1 Rank 2
approach 44% 30%
34% 43%
21% 26%
. On the other hand, we
40
(compared with the mean
-6% of total payments.
ered as indicative as survey participants were
ed concerns.
in UK law.
and internet cookie related knowledge.
- £0.5 band) are used average monthly willingness to pay is £0.67
rcentage of people having a
£1.50 £2.00 £2.50 £3.00 £3.50 £4.00
Premium for service (£ per month)
32
Rank 3
25%
22%
52%
Figure 19).
41
On this basis, the
users and
rs. The upper
ion
£4.50 £5.00 More than
£5.00
PwC 33
 This low awareness documents the importance of additional information and potentially education
campaigns.
 Privacy concerns seem to lead respondents to wishing more control regarding internet cookies (‘Opt in’)
however, results between the three approaches are not clear-cut and difficult to read given respondents
background knowledge.
 Willingness to pay for management of internet cookies is about 5-6% of total payments for internet
services with 57% of respondents stating that they would be unwilling to pay for this service.
 Consumers potentially underestimate the total time requirements the ‘Opt-in’ option might lead to which
might be due to an underestimation of the number of internet cookies in operation.
PwC 34
4 Business case studies
Introduction
This Section summarises our assessment of the potential business impacts of further regulation of internet
cookies based on a series of 20 case studies with business stakeholders. We begin by providing a brief overview
of the context for use of the internet, especially as a sales channel, by UK businesses. We then explain our
approach to the case studies including the sampling framework we used to target the case studies. The main
part of the Section presents our findings from the case studies. The results have been aggregated and
anonymised to protect confidentiality.
Context
Overall, in 2009, 76% of UK businesses with 10 or more employees had their own website. There are, however,
significant differences according to company size; whereas 99% of all businesses with 100 or more employees
had a website, only 72% of businesses with between 10 and 49 employees had a website. The internet presence
of companies according to size is summarised in Table 15.
Table 15: % of businesses with a website (2009)
43
Employment
size
10-49 50-249 250-999 1,000+ All
2005 65 87 95 98 69
2006 66 89 96 98 70
2007
44 66 89 96 98 70
2008 71 91 94 98 75
2009 72 92 97 99 76
Source: E-commerce and ICT activity 2009, Statistical Bulletin, ONS (November 2010).
The proportion of businesses selling products and services using a website reached 14.9 per cent in 2009
45
.
Sales between industries vary significantly as can be seen in Figure 20 with most website sales being
attributable to the wholesale, transport and storage, information and communication and retail sectors.
Figure 20: Sales over a website by broad industrial sector (£bn, 2009)
43
Coverage: UK businesses with 10 or more employment.
44
Estimates since 2007 have been revised.
45
E-commerce and ICT activity, 2009, Statistical Bulletin, ONS (November 2010).
8.7
8.1
11.4
48.2
10.5
14.1
4.3
0.9
8.9
Manufcturing
Utilities
Information & communication
Wholesale
Retail
Transport & storage
Accomodation & food
Construction
Other services
PwC 35
Source: E-commerce and ICT activity 2009, Statistical Bulletin, ONS (November 2010).
Approach to case studies
Our choice of case studies was developed in conjunction with DCMS having a priori identified those sectors that
are likely to be most impacted by implementation of the Directive. We used available data on the pattern of
internet use by business to inform our choice of sectors. We identified five categories of business:
 hardware suppliers;
 browser vendors and other software vendors;
 the broad set of businesses involved in the advertising industry (including various kinds of intermediaries
between advertisers and online publishers);
 online retailers; and
 online publishers (including B2B and B2C, private sector and public sector).
In addition, we aimed to achieve an appropriate spread across smaller and larger organisations. An overview of
the respective sample framework can be found in Table 16
46
. Given the number of case studies, the sample is
not representative of the UK business population nor is it intended to be.
Table 16: Business case study sampling framework
Category Targeted Completed
Hardware/software providers
Hardware manufacturers 1 2
Browser & related software vendors 2 3
Intermediaries
Web analytics 1 2
Ad networks 2 2
Other internet services (including web design) 2 1
Cookie users
Advertising agencies 3 2
B2C e-commerce: Retail, Travel, Banking, etc 4 4
B2B e-commerce 2 1
Online publishers 1 1
Public sector 2 2
Total 20 20
Source: PwC
Our case studies involved interviewing one or more representatives from the relevant organisations in a
position to understand both the technical and business implications of regulation of internet cookie use. The
framework we used in the discussions is shown in Appendix B. In summary, we sought to understand:
 The scale of the overall business and importance of UK business to the firm.
 The products and services offered which rely on the use of internet cookies and the importance of these to
the overall business.
 How internet cookies are used to provide these products and services; the types of internet cookies; the
volume of internet cookies; the types of information sought.
 Awareness of the Directive and preparedness for its implementation.
 The general impacts and risks of internet cookie regulation.
 The specific impacts and risks associated with the ‘Opt-in’, ‘Enhanced information’, and ‘Enhanced
browser settings’ approaches and businesses preferences as between each of them.
In the following part of the Section, we present our findings for each sector. The information has been
aggregated and anonymised to provide an overall view of:
46
The names of the organisations selected for case studies have been omitted to maintain their anonymity. This condition was seen as
being conducive to gaining detailed and reliable responses from interviewees for the research. In addition, anonymity was explicitly
requested by some interviewees.
PwC 36
 The context for internet cookie use in the industry;
 The general impacts associated with regulation of internet cookies; and
 The specific impacts associated with each of the three identified regulatory methods respectively.
Although implementation of the Directive might see various methods employed in conjunction - and
interviewees were made aware of this point - their consideration in isolation allows us to gauge the relative
impacts of each and the distribution of these impacts across different kinds of businesses.
Case study findings
In the main part of this Section, we present the findings of the cases studies we have conducted. We consider
each of the five sectors we have identified in turn.
Hardware suppliers
First, we report our findings with respect to hardware suppliers. Although two hardware suppliers are shown in
the business sampling frame, four of the case study companies are involved in the manufacture and sale of
computer hardware. Our analysis of the industry context, the general impacts of regulation of cookies and
specific impacts for each regulatory option are explained below.
Context
The hardware market - as understood in the context of this report - incorporates computers (including personal
computers, laptops and handheld devices), peripherals and storage devices and mobile telecommunication
devices (including internet-enabled mobile phones). The size of the UK computer hardware market was
estimated to be £3.1bn in sales in 2009, 11% of the EU market
47
.
Hardware suppliers make use of internet cookies in a number of ways:
1. Pre-loaded “asset tag”: these are used to identify electronically the asset (i.e. the hardware) and monitor
hardware and software changes, including the initial start-up date. Such a tag can be used for:
a. Validation of the hardware warranty; and
b. Provision of software/firmware/driver updates that allow the machines to function better in
terms of reliability or capability.
Although such tags are not considered to be internet cookies per se by the interviewed suppliers, if they
were deemed to fall within the scope of the Directive, businesses in the sector would need sufficient time
to plan and implement a suitable response since they are not currently expecting to have to respond.
2. Pre-loaded first party software applications: these are software applications that come preinstalled on
computer hardware, which may use internet cookies for activation/registration purposes once started.
The applications can also be linked to the design of personalised user experience offered as part of
specific marketing campaigns (e.g. a personalised laptop may be specialised for a specific sporting
event/team).
3. Pre-loaded third party software: this includes, for example, operating systems and browsers bundled
with the sale of hardware.
4. E-commerce enablement (as online retailers): first party session internet cookies are used to ‘maintain
state’ across the site. This includes websites for personalised hardware sales and log in facilities
(including for example ‘web baskets’). Third party persistent internet cookies may be used for analytics
and behavioural advertising.
48
It is important to note that hardware vendors make use of a number of preloaded internet cookies which
present an additional challenge that may require a different regulatory approach from other kinds of internet
47
Datamonitor, June 2010; $4.6bn at $1.5/£1.
48
The impacts on online retailers are covered more fully in the later section, although the emphasis on personalised products and this
function of cookies is especially pronounced for hardware manufacturers.
PwC 37
cookie since consumers cannot consent to these kinds of cookies through internet browsers or online publishers
(except as part of their agreement to purchase the hardware).
General impacts
Businesses indicated that the major costs of implementation of the Directive would be those associated with the
e-commerce enablement and the pre-loaded “asset tag” (to the extent that such devices are subject to the
Directive).
In terms of e-commerce enablement, the general costs are those associated with the loss of functionality to the
online site and the impact on the user experience caused by request requirements and/or the rejection of
internet cookies. One hardware vendor felt that internet cookies were vital to the personalisation of the
products being sold online.
49
This is especially important for online channels where consumers value the
convenience of having their preferences matched to the relevant products and services being sold, and
consumers face low costs in switching their search efforts to competing online retailers. In fact, the ability to
provide personalised products is sometimes a competitive advantage and, therefore, a specifically targeted
strategy. Such personalisation makes essential use of internet cookies (e.g. by remembering preferences
selected in forms data, allowing for authentication in making transactions, log in/registration procedures etc).
A reduction in the rate of acceptance of internet cookies has the potential to undermine the ability of firms to
provide such personalisation of products and the website.
Costs may be incurred in terms of the need to redesign the e-retail website to maintain the functionality and
user experience in case internet cookies are rejected by a significant portion of customers.
In terms of the impacts regarding pre-loaded third party software, there may be a cost of gaining some kind of
specific (and probably prior) consent, since such software including internet cookies might exist on the
hardware at the time of purchase, rather than being downloaded later. One case study interviewee suggested
that approval could be obtained at the point of sale since this was considered the best time to seek the
consumer’s acceptance of the cookies. This was seen as unlikely to give rise to a great cost.
The more substantial cost would be the need to replace the existing hardware and software frameworks relating
to customer support if the ‘asset tag’ solutions are subject to the Directive and are not approved by a significant
portion of the customer base. Alternative offline capabilities relating to hardware support could potentially be
needed to service this part of the overall customer base, and this could entail significant costs. Such capabilities
aim to maintain customer support standards, for instance by providing better or more extensive hardware
support over the telephone, or through onsite and in person hardware support services.
Interviewees also mentioned during the case studies that some innovative technologies which rely on preloaded
internet cookies for their effective functioning might not receive investment amidst a backdrop of uncertainty
regarding the regulation of preloaded internet cookies. This is because the uncertainty around possible
regulation weakens demand for these products/services. As a result, consumers may face more limited choices
(especially for innovative products) and hardware manufacturers may lose out on potentially revenue earning
opportunities. Such products could, for example, include services relying on a tracking of hardware.
In terms of benefits, hardware manufacturers might benefit from increased consumer trust in internet
technology. This might lead people currently not using internet technology to buy the respective equipment.
Furthermore, consumers preferring to buy hardware offline might switch to the online channel.
Specific impacts
The specific impacts of each regulatory option are summarised in Figure 21. They include the risks and costs to
hardware suppliers that are specific to (or most strongly associated with) one regulatory option over another.
Of particular note is the costly impact of the ‘Opt-in’ option for online retail operations. In addition, ‘generic
level approval’ (which might be interpreted as a ‘settings’-type approach at the point of sale) was seen as the
49
Personal computers, for example, can be bought to a personal specification.
PwC 38
least costly way to gather consent for preloaded internet cookies (to the extent that consent is required by the
Directive).
50
Figure 21: Summary of specific impacts on hardware manufacturers
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 This would severely restrict the e-
retail operation. Consent
requirements would severely
detract from the user experience
in terms of inconvenience caused,
which would negatively impact
sales. Those who ‘opt-out’ would
be repeatedly asked for consent,
since internet cookies are the
standard means of remembering
the opt-out preference.
 Small administrative costs
incurred if there is a need to gain
consent at point of sale for
preloaded internet cookies.
 But major costs would include
those associated with the change
of existing platforms
/infrastructure required to provide
essential functions such as
customer support and hardware
maintenance if a significant
portion of customers choose to
opt-out.
 Benefits of increased trust on sale
of hardware and online
transactions.
 The “eye icon” method in
behavioural advertising affects the
sale of hardware (through
advertising). But there was
uncertainty as to if/how this would
be applied to first party
behavioural tracking by hardware
vendors’ e-retail operations.
 Perception that if behavioural
advertising was singled out for
specific regulation (e.g. “eye
icon”), it might reduce the burden
on and regulatory costs associated
with other kinds of more essential
internet cookies used by hardware
vendors.
 Improvement of the provision of
information on pre-loaded internet
cookies at the point of sale was
mentioned as a potential strategy
for enhancing information. This
would incur administrative and
technical costs in providing this
information.
 Benefits of increased trust on sale
of hardware and online
transactions.
 This was seen as less costly and less
time consuming overall for both
consumers and hardware vendors.
 Allows hardware users to have a better
user experience of computer hardware,
by removing ‘unwanted’ internet
cookies, without the inconvenience of
the ‘Opt-in’ option.
 Option of ‘generic level approval’ (in
effect a ‘settings’ approach by internet
cookie type/use at point of sale of
hardware and across
browsers/software) was put forward.
But:
 If users consent on a type/use
basis, manufacturers would
incur legal costs of establishing
definitions, and technology
costs of recognising internet
cookie type/use.
 End user may not be the
purchaser (e.g. hardware gifts,
public access computers etc.),
so method may not comply with
Directive.
 Benefits of increased trust on sale of
hardware and online transactions.
Source: PwC analysis based on case studies
Internet browser and related software vendors
Second, we set out our findings with respect to software suppliers, including both the manufacturers of internet
browsers and the vendors of related software. This latter category includes developers of internet browser
runtime plug-ins that store data on end users’ hardware (i.e. those that use local storage).
51
Although browser
vendors are active in this space, this was not true of all case study companies. Below, we explain our
understanding of the industry context, the general impacts of regulation of internet cookies and the specific
impacts for each regulatory option.
Context
The market for web browser software is relatively concentrated. The top three vendors, Microsoft ‘Internet
Explorer’, Mozilla ‘Firefox’ and Google ‘Chrome’, together claim around 90% of the UK market.
52
‘Internet
Explorer’ is the market leader, capturing around half the UK market and has more than twice the market share
of ‘Firefox’, its nearest rival. It has, however, lost market share (mainly to Google Chrome) in recent years
53
.
These browser manufacturers currently present their options and default settings for internet cookies in
different ways. Although all major vendors offer the option to block third party internet cookies, to the best of
our knowledge Apple’s Safari is the only major browser to do so as the default.
50
Note that this type of consent would not strictly fit within the three regulatory options considered.
51
A runtime plug-in is software component that runs alongside and adds specific capabilities to a larger software application (in this case
the internet browser).
52
StatsCounter, February 2011.
53
This is broadly corroborated with the results of the consumer survey showing ‘Internet Explorer’, Mozilla ‘Firefox’ and Google ‘Chrome’
with 60%, 20% and 11% respectively, although Internet Explorer has a larger share amongst our sample.
PwC 39
The scope to prevent behavioural advertising (e.g. “do not track” options) also differs by browser. Microsoft’s
latest version of Internet Explorer 9
54
will allow users to restrict third party behavioural advertising by
importing a list of approved third parties from an independent privacy organisation of choice. For example,
TRUSTe
55
administers a list which allows cookies to be downloaded from parties approved by the Digital
Advertising Alliance's (“eye icon”) self-regulatory program, and will block cookies from all those that do not
achieve approved status within 30 days. Mozilla Firefox currently ‘expresses’ a preference (e.g. for a user to not
be behaviourally tracked) through a browser header which may or may not be heeded by advertising networks.
Google Chrome allows options to permanently opt-out of the 50-odd advertising networks that participate in
the self-regulatory regime (through a browser add on that is not pre-installed).
The three major vendors also have significant other business interests besides the production and sale of
browsers. These include hardware, e-retail, online publishing, other web based services and advertising.
The relevance of the Directive also extends to other software which is able to “store” or “access” information on
end users’ hardware, for example internet browser runtime plug-ins such as Adobe Flash, Microsoft Silverlight
and Sun Microsystems Java. The developers and users of such products are likely to be impacted by changes to
the Directive. Importantly, these products have historically circumvented browser settings and have user
controls which were perceived as less visible by some interviewees.
General impacts
Internet browser vendors are most obviously impacted by the possibility of ‘Enhanced browser settings’. This
option could require them to make potentially significant technical changes to their software to better reflect
users’ potential preferences regarding internet cookies and/or related types of local storage, to provide
information regarding internet cookies and to make these settings generally more visible to end users. The
extent to which they are likely to incur costs with this approach depends on the (marginal) changes that would
need to be made to ensure compliance. During our discussions, browser vendors generally saw themselves as
compliant with the aims of the Directive. Since internet browsers are frequently updated by vendors it seems
important to define criteria through which browser vendors can document compliance and to determine
whether the Directive explicitly requires an ‘audit trail’ of implemented changes. The costs of implementation
(assuming changes are necessary) include the time cost of reprogramming of browsers to incorporate the
provision of such ‘Enhanced browser settings’ and information as well as the associated costs of testing and
rolling out the changes. In addition, costs would be incurred as the changes to these settings and the
underlying technology frameworks would need to be communicated to web developers and other third parties
so that they could adapt their systems as necessary.
There may, however, be substantial costs involved for browser vendors also in the ‘Opt-in’ option for example
because of the creation of standards and mechanisms for the transmission of information between browsers
and cookie users. A particular hurdle for the ‘Opt-in’ approach is that browsers must be able to remember the
preferences of end users to prevent the repeat request (e.g. the choice to opt-out of internet cookies from a
particular advertising network or website), but this typically relies on the use of a persistent internet cookie.
This tends, however, to mean that companies must opt-in for the scheme to work, and end users who delete all
internet cookies also delete all memory of their opt-out preferences. In addition, existing technologies have
limited ability to recognise internet cookie types and use beyond the crude first party/third party distinction.
Moreover, there are obvious merits for end users in presenting this information in a standardised format, both
across web pages and across browsers.
56
54
This is currently available as a beta version.
55
TRUSTe is a company that manages a large Privacy Seal programme. The programme has certified more than 3,500 websites, who
successfully meet the company’s industry best practices regarding privacy and protecting confidential user information. For more
information see http://www.truste.com/about_TRUSTe/index.html
56
See, for example, the Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) initiative which aims to collect privacy policy information from websites and
classify the use/type of cookies on a standardised basis displayed within web browsers: http://www.w3.org/P3P/implementations.html.
From our interviews, there was a limited knowledge of the initiative. Support amongst those who were aware of the initiative was mixed.
The most commonly stated hurdle was the lack of compliance amongst browser vendors.
PwC 40
Importantly, several case studies suggested that it was likely that web developers and online publishers would
need to respond to the technical framework implemented by browser vendors. This would be difficult and
uncertain/costly for online publishers if browsers used different settings and technical approaches.
Browser vendors may thus incur costs of coordination with all regulatory options and were perceived as the
‘first movers’ by providing the underlying browser framework against which website owners must design their
sites.
Vendors of browser runtime plug-ins which provide local storage facilities will also incur costs. Such storage
has historically circumvented internet browser privacy settings. Their inclusion in the settings of future
versions of internet browsers could undermine the use of runtime facilities (if such internet cookies are rejected
by a significant portion of end users). In turn, these could reduce sales of revenue-driving development tools.
Browser vendors may incur costs of enhancing browser settings to include these other kinds of local storage.
Interviewees were mixed in their assessments of the privacy risks of other kinds of local storage and their
inclusion in internet browser settings.
Benefits for browser vendors might be mainly due to an increased browser usage and number of users online
because of increased trust.
Specific impacts
The specific impacts of each regulatory option are summarised in Figure 22. They include the risks and costs to
software vendors that are specific to, or most strongly associated with, one regulatory option over another.
The regulatory option of ‘Enhanced internet browser settings’ is perhaps the most costly approach for browser
vendors. The inclusion of wider kinds of local storage in these settings will give rise to costs for developers of
browser runtime plug-ins. Standardisation in settings and technology across all methods is desirable, but costly
to vendors.
Figure 22: Summary of specific impacts on browser vendors
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 To maintain consistency of user
experience, browser vendors would
incur costs of ‘standardising’
information presented in the pop-up
window/link to website e.g. on privacy
policy, internet cookie use/type etc.
 Cost would be incurred to browser
vendors that do not currently offer an
internet cookie-by-cookie request
option.
 Costs would be incurred to runtime
developers in providing opt-in facilities.
One developer noted that content may
crash in attempting to render the user
interface for consent if users opt-out.
This would incur redesign costs to
runtime developers and/or online
publishers.
 It appears that coordination between
browser vendors is desirable to achieve
uniformity and minimise costs for online
publishers. This may require costly
negotiations between vendors and
regulators.
 Increased trust might lead to additional
browser usage and more online
transactions.
 Browsers potentially need some
technology to remember settings
selected in the “eye icon” method and
incorporate chosen settings into how
internet cookies are filtered whilst
browsing.
 It is desirable that information on
behavioural internet cookies is located
and presented in some ‘standard’ format
across browsers. Again this may require
costly negotiations between vendors and
regulators.
 Enhanced information may compel the
standard presentation of ‘privacy policy’
information in browsers. Costs may be
incurred to browser vendors in making
these provisions (if necessary).
 Increased trust might lead to additional
browser usage and more online
transactions.
 (Some) browser manufacturers
object that they already comply.
 Reprogramming costs incurred to
browser vendors with the inclusion
of broader types of local storage
into browser settings.
 Loss of revenue to browser runtime
developers is likely if other kinds of
local storage are controlled in
browser settings, or even included
in the ‘cookie’ umbrella.
 To prevent a two-stage decision
procedure in end users’ choice of
privacy settings 1) the choice of
browser; and 2) the choice of
settings), browsers would need to
converge in their presentation of
options. Costs are again associated
with the coordination and
negotiation to this end. In addition,
there may be costs of
reprogramming and testing
software.
 If browsers implement different
solutions, there is the risk of
competition between vendors based
on privacy settings.
 Technology cost may be incurred in
making settings more visible, e.g.
by displaying options/information at
installation of software.
 Potentially provision of additional
information to user.
PwC 41
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 Increased trust might lead to
additional browser usage and more
online transactions.
Source: PwC analysis based on case studies
Advertising
This part of the Section explains our findings with respect to the broad and complex set of companies involved
in advertising. Although there is some overlap here with subsequent Sections - in particular in relation to
‘online retailers’ and ‘online publishers’ - the specific uses of internet cookies by this group warrant special
consideration. Our analysis of the industry context, the general impacts of regulation of internet cookies and
specific impacts for each regulatory option are explained below.
Context
The advertising industry is characterised by a series of complex interactions. At one end of the spectrum there
are the advertisers – those companies that wish to promote their goods and services through advertising. More
precisely advertising firms earn revenues through the direct promotion of specific sales (“acquisition media”)
and the general promotion of their brand (“brand media”), which indirectly promotes sales.
At the other end of this spectrum are the online publishers that are able to provide the valuable ‘audience’
which advertisers wish to reach. Revenues are earned through the sale of advertising space and are often linked
to metrics for the absolute numbers of target audience reached, with some accompanying definition for the
relevant demographic.
Between these parties are the intermediaries, which provide a range of services to both online publishers and
advertisers, which broadly improve the value of advertising. Such intermediaries include advertising agencies,
media agencies, advertising networks, advertising aggregators, behavioural advertising, and web analytics more
generally. Often, revenues are earned on a commission basis, as some proportion of advertising spend.
The use of internet cookies has been fundamental to the development of the online advertising industry and
especially the role of intermediaries.
The shift from non-targeted to behavioural advertising enabled by internet cookies was seen by one interviewee
as a “paradigm shift”, which made the value of advertising more transparent and higher in general. Advantages
of behavioural advertising give some indication of the net economic impacts of regulation after displacement of
advertising from behavioural to non-targeted online (or even offline):
 Attributive reporting means returns from advertising can be measured and optimised, reducing the
uncertainty for buyers and sellers of advertising. Buyers of advertising space are able to measure actual
returns to advertising by linking a ‘valuable event’ (e.g. interest or purchase) with advertising spend, and
sellers are able to justify the internal allocation of resources between online spend and other media. In
fact, the trend has been for reallocation of spend towards the digital channels. Note the importance of
internet cookies to this end:
 Internet cookies were used for 90% of performance metrics and optimisation by one media agency,
 Although other methods are available to measure performance (e.g. ‘click through’ and ‘views’
ratios) these seem much inferior to internet cookies, since it was mentioned that very few people
actually click ads and those that do click tend to be a narrow demographic (e.g. middle aged men).
8% of internet users represent 85% of clicks
57
.
 Re-targeting techniques meant advertising became more effective in reaching interested users. This
method involves monitoring and gauging the level of interest in certain goods/services and presenting
advertisements to those segments that are identified to be of the relevant cohort group. This reduces the
57
Source: Comscore, 2009.
PwC 42
‘wastage’ seen in non-targeted advertising, whereby much of the audience has no intention of making a
purchase. One agency commented than behavioural re-targeting was between 3 and 10 times more
effective than non-targeted spend. Note the importance of internet cookies to this end:
 It was mentioned that alternatives to behavioural tracking (such as HTML5 server-side data
collection and Flash internet cookies
58
) are perceived as inferior and potentially hazardous for end
users. Internet cookies were unanimously seen as the lightweight and controllable method of
tracking behaviours.
 Internet cookies used in the industry are typically third party (but not always). The information
contained in such internet cookies can include, for example, a unique identifier code (anonymous,
and with respect to a specific browser on a specific computer), details of the websites visited,
sections visited, purchase history etc and IP data or geo location (although not always).
General impacts
The general impacts seem largely related to the potentially reduced ability to track user behaviour, which
reduces the revenue earning potential of advertising space and spend. The greater the impediment to the
tracking capability enabled by internet cookies, the greater the costs to the industry.
Such impediments are the negative impact to the user experience which may be incurred with regulation (which
would likely reduce overall web traffic, the potential ‘audience’) and the potential reduction to the volume of
internet cookies in circulation. The two advantages of behavioural advertising over non-targeted forms are then
undermined (Attributive reporting and Re-targeting).
Referring to the impacts on specific sections of the value chain, advertisers firms will find online advertising
less effective, and more uncertain in terms of returns. Of this online spend behavioural techniques will be most
strongly impacted with displacement effects to non-behavioural online advertising and offline channels. Some
interviewees expected overall advertising spend to fall across all channels with the constraints on the online
behavioural channel. For intermediaries revenues are lost through reduction in online advertising spend
(effective volumes fall).
For online publishers’ advertising space becomes less valuable, reducing the scope for this revenue stream.
This may be critical for online publishers that rely on advertising revenues for their existence, or the provision
of specific content/services.
59
Specific impacts
The specific impacts of each regulatory option are shown in Figure 23. They include the risks and costs to the
broad set of firms involved in the advertising industry that are specific to or most strongly associated with one
regulatory option over another. The ‘Opt-in’ approach is likely to be most costly for firms in the industry, whilst
‘Enhanced information’ is seen as most supportive of the existing infrastructure. The impacts of ‘Enhanced
browser settings depend crucially on the design of settings and default options.
Figure 23: Summary of specific impacts on advertising companies
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 This is likely to severely reduce the
volume of internet cookies in
circulation:
- Intermediaries cannot maintain
the inventory of internet cookies in
circulation to reliably target
audience, or reach the relevant
audience at all.
- One agency felt 50% of digital
spend would be destroyed.
 Time for implementation would be
 Intermediaries we spoke to were most
in support of this method, in particular
the “eye icon” method for behavioural
advertising.
 Costs for this method would involve
payment to a third party administrator.
This may be a government body to
prevent excessive fees being charged.
But it is likely to be an industry
organisation paying licensing fees for
the US “eye icon” initiative.
 But there are risks:
 Broadly supported, but risks regarding
default settings and options. It was
noted that if ‘opt-out’ is the default,
the costs are much the same as ‘Opt-
in’ method. Furthermore there are
risks that third party internet cookies
are singled out.
 Browsers would find it conceptually
difficult to identify the internet cookie
use. This is a risk, especially in the
absence of standardisation across
browsers.
58
Some interviewees mentioned that some of these techniques would be able to circumvent end users’ browser settings.
59
Effects on publishers will be more explicitly discussed in a separate section.
PwC 43
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
modest, but greater cost would be
strategic shifts:
- To other (not regulated) forms,
- From behavioural to non-
behavioural online advertising,
- To offline channels.
 End users’ choices could be reduced
by loss of online publishers that rely on
advertising revenue
- Consumers may not be able to
differentiate between the listed
agencies.
- The method only compels ‘do-
gooders’, so is not robust if
regulating all relevant parties.
- Must also coordinate with browser
technology to ‘remember’ settings
and filter internet cookies
accordingly.
 Research by one intermediary showed
that a very small percentage (below
0.1%) of internet cookies is rejected
with the “eye-icon” method.
 One advertising agency noted ‘ideal
settings’ might lead to a 5% loss of
revenues .These ideal settings would
have options: accept all internet
cookies; accept none; and, accept
internet cookies from first party and
‘registered’ third party:
 Costs of administration paid to 3rd
party, who decides ‘safe list’
 Seen as most robust method, since
companies are incentivized to comply
Source: PwC analysis based on case studies
Online retailers
Online retailers are defined in the context of our report as any business which uses the internet to sell its
products to consumers. This includes those retailers who use the channel exclusively as well as those more
traditional multichannel businesses. Our analysis of the industry context, the general impacts of regulation of
internet cookies and specific impacts for each regulatory option are explained below.
Context
Our view of the impacts on online retailers was collected through case studies with an international clothes
retailer, an online niche clothes retailer, computer hardware retailers, a general online retailer and a retail
bank.
The various uses of internet cookies by online retailers differ importantly in terms of their business importance.
In general, first party internet cookies are seen as most important to the functioning of websites, although
online advertising - which often makes use of third party internet cookies - was sometimes a major driver of
online traffic to online retailers’ sites.
In summary, internet cookies are used in a number of functions:
• E-commerce enablement (these are vital functions normally reliant on first party internet cookies):
 “Maintain state” across the site (i.e. session internet cookies for the online basket, log in,
language/shipping/size preferences etc.).
 Customer recognition and personalisation of the website (e.g. language selection,
recommendations based on interest, or past purchases).
 Fraud prevention (monitoring for suspicious behaviours).
 Authentication (log in).
 Provision of a single basket/transaction facility across multiple brand sites in an e-retail group.
 Load testing (for bottlenecks etc.); and
 A/B and multivariate comparative testing of new features on the website.
60
• Third party analytics (whilst online retailers could run a site without them, it was seen by one retailer as
akin to “driving a car without a speedometer”)
 Individual behaviours for site optimisation.
 Aggregated information for forward looking investments.
 Relates to consumption of all site information, not just adverts.
60
With an A/B comparative test technical change(s) are made to the website and cookies are used to track the marginal improvement (or
deterioration) in performance, comparing the website/function with and without the change(s). In the case of multivariate testing, more than
one change is tested simultaneously on the same page, often on live content. Such testing is used to improve the website functionality, and
achieve the goals of the website owner, e.g. successful registration, content consumption etc.
PwC 44
• Ad server/media (“non critical, but drive a lot of traffic”; third party internet cookies):
 Traffic (Behavioural advertising).
It is important to note that the use of behavioural analytics may relate to both third party internet cookies
across an ad network (e.g. retargeting) and first or third party internet cookies used only on the online retailers’
website(s). This distinction is obscured where the category of ‘third party’ internet cookies is conflated with
‘behavioural’ internet cookies.
The general feeling conveyed through the case studies was that concessions may have to be made to single out
behavioural advertising and third party internet cookies to protect more vital first party internet cookie use.
Fraud prevention through the use of local storage to identify users and monitor for suspicious behaviours was
seen as especially important in financial services. Alternative instruments to internet cookies were said to
provide a greater range to the dialogue with the user/computer since storage is not restricted to text files.
It should also be noted that internet cookies may contain only an identifier code. The internet cookie is then
used to index the user to more substantial information contained at a secure server.
Benefits for online retailers might especially arise because of additional consumer trust which might lead to:
 More consumers buying products and services online; and
 An increased volume of transactions by consumers already using the internet to buy (some) products.
General impacts
Costs include the technical changes of compliance depending on the method of implementation, but the more
significant component of costs is the loss of essential functionality and impact on user experience if consent is
repeatedly requested or first party internet cookies are rejected. This may manifest in a number of ways:
 Reduced traffic: Users may choose not to use the website in which case the costs are the loss of revenues
from the online channel. In addition, for multichannel businesses, the growth in online sales was seen as
a driver of offline sales, since online customers are often diverted to retail stores. Reduced traffic online
therefore also negatively impacts offline sales. However, displacement effects might be important.
 Loss of website optimisation capabilities: retailers felt that alternative tracking devices were inferior in
terms of elucidating consumer behaviours and user journeys. Revenues are lost with the inability to
carefully optimise the website usability.
61
 Costs of maintaining functionality associated with personalisation: retailers would need to reengineer
the site, potentially replacing infrastructure associated with personalisation.
 Customer support costs: these would increase if end users’ technical difficulties with the
website/browser are directed at retailers, and not browser vendors.
One retailer commented that these costs would be greatest for those businesses running a more sophisticated
website which makes use of internet cookies that go beyond essential function that qualify as “strictly
necessary” in the Directive. We note that impacts may also differ by the nature of the industry and the
associated technical knowledge of the user. For instance, one retailer aimed at an older customer segment
thought internet cookies were more likely to be rejected by their less tech-savvy customer base.
However, one major issue in the case studies was the uncertainty surrounding the exceptions to the
requirement for consent and information in the Directive afforded to “strictly necessary” services that had been
specifically requested by the end user. In particular, retailers did not understand which functions of first party
internet cookies would fall under this category. This significantly undermined their ability to plan for the
necessary changes to the websites and will increase time requirements for implementation.
In addition, online retailers would incur costs qua advertisers if third party internet cookies are rejected. One
business mentioned that about 50% of online traffic can be directed through third party advertising (although
61
Lost revenues also affect those third parties that provide such optimisation/analytical services.
PwC 45
not all of this is banner advertising, and not all banner advertising is behavioural, relying on third party internet
cookies). This advertising channel is more important for infant or niche businesses that do not have the
brand/online presence of more established players. As noted in our earlier analysis of ‘Advertising’, with the
decline in online advertising online retailers benefit less from “brand media” (advertising building general
brand awareness) and “acquisition media” (advertising driving a specific sale) which reduces their revenues.
Some retailers claimed that internet cookies and the personalisation of services were inextricably linked to their
entire business strategy. The reduced user experience through the inconvenience of the consent process or the
rejection of internet cookies by a significant portion of the customer base might rationalise the very costly
realignment of strategy, away from personalisation and potentially away from online channels. This would be
more significant for those retailers who do not currently use offline channels. In addition, it was claimed costs
to online retailers fall disproportionately on more technologically sophisticated, or smaller, or niche online
retailers reliant on the online channel.
The fraud prevention function of internet cookies was found to be particularly pronounced in financial services,
where other technology which might allow tracking would be pursued in the case regulation saw a significantly
reduced ability to track users through conventional internet cookies. One retailer spoke of an “innovation arms
race” between retailers and regulators given the business importance of tracking technology.
For multinational businesses the costs of compliance may extend to international websites visited by UK
customers, not just those on UK domains.
Specific impacts
The likely effects of the different options on online retailers are shown in Figure 24. The specific impacts and
impacts most strongly associated with one method of regulation over another are detailed.
For online retailers, the negative impact on the user experience is likely to be strongest with the ‘Opt-in’
approach, whilst ‘Enhanced internet browser settings’ is seen as least intrusive. ‘Enhanced information’ with
respect to behavioural advertising was seen as justified and conceded.
Figure 24: Summary of specific impacts on online retailers
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 Technical changes would be relatively
straightforward, but time consuming
with necessary technology standards
for information transmission and
regulatory implications not yet clear
(retailers mentioned a period of 6-8
months)
 More important, the user experience
would be impacted by the multiple
requests for consent. Access may not
be possible at all without the first party
internet cookie(s).
 One retailer estimated a 5-10% fall in
revenues across all channels with this
method.
 Strategy would shift away from
personalisation to generic solutions
(“the entire ecosystem would be
impacted”).
 Offline sales would be negatively
impacted, since sales are often
redirected offline.
 There would be no consistency in user
experience, since different sites may
implement ‘Opt-in’ differently.
 High customer service costs likely as
users experience technical difficulties.
 Benefits because of increased trust
and increased sales.
 Treatment of behavioural advertising
(“eye icon”) was seen as appropriate
and worthy of a specific initiative.
 One retailer noted the possibility that
each retailer lists the uses of internet
cookies on its sites and option to opt-
out of each:
- But would rely on an internet
cookie to remember settings
- Only compels ‘do gooders’
 Costs of this method are likely to be
small since it was thought not many
people would alter behaviour.
 Provision of standardised privacy policy
displayed in browsers would incur costs
of transmitting information to browsers,
and the costs of uncertain/non-uniform
browser frameworks.
 Interviewed online retailers were
divided regarding the method, with
some strongly supportive and others
seeing benefits only for the browser
vendors.
 Benefits because of increased trust and
increased sales.
 Current settings emphasising first
party/third party distinctions were
seen as already compliant and well
functioning, since no complaints were
received from consumers.
 One retailer felt that ‘trust’ and robust
privacy settings were part of
browsers’ brand value and vendors
have strong incentives to provide
options that protect users’ privacy.
 Some retailers thought there was a
risk that settings provide technical
definitions of internet cookies, not
their use. But the move towards ‘use-
based’ settings was conceptually
difficult.
 Ambiguity /non-standardisation as to
internet cookie classification could
result in legal costs for clarification
and increase cost of website
development in complying with
competing standards.
 In addition, costs incurred in trying to
‘fit’ to certain categories of internet
cookies.
 Risk of no external adjudication;
process relies on honesty that is more
likely to compel larger, more visible
retailers.
 Significant customer service costs
PwC 46
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
likely. Risk that other forms of locally
stored objects (and fraud prevention
function) are integrated with the
management of internet cookies.
Cost of developing alternative
tracking/fraud prevention technology
(e.g. device fingerprinting) is incurred.
One retailer placed the investment
cost at £2m.
 Benefits because of increased trust
and increased sales.
Source: PwC analysis based on case studies
Online publishers
Online publishers are defined as (all) those businesses and public sector institutions that publish content on
their own website for the purpose of consumption by users of the website.
Context
Our view of impacts on the sector is based on case studies with news media, online B2C portal businesses, B2B
websites, and central government and local government online portals. Note that the number of online
publishers is, therefore, relatively large. Even if only a fraction has internet cookies in operation this is likely to
be relatively large number of companies.
Online publishers make important use of first and third party internet cookies in the following ways:
 Website design: to improve website usability;
 Research: using aggregated data to inform economic decisions;
 Fraud prevention: for example, log in facilities and authentication in transactions;
 Monetisation of advertising: internet cookies as a counting device to monitor and optimise returns from
online advertising spend;
 Track consumption of information: this is especially relevant to public sector organisations, where the
primary concern is the dissemination of public information;
 Content syndication: to enable content to be displayed from third parties and so allow consumers to
reach relevant content without having to switch between websites and permit information to be linked
and refreshed as and when it changes;
 Online search: to remember, for example, end users’ language preferences; and
 Authentication/forms products (memory and recognition of end users):
 Certain services require authentication (log in) as an essential requirement for provision of the
service in the first place (e.g. for user-generated content such as a blog, online videos or photos);
 Authentication is also used to measure consumption of business development materials (e.g. free
‘thought-development’ content used to promote sector expertise requires a log in process for
access).
In general, online publishers may generate value/revenues from a number of internet cookie dependent
streams:
 Direct sale of content: this includes subscription charges (e.g. news media);
 Consumption of information per se: this is a particular concern for public sector organisations; and
 Sale of advertising space: consumption of advertising by relevant end users: this is more applicable to
private sector businesses.
General impacts
The main impacts of internet cookie regulation on online publishers are directly related to the extent to which
the consumption of information - both primary content and advertising - is impeded or made immeasurable by
PwC 47
the rejection of internet cookies by a significant portion of end users. Such impediments include the negative
impact to the user experience of consent requests, and the possibility that internet cookies are rejected entirely,
undermining certain important functions. Internet cookie use was also cited by a number of online publishers
as essential for attracting online advertising spend, but also in the efficient provision of information more
generally.
As highlighted in our previous analysis of ‘Advertising’, online publishers inherit the costs of lost advertising
revenues since advertising space becomes less valuable (consumption of advertising becomes less reliably
measured and less effective in driving sales given a level of consumption) with the result that advertising space
is the sold for less. In addition, the decline in users’ experience reduces total website traffic. Revenues from
advertising were seen as essential to the continued existence of one online publisher.
The negative impact on user experience means online publishers also suffer from fewer consumers or less
frequent consumption of paid for services. It is often the case that certain high value services (such as user
uploaded content) rely most strongly on internet cookies so that a reduction in the use of internet cookies by
online publishers tends to impact the most ‘profitable’ functionalities.
For some public sector online publishers, the costs are those associated with reduced consumption of public
information and the reduced scope for personalised content to be made more relevant (i.e. reach the intended
audience). Knowledge may need to be diffused through alternative, potentially more expensive, channels such
as offline media.
One specific concern for B2B online publishers is regarding business development materials. If online
publishers cannot use internet cookies to track the consumption of ‘thought leadership’ materials
62
, it could be
more difficult or more expensive to measure the returns to such publishing. In turn, this could weaken the
justification for the initial investment. In addition, consumption of such materials can indicate the level of
interest and business opportunities that are more pronounced in some sectors over others. Costs are incurred
to the extent that internet cookies may be rejected, although the technical costs of gathering consent are not
likely to be great.
Across all online publishers it is important to note that the costs of reduced user experience, internet cookie
rejection and technical compliance costs fall disproportionately on those websites that are more sophisticated
(i.e. those that make more use of internet cookies). As discussed initially, online publishers not using internet
cookies will not be directly affected by the Directive.
Benefits of the different regulatory options for online publishers might arise especially due to enhanced trust
and, therefore, a larger number of visitors of the respective websites.
Specific impacts
The specific effects of the different options are shown in Figure 25. These are those impacts most strongly
associated with one method of regulation over another are shown detailed below.
For online publishers, the impact on the user experience (and consequently traffic) of the ‘Opt-in’ option is
likely to be most costly. In addition, the impacts on advertising revenues are similarly greatest with this
method. ‘Enhanced information’ was most strongly supported since it would be least impactful on existing
infrastructure.
Figure 25: Summary of specific impacts on web publishers
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 Would severely reduce the user
experience (even if internet cookies
are accepted) and in turn reduce
visitors and traffic (revenue impact).
 The “eye icon” method was seen as
most supportive of the existing
infrastructure; in targeting behavioural
advertising it preserved more essential
internet cookie functions.
 This method risks impeding counting
(attributive reporting or measurement of
content consumption more generally) and
would thus be costly.
 It was felt the scope and definition of
62
‘Thought leadership’ materials include reports prepared by professional services firms to demonstrate their sector expertise and insights
as part of their business development process.
PwC 48
Opt-in Enhanced information Enhanced internet browser
settings
 Reduced internet cookie acceptance
would undermine the measurement
of consumption of
information/advertising.
 Costs may be incurred in developing
other means of tracking. This may
include for example ‘log in’
processes, which are not
anonymous.
 Not seen as feasible due to the
volume of internet cookies in use
and the importance of their use to
the business (e.g. for advertising, for
the provision of content).
 Does not make any distinction
between uses of internet cookies.
 One public sector publisher put the
cost of compliance in the £100,000’s
and requiring 6 months time for
planning and implementation.
 Benefits because of larger number of
visitors due to increased trust.
 Technical costs of implementation
would be relatively small.
 More broadly, this method was viewed
as strategically appropriate in making
a distinction between internet cookies
that are ‘strictly necessary’ and other
less critical kinds.
 Given the large number of online
publishers the implementation of a
web-wide ‘Enhanced information’
approach for other types of internet
cookies was seen as not feasible.
 Provision of standardised ‘privacy
policy’ displayed in browsers would
incur costs of transmitting information
to browsers, and the costs of
uncertain/non-uniform browser
frameworks. Interviewed online
publishers did not provide information
in this format, since they are not
required to currently.
 Benefits because of larger number of
visitors due to increased trust.
internet cookies should distinguish
between more and less critical uses (not
technical types).
 Choices should not emphasise data
collection per se, but how that information
is used (e.g. ‘Basket’, ‘behavioural
advertising’, rather than ‘first party’ and
‘persistent’).
 However, one web developer noted that
the method would require some
coordination between website publishers
and browsers (e.g. regarding internet
cookie types) that incur costs to all
parties in terms of technical
implementation.
 There are risk/costs incurred if different
browsers use different technical
standards.
 Benefits because of larger number of
visitors due to increased trust.
Source: PwC analysis based on case studies
Summary
Having identified a range of impacts on an industry by industry basis a number of key issues emerge with
broad-bearing implications for implementation of the Directive.
 The ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option was seen as preferred for the general management of internet
cookies. Generally, the view was that this method would be preferable in terms of maintaining the online
user experience. The selection of default options is seen as critical as a determinant of consumer
behaviour.
 Browser vendors are commonly seen as the potential ‘first mover’ in providing the technical framework
for the communication of information and settings with websites. Standardisation in browser settings
and format across browsers is seen as desirable to minimise the costs for other businesses.
 It would be desirable to provide consistent presentation of information to end users.
 Enhanced information/‘eye icon’ for third party behavioural advertising is seen as a special case and
greater regulation and information were generally seen as justified.
 The speed of response required for implementation (late May 2011) is extremely challenging for business:
interviewees cited the extended planning/implementation period required (typically over six months)
especially for the ‘Opt-in’ option.
 Benefits of the implementation for (online) business are likely to arise because of increased trust and,
therefore, potentially a larger online community and larger number of online transactions. These effects
could also lead to some displacement if consumers switch from ‘offline’ to ‘online’ alternatives.
PwC 49
5 Overall impacts
Introduction
This final Section brings together the evidence from the online survey of internet users and the business case
studies to provide research into the impacts of changes in regulation of the use of internet cookies. The
combination of insights from both areas of research enables us to develop and apply a consistent framework to
the analysis of the relevant effects.
We consider each of the three regulatory options (‘Opt-in’, ‘Enhanced information’ and ‘Enhanced browser
settings’) separately. This enables us to analyse the distinct impacts of all three options in detail. We
acknowledge, however, that in practice implementation of the Directive may be based on a combination of the
three options rather than a single option.
In what follows we analyse each option within the same broad impact assessment framework. First, we focus on
the direct effects on those organisations required to comply with the regulatory option. Second, we examine the
indirect effects, including those resulting from feedback from consumers’ response to the regulatory options.
Finally, wherever useful and possible, our framework distinguishes between one-off costs from those which are
likely to be recurring. The nature of the effects (direct versus indirect or induced by consumer) means that it is
difficult to draw precise a priori conclusions on the likely size of the effects as will become clear in the
discussion.
In the remainder of this Section, we first briefly discuss measurement issues and then analyse the likely impacts
of each regulatory option. We start by describing their nature and then examine the available data to
understand the potential scale of the impacts. We consider each of the regulatory options in turn: we start with
the ‘Opt-in’ approach, we then discuss the ‘Enhanced information approach’ and, finally, we analyse the
‘Enhanced browser settings’ approach.
Scale of impacts
No interviewed company was able to provide quantitative estimates of the direct costs they would expect to
incur in complying with each of the regulatory options. We understand this was due to the following reasons:
 There is ambiguity associated with the wording of the Directive: this has a bearing on the likely costs of
compliance because it affects the extent to which firms may need to change their business strategy and
operations.
 Few (if any) companies were fully prepared with plans on how to implement potential changes.
 There is no ‘leading response’: no one firm or sector has stepped forward to lead or coordinate a response
and there is a lack of clarity as to where the responsibility lies.
 Costs depend significantly on browser vendors’ behaviour and whether they act uniformly. For example,
costs for cookie users are likely to increase if browser vendors do not act uniformly.
 The change in user behaviour associated with some of the options is expected to have a significant
bearing on some industries and companies (but is itself difficult to predict).
Although no quantification was possible, our discussions showed that business expects four factors to drive
costs:
 The precise legislative requirements (the most important factor).
 Whether, and if so, how, browser vendors respond.
 The number of companies which need to implement the changes (which depends on how browser
vendors respond).
 The extent to which there are displacement effects and efficiency losses.
PwC 50
Table 17 shows the number of UK businesses (2010) split by size as well as the total turnover and estimated
number of websites based on data from ONS (2009). The total number of enterprises included is 1.9 million
based on the Annual Business Survey 2009. A more detailed analysis by sector can be found in Appendix C.
Table 17: Analysis of number of UK businesses with websites
Number of
enterprises
(ABS 2009)
Turnover of
enterprises
(£m)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(2010)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(10-49)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(50-249)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(250-999)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(1000+)
Total 1,886,475 2,809,384 2,100,370 196,525 33,605 6,120 2,530
Estimated number of websites 142,088 30,849 5,955 2,492
% of businesses with a website 72% 92% 97% 98%
Source: PwC analysis based on ONS
As can be seen in Table 17, whereas 98% of all businesses with more than 250 employees have websites, only
72% of businesses with between 10 and 49 employees have their own website. All of these companies publish to
some extent and a significant subgroup will also engage in online retailing: In total, roughly 181,000 companies
with more than 10 employees engage in some form of publishing activity
6364
.
Table 18 indicates website sales in total and as percentage of turnover. As can be seen, website sales amount to
roughly £115 bn for the UK economy
65
. In terms of totals website sales are largest for wholesale, transport and
storage (incl. postal) and information and communication. 14.9 % of UK businesses sold over a website (further
6.9% over ICTs other than a website) in 2009. A more detailed analysis by sector can be found in Appendix C.
Table 18: Analysis of website sales
Number of
enterprises
(ABS 2009)
Turnover of
enterprises
(£m)
Website
sales (2009,
£m)
Website sales
as % of
turnover
ICT sales
(2009, £bn)
% sales over
website
(2009)
% sales over
ICT (2009)
Total 1,886,475 2,809,384 115,100 4% 319.4 15% 7%
Source: PwC analysis based on ONS
The following parts of the Section highlight the impact of the different options on the various groups of
business. Given the complexity of the various effects and the difficulties obtaining quantitative cost data from
businesses, it is not possible to estimate the scale of the costs and benefits of regulation. Instead, the analysis
which follows should be seen as a piece of qualitative research which provides a framework for assessing the
various effects of different regulatory options.
The different regulatory options
This part of the Section discusses the main effects and impacts we expect to arise from implementation of each
of the three potential regulatory options.
It is important to consider the potential benefits of the amended E-Privacy Directive for consumers: over three
quarters of the respondents in our online survey stated that they are concerned about internet security.
Furthermore, 42% respondents stated that there are activities they do not undertake because of internet
security concerns. The amended E-Privacy Directive is likely to increase consumer control, trust and
confidence. All of these are benefits are likely to transpose into economic benefits (which are however, difficult
to measure). The nature of these economic benefits to business is likely to be long term as opposed to costs
63
Note that this excludes businesses with less than 10 employees. We expect, however, that a significant fraction of these businesses is
also engaged in online publishing making our estimates conservative.
64
Note that if we were to focus on publishers in a narrower sense (i.e. publication of articles, etc.) the number of companies becomes
significantly smaller. The UK Annual Business Survey shows that in 2009 10,465 businesses focused on publishing activities of various
types.
65
Based upon annual survey into e-commerce and ICT activity (businesses with 10 or more employees). The statistic will, therefore,
underestimate total website sales.
PwC
which are generally incurred immediately. However, the view of businesses interviewed as part of the case
studies was generally much more focused on costs with benefits often not immediately perceived.
‘Opt-in’
Figure 26 shows the framework we have used to assess the likely effects of the different options. Essentially, we
seek to distinguish the impacts on the business side betwe
publishers, specific industries (behavioural advertisers, web analytics/research, online retailing and hardware
manufacturers).
66
The likely requirements of each of the regulatory options on each respective gro
26 whereas the respective costs that potentially are incurred are shown in each box below: for specific
industries, only the industry is shown. Note that not all effects are shown and a full discussion is provided in
the text below. The overall effect of each option will be the aggregate effect from the business side (including
browser vendors, online publishers and specific industries)
Figure 26: Likely impacts of ‘Opt-in’ option
Source: PwC analysis
66
Note that the specific industries considered were indentified in business intervie
exhaustive.
Browser vendors
Establish
information
transmission
standards
High costs
(coordination)
Pot. change
management of
session cookies,
etc.
Costs unclear
Publishers
Compilation and
provision of
cookie specific
information
Information readily
available,
displacement
Performance
optimisation
Direct costs,
Displacement
en those on internet browser vendors, online
up are shown in bold in
and the consumer side.
ws and various discussion but do not claim to be
Specific industries
Behavioural
advertising
Revenue
displacement
Web analytics /
research
Revenue
displacement to
traditional research
Online retailing
Revenue
displacement to
‘offline’ retail
Hardware
manufacturers
Direct costs
Time requirement
Online experience
51
Figure
Consumers
Change in
behaviour
Recurring
PwC 52
Browser vendors
Main browsers in use are according to the conducted consumer survey are Internet Explorer (60%), Firefox
(20%), Chrome (11%) and Safari (4%).
67
Other statistics show that Opera also belongs to the most common
browsers in use.
Browser vendors are not only active in browser development. Research suggests for example that Google,
Microsoft, and Apple sites belong to the top 20 most visited UK websites
68
. Furthermore, browser vendors are
also significantly engaged in the online advertising industry. The Directive is, therefore, likely to affect browser
vendors in various ways.
The ‘Opt-in’ option would require establishing information transmission standards:
 Status quo: internet cookie acceptance message is generic; there is no information on the internet cookie
provided.
 For consent the online publisher would need to submit relevant information on purpose, contained
information etc. and the browser would need to display this information (for example through a pop-up
or link to a different web page). It is likely that the creation of standards would be costly as all browser
vendors would need to agree on a single standard to ease compliance for online publishers. This is a one-
off cost which would affect all browser vendors.
During a case study it was mentioned that the browser creates session internet cookies even before the website’s
code runs: browser vendors would then probably need to reengineer this mechanism. This change in internet
cookie management might, however, lead to coordination issues and high costs for online publishers later on
depending on the implemented solution. It is unclear to what extent the browser technology itself depends on
this session internet cookie and how it could be replaced.
Online publishers
We apply a relatively wide definition of online publishers: All companies and public sector institutions with
their own website are defined as being online publishers. Publishing might, therefore, serve for example the
dissemination of information on product and services, provision of services or building a relationship with the
customer. Some statistics on publishers have already been presented in the Scale of impacts section.
Linkages between certain online publishers and specific industries (like behavioural advertising) might be
strong as for example some contents might be funded through them.
We have no estimate of the number of businesses operating internet cookies on their website. Based on our
discussions with business, however, we believe that session internet cookies are widely in use. We further
assume that any website exceeding a certain size or functionality will need to rely on internet cookies to a
certain degree.
Regarding the ‘Opt-in’ option, online publishers should generally have the relevant privacy and other technical
information on internet cookies readily available. However, submission to the browser or a link to a privacy
website would need to be established.
As browser vendors might be required to alter the mechanisms with regard to session internet cookies, online
publishers might incur significant additional costs. Again, this depends on the new standards - the option
which is most in line with the current handling of internet cookies is likely to be the most easily acceptable for
online publishers as this option will entail smallest changes for them. The costs for online publishers are likely
to depend on the importance of session internet cookies for the functionality and performance of a website.
69
Generally, we expect that the cost of complying with the regulatory option will tend to increase with:
67
Note that depending on the calculation of market shares these might vary. Other statistics show a somewhat lower share for Internet
Explorer and a larger share for Firefox (for example http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_web_browsers).
68
Mintel (2009).
69
Note that there can be significant differences between the importance and volume of cookies.
PwC 53
 the size of the website (i.e. more information);
 the number and sophistication of functionalities (for example, a blog or chat function, search facilities,
login);
 universality (for example, recognition of territory); and
 handling of any necessary changes by browser vendors in a common or different way (i.e. handling in
different ways would make it necessary to adapt websites for each browser separately).
Selective industries
Online advertising
Online advertising has continued to grow, including through the recession. It rose by nearly 13% since 2009
and has reached £4,097 million in 2010. The majority of this (around 60%) is paid-for search but other
categories, such as targeted and behavioural advertising, are becoming more significant
70
. The UK is the biggest
online advertising market in the EU. Behavioural advertising represents only a small proportion of total online
advertising
71
.
The (behavioural advertising) industry is highly specialised with a limited number of companies (or networks)
operating the respective platforms. Youronlinechoices.com lists 12 partner networks from which the consumer
is able to ‘opt-out’.
72
This industry structure makes a coordinated approach possible.
As targeting and tracking of consumers will become more difficult under the ‘Opt-in’ option and consumers are
unlikely to opt-in (see consumer survey results), the behavioural advertising industry is likely to be significantly
impacted and risks losing market share to more traditional forms of advertising (i.e. displacement). In the most
severe scenario, this could result in behavioural advertising being largely displaced by traditional forms of
advertising (online and offline). Moreover, it is likely that due to losses in advertising efficiency (and reduced
scope for measuring success), some buyers of advertising may scale down their advertising spend.
Web analytics
Web analytics and online research are generally reliant on internet cookies, for example to analyse the
behaviour of individuals and deliver input for website optimisation. It is likely that large parts of industry
revenue would be displaced by more traditional forms of research like consumer surveys and testing campaigns
which will benefit. As with behavioural advertising, however, we expect significant efficiency losses to occur
and a reduction in revenue.
We expect the effects on the web analytics sector generally to be similar to those on behavioural advertisers.
Unlike the internet advertising sector, we have not identified an industry body which is capable of coordinating
the sector’s response to an ‘Enhanced information option. It is, however, possible that the internet advertisers’
response could be integrated with that of the web analytics sector.
73
We think it is likely that online market research could lose some market share to traditional market research
techniques although, in some cases, online research without resorting to the use of internet cookies could be
possible. Likewise, web analytics companies will not be able to gather and use large amounts of consumer data
(other than behavioural advertising networks).
Online retailing
We assume that the operation of a basic web basket facility is likely to remain possible without end user consent
for online retailers as this use of internet cookies is likely to be deemed ‘strictly necessary’ for the service
provided. Based on the business case studies however, other areas of e-commerce enablement (personalisation,
recommendation, etc.) which are important for the generation of online revenue might be subject to consent.
Online retailers however, were not able to quantify the respective impacts.
70
IAB Online Adspend Study, prepared by PwC (2010).
71
Display advertising accounts for around 21% of total online spend. Behavioural advertising is a part of display advertising. (PwC
Research).
72
Accessed on 29 March 2011.
73
Research companies are listed on www.evidon.com.
PwC 54
Regarding linkages with other sectors we learned from retailers that large parts of their sales are attracted by
online advertising which might significantly reduce the number of visitors and ultimately customers.
Furthermore, as the website functionality might become reduced (for example, due to required log in processes,
etc.), people might shift back to high street retailers.
It is likely that (consumer focused) online retail with sales of £10.5 bn in 2009 would be central to these
effects.
74
Significant reductions are likely to occur based on retailer’s views in business case studies.
Hardware
Sales of computers amounted to £ 3.1 billion in 2009. This was equivalent to 62.9% of the UK hardware
market's overall value
75
.
As we have noted, it is not yet clear to what extent the use of internet cookies (and other asset tagging) by
hardware manufacturers will fall within the scope of the E-Privacy Directive. If they did, the required changes
could lead to significant additional costs for hardware manufacturers: for example, the business processes
which underpin warranty and update processes would potentially need to be reorganised. To the extent that
this increases manufacturers’ and distributors’ costs, these cost increases are likely to be passed through to
consumers in the form of higher product prices. The risks of displacement appear to be very small.
A summary of the main industry specific effects is shown in Table 19 below.
Table 19: 'Opt-in' effects by industry
Group Main effects
Browser vendors  Costs incurred in creating information standards for internet cookies.
 Loss incurred because reengineering of browser functions might be necessary.
 Different technical implementation by vendors increases costs of cookie users.
Online publishers  Information on cookies is readily available, but a large number of companies and
bodies in the public sector would need to provide and submit information which
would increase total costs.
 Reengineering of website functionalities and management of session cookies
would increase costs.
 Displacement effects would lead to redistribution: traditional publishers (offline)
would be likely to benefit whereas internet publishers would be likely to lose
business as consumers switch to ‘offline’ media. Costs are incurred as a result of
efficiency losses.
Specific industries
Online advertising  Large reduction of behavioural advertising volume and potentially online
advertising volume due to ‘opt-out’.
 Displacement effects: traditional forms of advertising would be likely to benefit
whereas online advertising would be likely to lose business. Economic costs
because of efficiency losses.
Web analytics  Large reduction in web analytics volume and therefore business due to ‘opt-out’.
 Displacement and efficiency losses (see online advertising).
Online retailing  Basic web basket functionality of online retailers is likely to stay functional
because of ‘strictly necessary’ provision.
 Reengineering of other website functionalities and management of session
cookies would increase costs.
 Reduction in user online experience and therefore traffic and sales.
 Displacement effects: ‘high-street shopping’ would benefit whereas online
74
See Appendix A for details.
75
Datamonitor 2009
PwC 55
Group Main effects
retailers would be likely to lose business. Costs are incurred as a result of
efficiency losses.
Hardware  Potentially costly reengineering of warranty and update processes.
 Obtaining consent for preloaded cookies might be necessary.
Source: PwC analysis
Consumer behaviour
The constant requirement to opt-in will reduce consumers’ online experience and consumers are likely to
change their behaviour (this includes more or less trust): as consumers will be required to opt-in they might
access fewer websites or only those websites of large companies (see consumer survey). This change in
behaviour could lead to a bias favouring large and well established companies or companies operating outside
the UK (or EU) as there might be no ‘Opt-in’ requirements.
Additionally, consumers are likely to need more time online to achieve the same ‘success’ as before: responses
to the consumer survey indicated that internet users would read the respective information and then decide
what to do. This would involve a significant total time requirement – which they have probably underestimated
- and, therefore, costs for consumers (approaching £190-235 million per annum if they have to deal with 200
internet cookies per annum). The time requirement would be recurring whenever a new website is visited (and
the purpose of an internet cookie is changed).
These effects are likely to lead to significant and large indirect effects for business. The effects are likely to be
larger than the direct costs and result in significant displacement effects. They might include for example:
 Less online retailing (consumers decide to buy offline or do not receive appropriate recommendations):
traditional retailers would benefit from this effect given that we assume that overall level of consumer
spending will remain largely unaffected. However, there will be efficiency losses in terms of increased
consumer time and effort to buy a specific good. This effect is likely to be non-uniformly distributed
amongst business.
76
As consumers indicated they might feel more secure with the ‘Opt-in’ approach there
might also be a countervailing effect and increased online shopping by a certain subgroup of consumers.
 Potentially, there will be some impact on online publishing which would become less convenient for
consumers because of fewer visitors.
 Online transactions: Likely to be the same impact as online retailing (less functionality and additional
time needed).
 Use of less internet cookies and/or new technologies: Companies might enter a ‘race to the bottom’ by
reducing the use of internet cookies significantly or switching to new technologies altogether because of
consumer response. Use of new techniques will lead to significant reengineering costs and selectively
favour certain companies over others. ‘Favoured companies’ might already use alternative non-cookie
based techniques and/or have significant resources available for the implementation of changes.
As the revenue of some companies might directly be linked to the amount of web traffic the websites
generate there is a high incentive to maintain functionality and performance by switching to alternative
technologies.
‘Enhanced information’ option
Figure 27 depicts the main effects we expect resulting from the ‘Enhanced information’ option.
76
The consumer survey indicates that users accepting only selected cookies are mostly likely to accept cookies from websites they visit
frequently (63%), cookies which are necessary for functionality (63%) and from companies having a good reputation (49%).
PwC
Figure 27: Likely impacts of ‘Enhanced information’ option
Source: PwC analysis
Business costs
Compared to the status quo, the ‘Enhanced info
likely to lead to relatively small overall costs for the UK economy. Rather, the businesses (or industry)
organising such platforms would incur costs for:
 Creation and maintenance of a general
 Standardisation and industry agreement; and
 Testing the approach.
The option is industry specific (targeted towards behavioural advertising and web analytics) and only a limited
number of companies would incur direct costs. It seems not feasible to use this option as an overarching
approach as is the case for the other two regulatory options. If it were to be implemented by a large number of
online publishers, significant coordination costs would be incurred
publishers can be expected to differ significantly, it seems unlikely that such a platform would be able to deal
with and manage different uses of internet cookies. The approach is, therefore, much more focus
behavioural advertising and potentially web analytics.
With regard to specific industries, we assume the following effects of the ‘Enhanced information option:
 Enhanced information’ is likely to have no significant impact on vendors.
 Implementation of a standardised ‘Enhanced information’ approach seems unlikely and would lead to
large coordination costs between online publishers. This solution is likely to be more cost
specific industry context.
 The implementation of a general standar
the large number of companies and different use of internet cookies for online retailing.
 Implementation in behavioural advertising and web analytics seems possible.
 Implementation of the approac
information about internet cookie usage in a meaningful way to the consumer such that she or he can
Browser vendors
-
-
Publishers
Creation of
platform
(coordination) costs
rmation’ approach (as proposed for behavioural advertising) is
platform managing the use of internet cookies;
. Also, as internet cookie use between online
dised ‘Enhanced information’ option seems not possible given
h by a single company could be difficult – it would be necessary to provide
High
-
-
Specific industries
Behavioural
advertising
Costs for platform
Web analytics /
research
Costs for platform
-
Time requirement
56
ed on
-effective in a
Consumers
Change in
behaviour
likely to be more
than once
PwC 57
give consent. It seems unlikely that the current practice of listing a websites privacy policy in a
designated place is by itself sufficient to obtain a user’s consent in accordance with the Directive.
A summary of the respective effects can be found in Table 20 below.
Table 20: 'Enhanced information' effects by industry
Group Main effects
Browser vendors  No immediate impact.
Online publishers  No immediate impact as it is unlikely to be feasible for large and
diversified group of online publishers.
Specific industries
Online advertising  Direct costs incurred for creation of platform and management of cookies.
 Small displacement effects shifting business from behavioural advertising
to other forms of online and offline advertising. Small efficiency losses.
Web analytics  If included in approach see online advertising effects.
Online retailing  No immediate impact as a cross-industry initiative would be unlikely to be
feasible.
Hardware  No immediate impact as a cross-industry initiative would be unlikely to be
feasible.
Consumer behaviour
This approach would provide users with ‘information in context’. This would be welcomed by some businesses.
It was also mentioned that some evidence from the US, where the approach for behavioural advertising is being
tested, shows that consumer behaviour (i.e. ‘opt-out’) does not change significantly as the online experience
seems not significantly affected. Generally, the ‘Enhanced information’ option seems to have only a small
impact on consumers.
The main costs of this option are, therefore, expected to be direct costs and to be incurred in the respective
industry for setting up and managing a platform for cookie management. It should be noted however, that this
option is not independent from the other options as for example ‘Enhanced internet browser settings’ might
interfere with it.
PwC
‘Enhanced browser settings’ option
Figure 28 depicts the main effects we expect resulting from the ‘Enhanced information’ option.
Figure 28: Likely impacts of ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option
Source: PwC analysis
Browser vendors
Browser vendors are likely to be required to make ‘opt
(first vs. third party internet cookies, etc.). (Most of) the necessary technologies, however, are (already)
implemented in browsers in different ways. We assume, therefore, that making settings ‘more visible’ would
not involve significant additional reengineering
would potentially need to be standardised to avoid a two stage selection process by the consumer (in which they
first choose the browser with the preferred settings and then the settings). If thi
significant additional costs.
‘Enhanced browser settings’ might lead to the following specific effects:
 Although only a limited number of companies are active in browser development and production,
changes to browser technology (i.e. ‘Enhanced browser settings’) might entail reengineering browser
technology. This would be costly for vendors: significant development costs might be incurred, products
might need to differ with regard to country to be compliant, etc. It is n
need to be implemented in ‘Enhanced browser settings’.
 ‘Enhanced browser settings’ is likely to have a small immediate impact on most online publishers.
 ‘Enhanced browser’ settings would not entail immediate direct effects
The view was expressed during some case studies that browsers (which are constantly reengineered and
updated) are already compliant. This however poses a legal question. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the
77
The inclusion of new functionalities might lead to significant costs. Making functions more visible might also include help f
inform users.
Browser vendors
Pot. adjust
browser settings
to make them
‘more visible’
Costs unclear
Potentially
‘standardisation of
some browser
functionality’
Costs unclear
Publishers
-out’ settings more visible and, potentially, more specific
costs for browser vendors.
77
The approach to implementation
s was necessary, it could lead to
ot yet clear what exactly would
on most online retailers.
-
-
-
Specific industries
-
-
-
Time requirement
58
unctionalities to
Consumers
Change in
behaviour
(One –off cost)
-
PwC 59
Directive requires an ‘audit trail’ of (technology) changes to document a browser’s compliance or how otherwise
compliance can be established by vendors.
The industry specific effects are summarised in Table 21 below.
Table 21 - 'Enhanced browser' settings approach by industry
Group Main effects
Browser vendors  Costs would depend on precise requirements: whether browsers are
already compliant/it would be necessary to provide additional
information/it would be necessary to reengineer browsers?
Online publishers  No immediate impact.
Specific industries
Online advertising  Impact dependent on interaction with the ‘Enhanced information’
approach and specified default settings.
 If advertisers’ third party or behavioural cookies are blocked effects similar
to ‘Opt-in’.
Web analytics  See online advertising.
Online retailing  No immediate impact.
Hardware  No immediate impact.
Source: PwC analysis
Consumer behaviour
A change in consumer behaviour might be largely due to a ‘status quo bias’ created by default settings. Our
consumer research suggests that many users (at least 28%, additional 20% if ‘cannot remember’ is included as
well) do not review default internet cookie settings. This might then lead to a significant permanent impact on
their online performance or (more likely) a change in settings by the consumer later on.
The time spent by the consumer would be best characterised by one-off costs (although later adjustments are
likely to occur).
Importantly, the indirect effects of this option are likely to materialise especially through default settings which
might change consumers’ web experience. This could lead to industry impacts by increasing the proportion of
internet users which do not accept internet cookies when being online. Depending on these settings, specific
industries like behavioural advertising might be significantly impacted.
Conclusion
We have used the results from our consumer survey and business case studies to investigate the likely costs and
benefits of the three regulatory options. It should be stressed that these options are not strictly comparable as
some only apply to specific industries and the nature of the incurred costs differs largely.
‘Opt-in’ option
Compared to the other options, the ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to impose the largest total costs on the UK economy
for the following key reasons:
 The ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to give rise to direct costs for all internet cookie users, especially the large
number of online publishers.
 Internet users will potentially incur large time costs managing their use of internet cookies. If each user
had to manage (only) 200 internet cookies each year, then our consumer survey suggests that the total
cost would be around £190- £235 million per annum. Furthermore, users’ online experience is likely to
be negatively impacted. However, the results of the online survey in which the ‘Opt-in’ option was
PwC 60
preferred by most consumers contrast these calculations suggest a preference for more control with
regard to internet cookies. It is, however, unclear whether the above time costs have been fully
considered by survey participants.
 The ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to increase the overall level of trust of internet users and this might increase
the volume of certain online transactions.
 The ‘Opt-in’ option is likely to lead to the largest displacement effects as business shifts from online
channels to offline channels. Although offline business will benefit from these effects, there will be
associated efficiency losses (unrealised sales, additional consumer and business costs) which represent
economic costs.
The costs are likely to be non-uniformly distributed across the business community. Businesses with websites
which rely most heavily on the use of internet cookies will be most affected. Furthermore, internet cookies are
most likely to be accepted if they come from large, well known companies and public sector institutions which
are most trusted by consumers.
‘Enhanced information’ option
The ‘Enhanced information’ option would be likely to lead to relatively small overall economic costs for the
following reasons:
 The option is industry specific (targeted towards behavioural advertising and web analytics) and only a
limited number of companies involved in providing browsers would incur direct costs. It is not likely to
be feasible to use this option as an overarching approach as is the case for the other two regulatory
options.
 Initial trials show that the approach would not lead to large scale consumer reactions.
A general benefit of the ‘Enhanced information’ approach would be the presentation of information in context
(i.e. the user would be able to request additional information on internet cookies when they were in use). This
would be likely to have positive implications for users in terms of enhanced trust.
The ‘Enhanced information’ option does not seem feasible in a wider context for publishers due to the large
number of companies and associated coordination problems and the diverse use of cookies. Nevertheless, it
potentially can be applied in a ‘mixed implementation’ strategy for behavioural advertising (and web analytics).
‘Enhanced browser settings’ option
The costs incurred by the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option would depend significantly on the precise
implementation and requirements of the option. For example, if existing browsers were already deemed to be
compatible with the amended E-Privacy Directive then no costs would be incurred by the implementation of
this option. However, if browser vendors were required to reengineer their browsers, this would entail direct
costs for vendors and potentially associated technology costs for cookie users who must coordinate with the
underlying browser technology framework(s). The costs could become substantial. We estimate the economic
costs of this option to be in general lower than the costs incurred by the ‘Opt-in’ option for the following
reasons:
 ‘Enhanced browser settings’ would concentrate the requirements for regulatory compliance onto a
small number of stakeholders; direct costs could be limited to browser vendors.
 The option would generally lead to one-off consumer costs as opposed to recurring costs of the ‘Opt-in’
option.
The consumer response to this option would depend on the information provided and the default options (as
shown in consumer research) and could have a significant impact on economic costs as business adapts to this
response.
Currently internet browsers distinguish between first party and third party cookies. If browser vendors’
interpretation of ‘Enhanced browser settings’ involves blocking third party cookies by default, this would entail
large costs on the advertising and web analytics industries. In addition, costs would be incurred by the
PwC 61
advertising industry if users were provided with the option to block behavioural tracking cookies
78
in browser
settings, perhaps even by default. Online retailers and hardware vendors rely less critically on these kinds of
cookies and are, therefore, less exposed to changes in browser settings.
79
Generally, ‘Enhanced browser settings’ could potentially provide a solution for most internet cookies in use. The
option could be refined by the ‘Enhanced information’ option or ‘Opt-in’ options for specific internet cookies
uses and/or industries.
Overarching conclusion
Internet cookies are fundamental to the success of many of the businesses we spoke to. The implementation of
the Directive needs careful thought because of this importance, the associated costs with regard to changes in
internet cookie handling, and because of the substantive lead times for implementation that were generally
reported. Importantly, the number of businesses affected and lead times depend on the design and
implementation of the regulatory options. The ‘Opt-in’ option, in particular, would lead to substantive costs for
business.
Whereas the businesses interviewed were generally in favour of the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option,
evidence from the consumer survey revealed user concerns with regard to internet security and, specifically, a
preference for the ‘Opt-in’ option. However, given survey respondents’ limited knowledge of internet cookies, it
is unclear whether consumers’ views adequately reflect the total time requirements of this regulatory option.
Overall, enhanced consumer trust is likely to have (long-term) benefits for online business and to increase
online transactions.
The implementation of the Directive will need to strike a balance between the costs and benefits likely to be
incurred by consumers (i.e. internet users) and those imposed on businesses given the legal framework and
requirements. Having researched three different regulatory options, we believe that the implementation of a
mixed approach might be most sensible as this would enable different approaches to be applied to different
types of cookie whilst minimising the number of businesses potentially affected by the regulation. Whereas
‘Enhanced browser settings’ could be a sensible and time-saving approach for day-to-day management of
cookies, consumers’ wish for more control would potentially be addressed for by the ‘Enhanced information’
option or the ‘Opt-in’ option in specific circumstances. Such an approach is also likely to reduce the overall
costs for business as further requirements for regulatory compliance would be concentrated on a small number
of business stakeholders.
78
Behavioural tracking cookies are cookies that track a user’s behaviour across a number of sites such as to display advertisements that
are most likely to lead to a sale.
79
It is unlikely that the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ option would require all cookies to be blocked by default.
PwC 62
Appendix A: Consumer survey
questionnaire
Introduction
Thank you for opening this survey which is being undertaken on behalf of the Department for Culture, Media
and Sport.
The results of the survey will be used to assess the potential impacts of policy changes being considered by the
Department.
Results of interviews will be combined in our analysis, and you will remain anonymous. Neither the
Department nor anyone who sees reports of the survey results will know who has participated.
The questions will take about 20 minutes to answer.
Internet use - background information
Explain that focus of survey is private use of internet
1. Before today, when did you last use the internet for private use? (Please mark the one that applies)
Within the last week
Within the last month
Within the last three months
More than three months ago
Never used it
2. How often do you use the internet for private use? (Please mark the one that applies)
Every day or almost every day
At least once a week (but not every day)
Once a month or less
3. Where do you access the internet for private use? (Please mark all that apply)
Home
Another person’s home
Place of education
Hotspot (wi-fi)
Place of work
Public library
Whilst travelling between locations (e.g. on the train)
Other (please specify)
4. How do you access the internet? (Please mark all that apply)
Personal computer (PC)/laptop
Handheld computer
Tablet computer (like an iPad)
Mobile phone
Portable media player (like an iPod Touch or Archos)
None of the above
PwC 63
5. What is the main internet browser you use? (Please mark the one that applies)
Internet Explorer
Safari
Mozilla
Chrome
Other (please specify)
Don’t know
6. Do you use more than one internet browser? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes
No
Don’t know
7. When you first started to access the internet with the device you are currently using, how were the privacy
settings established? (Please mark the one that applies)
I left the default settings without checking them
I reviewed the default settings but did not change them.
I changed them to give me more privacy
I changed them to give me less privacy
I cannot remember
8. What activities do you undertake when using the internet? (Please mark all that apply)
Send/receive e-mails
Get information on hobbies and personal interests
Get information on products/services thinking of buying
Buy products/services online (not groceries)
Internet banking
Social networking sites
Download music or streaming music
Play games online
Grocery shopping online
Download movies or watch web television
Read or download online news, newspapers or magazines
Upload self created content to any website to be shared (e.g. photos, music, videos)
Make voice or video calls (via webcam) over the Internet
Sell goods or services over the Internet
9. Which online communities, if any, are you part of? (Please mark all that apply)
Facebook
MySpace
Twitter
LinkedIn
Little Gossip
Last.fm
Other(please specify)
None
10. How often do you purchase each of these items using the internet? (Please mark the one that applies)
A few times a month A few times a year Never
Clothes, sports goods
Films, music
Holiday accommodation (e.g. hotels)
Household goods (e.g. furniture, toys)
Books, magazines, newspapers (including e-books)
Other travel arrangements (e.g. flights, transport tickets, car hire)
Tickets for events
PwC 64
Electronic equipment (including cameras)
Food or groceries
Video games or computer software and upgrades
Other (besides those specified above)
11. How often do you purchase items in response to adverts you see on the internet? (Please mark the one that
applies)
A few times a month
A few times a year
Never
12. How often do you purchase items in response to e-mails you receive? (Please mark the one that applies)
A few times a month
A few times a year
Never
Attitudes to the internet
13. Overall, how confident are you as an internet user?
Scale from 1 to 10; (1: I am not confident at all; 10: I am totally confident I can do everything I wish to do)
14. Are you concerned about internet security? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes (go to question 13)
No (go to question 16)
Don’t know (go to question 16)
15. What aspects of internet security are of concern to you? (Please mark all that apply)
Catching a virus or other computer infection
Receiving unsolicited e-mails
Abuse of personal information sent on the Internet
Other privacy violations (abuse of pictures, personal data uploaded on community websites)
Financial loss due to responding to fraudulent messages
Financial loss due to getting redirected to fake websites asking for personal information
Financial loss due to fraudulent payment (credit or debit) card used
Children accessing inappropriate websites
Children connecting with potentially dangerous persons from a computer within the household
Other (please specify)
16. Are there any activities you do not undertake because of internet security concerns? (Please mark the one
that applies)
Yes (go to question 15)
No (go to question 16)
Don’t know (go to question 16)
17. Which internet activities do you not undertake because of internet security concerns? (Please mark all that
apply)
Ordering or buying goods or services for private use
Carrying out banking activities
Providing personal information to online communities for social or professional networking
Communicating with public services or administrations
Downloading software, music, video files, games or other data files
Using the Internet with mobile device (e.g. laptop) via a wireless connection from places other than home
Using internet cafes or public computers for writing e-mails and other personal transactions
PwC 65
Other (please specify)
18. On a scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree), please indicate how far you agree with the following
statements about the internet
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 –
Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t
know
Buying through the internet is as safe as any other way
I worry about the dangers the internet poses to children
The internet is my main source of entertainment in my
free time
Through the internet I can find information I need fast
I find the internet too complex
19. On a scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree), please indicate how far you agree with the following
statements about data security
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 –
Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t
know
I am concerned about companies collecting my private
data
I am happy giving out my personal information if it helps
companies give me more choice/options
I’m happy giving out my personal information if it helps
companies give me relevant discounts/deals
I’m happy giving out my personal information if it saves
me time
I don’t have a clear view about the types of personal
data companies are able to collect from me
I only provide my personal information to companies
who I know I can trust
I am only happy for my data to be used if it is
anonymised
Too much of my personal information is stored on the
internet
There is no personal benefit to companies storing my
personal information
Companies should be punished for breaking privacy
laws
I would watch what I do online more carefully if I knew
companies were collecting data
20. When you use the internet, how concerned, if at all, are you about your online privacy generally? (Please
mark the one that applies)
Very concerned
Fairly concerned
Not very concerned
Not at all concerned
Don’t know
21. When you use the internet, do you consider these data private? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes No Don’t know
Personal details (name, address)
Internet protocol (IP) address
The contents of e-mails
The websites I have visited (history)
What I did when visiting a website
PwC 66
Other (please specify)
22. On a scale from 1 (not at all important) to 4 (very important), please indicate how much importance you
attach to each of the privacy of the following data?
1 – Not at all
important
2 - Not very
important
3 – Quite important 4 – Very
important
Don’t know
Personal data (name, address)
IP address
The contents of e-mails
The websites I have visited (history)
What I did when visiting a website
23. On a scale from 1 (totally agree) to 5 (totally disagree), please indicate how far you agree with the following
practices
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 –
Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t
know
I like advertising which is tailored to my interests
I like discounts which are tailored to my interests
I like news that is tailored to my interests
I like being automatically recognised on a webpage
I use the “remember me / auto login” facility of
webpages so I do not need to remember all my
passwords
Understanding of internet cookies
The next section of the questionnaire asks about your understanding of internet cookies
24. Which one of these best describes how aware you were of how cookies work before today? (Please mark the
one that applies)
I understood fully how they work
I had some understanding of how they work
I had heard of cookies, but did not understand how they work
I had not heard of cookies before today
Don’t know
25. Please indicate whether each of these statements about internet cookies is true or false?
True False Don’t know
Cookies are small bits of data stored on my computer
Cookies let websites display more quickly
Cookies let me stay logged in over time without needing to enter my password every
time I visit a website
Cookies enable personalised advertising based on my previous behaviour online
Cookies are no different to my internet browser history
Advertisers can use cookies on multiple websites to learn which websites I visit
Cookies may be combined with other data that identifies me by name
If I do not accept cookies, websites cannot tell where I am physically located
Cookies enable personalised content like colour schemes or what type of information I
want to see on a website
Cookies contain information from when I first purchased my computer, including my
name and home address
Cookies let browsers forward and backward arrows work correctly
Cookies are a type of spyware
A website I visit can read every cookie I have no matter which website the cookie if
from
PwC 67
Cookies let people send me spam
Cookies change the colour of hyperlinks to websites I have already visited
By law, cookies may not contain credit or debit card information
26. Please refer to the images and descriptions below to answer the following question.
Imagine you are using a web browser to view an online news website which has adverts as depicted in the
diagram. There are no other non-visible components to the webpage.
[Presentation of diagrams]
For each diagram, how confident are you that each of the following situations could happen?
Certain it could
happen
Probably could
happen
Probably can’t
happen
Certainly can’t
happen
Don’t know
Diagram
A
The news web server sets and
reads cookies for all elements
on the webpage, including
cookies associated with specific
adverts.
Diagram
B
Multiple web servers set and
read cookies from news web
page
Diagram
C
Only the news web server can
set and read cookies on the
news web page.
Diagram
D
Different servers set and read
cookies from different parts of
the news web page.
Explanation of internet cookies
Cookies are small text files that are saved on a computer when a user visits certain websites. They effectively act
as a memory of what has happened previously when the user’s computer has interacted with that website.
Cookies have a number of uses: for example, they facilitate internet session management and personalisation of
web use. They are also used by some advertising firms to tailor their advertising campaigns.
For example, if an internet cookie is issued by an advertising company with adverts on many different websites,
this might allow a user to be followed across websites as the cookie will be sent whenever the user visits these
websites. Alternatively, an online retailer may use cookies to store information on items that have been added
to the ‘basket’, ready to be purchased together with other items in one transaction.
Cookies can be session based and expire after a session or be persistent and last beyond the current web
session. If an internet cookie is persistent, it will be sent to the webpage (server) again whenever the user visits
the site until the cookie’s expiry date.
Cookies do not identify an individual user, but rather the computer that was used to access the website.
Cookies do not read information saved on a user’s hard drive; they can only transfer, and only contain, as much
information as the user has disclosed to a certain website.
Cookies are not computer programmes and, therefore cannot be executed as code.
Cookies cannot be used to disseminate computer viruses.
PwC 68
Management of cookies
27. How many cookies do you currently accept on your computer? (Please mark the one that applies)
I accept all cookies go to Q29
I accept only selected cookies go to Q28
I do not accept any cookies go to Q30
Don’t know go to Q30
28. Which selected cookies do you currently accept on your computer? (Please mark all that apply)
Cookies from companies or websites I visit frequently
Cookies from companies that have a good reputation
Cookies that are necessary for the functionality of a webpage I would like to visit
I read the privacy policy of a company and then decide
Depends on circumstances (please explain)
29. What do you mainly do with those cookies that you accept onto your computer? (Please mark the one that
applies)
I take no further action
I delete them automatically (by software)
I delete them by hand
30. How do these factors impact on your decision to accept cookies? (Please mark the one that applies)
No impact on my decision Will change my decision to
accept
A transparent privacy policy of the webpage
The possibility of getting additional information on the cookie (purpose,
how to delete, etc.)
The website performance & functionality would be impacted otherwise
Personalisation of a webpage would be lost otherwise
Stored cookies provide evidence of web pages I have visited
31. Are you aware of any of the following websites and software which help users to “opt out” of receiving
internet cookies from certain websites? Which of them have you used? (Please mark all the ones that apply)
Aware (Yes or no) Use (Yes or no)
youronlinechoices.com
NAI- Network Advertising Initiative
TACO (for Firefox)
Anonymous browsing
Other (please specify)
32. Do you use software that helps you to protect your privacy when you use the internet?
Yes
No
Don’t know
33. How much do you currently pay each month for your internet services? (Please mark the one that applies)
£0-£2.50
£2.51-£5.00
£5.01-£7.50
£7.51-£10.00
£10.01-£12.50
£12.51-£15.00
£15.01-£17.50
£17.51-£20.00
PwC 69
£20.01-£22.50
£22.51-£25.01
£25.01-£27.50
£27.51-£30.00
More than £30.00
Impact of suggested approaches to regulation
34. Are you aware that the Government is considering changes to the way in which the use of internet cookies is
regulated as part of implementing revisions to the European Union’s Electronic Communications
Framework? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes
No
Don’t know
The Government is currently considering changes to the way in which the use of internet cookies is regulated.
It has identified three possible elements of its approach:
 Approach 1 - ‘Opt-in’ for Individual Internet Cookies’: this would require internet users to
confirm that they wish to accept an internet cookie placed on their computer before the internet cookie is
placed there. Under this option, users might see a pop-up window appear on every web page they visit
where an internet cookie is about to be used. This pop-up would explain the purpose of the internet
cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would be used. It would then give the
user the option to accept or reject the internet cookie before it is used.
 Approach 2 – ‘Enhanced Information about Individual Internet Cookies’: this would highlight
to internet users where internet cookies are being used and enable them to find out more about them.
Under this option, users would see an icon appear on every web page they visit where an internet cookie
is being used. By clicking on this icon, users would be able find out more about the purpose of the
internet cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would be used. It would also
explain how the user can accept or reject the internet cookie.
 Approach 3 - ‘Enhanced Internet Brower Settings’: this would allow users to consent to the use of
internet cookies via their internet browser settings. It would mean that browser settings would need to be
made more visible to internet users and they would need to be provided with clear and comprehensive
information about internet cookies and how they can use their browser settings to opt-out of them if they
wish either on a case by case basis or collectively.
35. On a scale from 1 (not at all important) to 4 (very important), please indicate how much importance you
attach to the following types of information to enable you to make informed choices about whether or not to
accept an internet cookie?
1 – Not at
all
important
2 - Not very
important
3 – Quite
important
4 – Very
important
Don’t know
Contents The information contained in the cookie
Issuer The organisation responsible for the cookie
Purpose How the information provided by the cookie will
be used
Impact How acceptance of the cookie will impact on
the functionality of the webpage
How to
delete
them
Information on how the cookie can be deleted
in future
PwC 70
36. How would you decide whether or not to accept an individual internet cookie? (Please mark the one that
applies)
I would decide instantly without reading the information provided each time
I would need some time to read the information presented each time
I would need some time to read the information presented and do additional research /
ask for help
37. How much time would you be willing to spend the first time you use a website deciding whether or not to
accept an individual internet cookie? (Please mark the one that applies)
Up to 5 seconds
Between 5 and 10 seconds
Between 10 and 30 seconds
More than 30 seconds
38. If you receive subsequent internet cookies from the same website, would you expect to spend more or less
time before deciding whether or not to accept the internet cookie? (Please mark the one that applies)
More time
Less time
Would depend on the type of internet cookie
Not sure
39. For each of the following possible types of internet cookie, please indicate which statement you agree with
I prefer to have to opt-in to
accept the internet cookie
I prefer to be able to find out
about the internet cookie and
then decide whether to accept it
I do not mind what approach is
used
A persistent internet cookie that
remains on your computer after
your session
A temporary internet cookie that
is deleted when you close your
internet browser
An internet cookie originating
from the website you wish to
use
An internet cookie originating
from a different website to the
one you wish to use
An internet cookie which is used
to manage and personalise your
web use
An internet cookie which is used
to target advertising
40. Overall, would you change the number of internet cookies you accept if Approach 1 - the ‘Opt in’ approach -
were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes, I would change my online behaviour Go to Q41
No, I would not change my online behaviour Go to Q42
I do not know Go to Q42
41. How would you change the number of internet cookies you accept if Approach 1 - the ‘Opt in’ approach -
were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
I would accept more internet cookies than I do currently
I would accept fewer internet cookies than I do currently
I do not know
PwC 71
42. How many internet cookies would you accept if Approach 1 - the ‘Opt in’ approach - were implemented?
(Please mark the one that applies)
I would accept all cookies
I would accept more than half of the cookies but not all
I would accept less than half of the cookies but I would accept some
I would reject all cookies
43. On a scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree), please indicate how far you agree with each of the
following statements if Approach 1 - the ‘Opt in’ approach - were implemented?
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 – Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t know
I would feel more secure
I would think more about privacy issues
My online experience would be hindered
I would be more willing to perform personal
transactions on the web
I would find this approach too time consuming
I would find it more difficult to navigate on websites
I would spend less time on the internet
I would spend more time on the internet
I would find it more difficult to find products I like
44. Overall, would you change the number of internet cookies you accept if Approach 2 - the enhanced
information about individual cookies approach - were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes, I would change my online behaviour Go to Q45
No, I would not change my online behaviour Go to Q46
I do not know Go to Q46
45. How would you change the number of internet cookies you accept if Approach 2 - the enhanced information
about individual cookies approach - were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
I would accept more internet cookies than I do currently
I would accept fewer internet cookies than I do currently
I do not know
46. How many internet cookies would you accept if Approach 2 - the enhanced information about individual
cookies approach - were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
I would accept all cookies
I would accept more than half of the cookies but not all
I would accept less than half of the cookies but I would accept some
I would reject all cookies
47. On a scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree), please indicate how far you agree with each of the
following statements if Approach 2 - the enhanced information about individual cookies approach - were
implemented?
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 – Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t know
I would feel more secure
I would think more about privacy issues
My online experience would be hindered
I would be more willing to perform personal
transactions on the web
I would find this approach too time consuming
I would find it more difficult to navigate on websites
I would spend less time on the internet
PwC 72
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 – Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t know
I would spend more time on the internet
I would find it more difficult to find products I like
48. If Approach 3 - the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ approach - was implemented, how much time would you be
willing to spend deciding how to set your browser? (Please mark the one that applies)
Up to 2 minutes
Between 2 and 5 minutes
Between 5 and 10 minutes
More than 10 minutes
49. On a scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree), please indicate how far you agree with the following
statements if Approach 3 - the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ approach - were implemented?
1 – Totally
disagree
2 -
Disagree
somewhat
3 –
Neither
agree or
disagree
4 - Agree
somewhat
5 – Totally
agree
Don’t
know
I would feel more secure
I would find it difficult to know how to set my browser
without knowing how each internet cookies will be
used
I would think more about privacy issues
My online experience would be hindered
I would be more willing to perform personal
transactions on the web
I would find this approach too time consuming
I would find it more difficult to navigate on websites
I would spend less time on the internet
I would spend more time on the internet
I would find it more difficult to find products I like
50. Overall, would you change the number of internet cookies you accept if Approach 3 - the ‘Enhanced
browser settings’ approach - were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes, I would change my online behaviour Go to Q51
No, I would not change my online behaviour Go to Q52
I do not know Go to Q52
51. How would you change the number of internet cookies you accept if Approach 3 - the ‘Enhanced browser
settings’ approach - were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
I would accept more internet cookies than I do currently
I would accept fewer internet cookies than I do currently
I do not know
52. How many internet cookies would you accept if Approach 3 - the ‘Enhanced browser settings’ approach -
were implemented? (Please mark the one that applies)
I would accept all cookies
I would accept more than half of the internet cookies but not all
I would accept less than half of the internet cookies but I would accept some
I would reject all internet cookies
53. Overall, please rank the three approaches in order of preference? (Please add rank from 1 to 3 where 1 is
the preferred approach and 3 is the least preferred)
Rank
Approach 1 – Opt In for individual internet cookies approach
PwC 73
Approach 2 - Enhanced information about internet cookies approach
Approach 3 - Enhanced browser settings approach
54. If it was possible to provide a service which could manage the internet cookies delivered to your computer
on your behalf to reflect your preferences, how much would you be willing to pay per month? (Please mark
the one that applies)
£0
£0.50
£1.00
£1.50
£2.00
£2.50
£3.00
£3.50
£4.00
£4.50
£5.00
More than £5.00
Demographic information
To finish the survey, here are a few questions about you.
55. What is your age? (Please mark the one that applies)
16-24
25-44
45-54
55-64
65+
56. Are you male or female? (Please mark the one that applies)
Male
Female
57. Where in the UK do you live? (Please mark the one that applies)
North West
North East
Yorkshire & Humberside
East Midlands
West Midlands
South West
South East
London
East
Scotland
Wales
58. What is your marital status? (Please mark the one that applies)
Single
Married
Widowed
Divorced
PwC 74
59. What is your highest educational qualification? (Please mark the one that applies)
Degree
A-Level or Highers
ONC / BTEC
O-Level or GCSE (A-C)
GCSE (D-G)
Other qualification (foreign qualification below degree)
No formal qualifications
60. Last week, were you mainly (Please mark the one that applies):
Working as an employee
On a government sponsored training scheme
Self-employed or freelance
Working paid or unpaid for your own or your family’s business
Away from work ill, on maternity leave, on holiday or temporarily laid off
Doing any other kind of paid work
Actively looking for any kind of paid work
Waiting to start a job already obtained
Retired (whether receiving a pension or not)
A student
Looking after home or family
Long-term sick or disabled
Other
61. Do you have a long-standing illness, disability or infirmity (i.e. anything that has troubled you over a long
period of time or that is likely to affect you over a period of time). (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes
No
62. Which of these ethnic groups do you consider that you belong to? (Please mark the one that applies)
White
Asian or Asian British
Black or Black British
Mixed ethnic background
Prefer not to say
63. Are you the bill-payer in your household for internet services? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes
No
64. How many internet users are there in your household? (Please mark the one that applies)
1
2
3
4
5
More than 5
65. What is your total yearly household income from all sources before tax and other deductions? (Please mark
the one that applies)
£6,000 or less
£6,001 to £15,600
£15,601 to £26,000
£26,001 to £41,600
£41,601 to £56,600
PwC 75
£56,601 or more
Prefer not to say
Don’t know
66. Sometimes it is helpful to re-contact people to find out more about their views or to see what their views are
in the future. Would it be acceptable to contact you again to discuss topics similar to those covered in this
survey? (Please mark the one that applies)
Yes
No
PwC 76
Appendix B: Business case study
framework
Hardware manufacturers & browser vendors
Respondent
 What is the respondent’s role in the company and his position?
Company
 How many full time employees does the company have in the UK? And how many elsewhere in the EU?
And the RoW?
 What was the company’s annual revenue last year (if public)? Again, how does this breakdown by
geography?
 When was the company founded?
 What products/services does the company provide which rely on the use of internet cookies
(hardware/software (including web browsers)? What are they used for? How are they used?
 How important is the supply of products and services which use internet cookies (i.e. sales) for the
company (percentage of annual revenue)?
Market position
 For what is the product/service used (description)? Are there substitutes? What are these?
 What are the company’s main markets?
 Who are the company’s customers (profile; downstream businesses, customers, etc)? How many are
there?
 Who are its main competitors? Where are they located - in the UK or abroad (EU vs. non-EU)?
 What is company’s market share?
 How large is this sector/market (total revenue, # companies)? How has it changed over the last five
years?
 What is the size profile of companies in the industry (small / medium / large)? What drives this profile
(e.g. existence of economies of scale and other entry barriers)?
Role of internet cookies
 How are the company’s products and services used by internet users to manage the way in which they
make use of internet cookies? What options do they have? How much information/other help is
provided to customers?
 What skills/technical knowledge do internet users need to manage their use of cookies?
E-privacy Directive
 Is the company aware of the European Communications Framework and the changes required/envisaged
to the E-privacy Directive?
 Has the company publicly expressed its views?
 How well informed does the company feel about the potential changes?
Regulatory options – Opt in
‘Opt-in’ Approach: this would require internet users to confirm that they wish to accept every internet cookie
placed on their computer before the internet cookie is placed there. Under this option, users might see a pop-
up window appear on every web page they visit where an internet cookie is about to be used. This pop-up
would explain the purpose of the internet cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would
be used. It would then give the user the option to accept or reject the internet cookie.
PwC 77
 What (if anything) would the company need to do to ensure that its use products/services enable internet
cookies to be used in a way which complies with the regulatory option?
 What (technical) changes / solutions would need to be implemented to comply with the Directive?
 How long would it take to comply?
 How large would be the associated direct costs? Would they be one-off or recurring costs? What would
they involve? What determines their scale? Would there be any indirect costs? What would these be?
What determines their scale?
 What would this imply for internet users already using a certain browser? Would an update or a new
installation be required?
 What would this imply for new users of your browser? Would the new product satisfy the Directive or
would you provide an add-in?
 How far would you be able to pass any additional costs onto browser users? How much more expensive
would your product be?
 Would there be issues with browser compatibility (EU ROW)? Would there be different browsers
depending on a consumers’ location (EU and ROW? How might competition between browser vendors
change (for example the browser which is closest to the status quo might be preferred by some groups)?
Regulatory options – Enhanced browser settings
 ‘Enhanced Internet Brower Settings’ Approach: this would allow users to consent to the use of
internet cookies via their internet browser settings. It would mean that browser settings would need to be
made more visible to internet users and they would need to be provided with clear and comprehensive
information about internet cookies and how to opt-out of them if they wish.
 What (if anything) would the company need to do to ensure that its use products/services enable internet
cookies to be used in a way which complies with the regulatory option?
 What (technical) changes / solutions would need to be implemented to comply with the Directive?
 How long would it take to comply?
 How large would be the associated direct costs? Would they be one-off or recurring costs? What would
they involve? What determines their scale? Would there be any indirect costs? What would these be?
What determines their scale?
 What would this imply for internet users already using a certain browser? Would an update or a new
installation be required?
 What would this imply for new users of your browser? Would the new product satisfy the Directive or
would you provide an add-in?
 How far would you be able to pass any additional costs onto browser users? How much more expensive
would your product be?
 Would there be issues with browser compatibility (EU ROW)? Would there be different browsers
depending on a consumers’ location (EU and ROW?
 How might competition between browser vendors change (for example the browser which is closest to
the status quo might be preferred by some groups)?
Regulatory options – Comparison
 How would you compare the two regulatory options in terms of their impact on your company? How
would you summarise your views and preferences?
Intermediaries
Respondent
 What is the respondent’s role in the company and his position?
Company
 How many full time employees does the company have in the UK? And how many elsewhere in the EU?
And the RoW?
 What was the company’s annual revenue last year (if public)? Again, how does this breakdown by
geography?
 When was the company founded?
PwC 78
 What products/services does the company provide which rely on the use of internet cookies (web design,
web analytics, ad networks, other intermediary services)? What are they used for? How are they used?
 How important is the supply of products and services which use internet cookies (i.e. sales) for the
company (percentage of annual revenue)?
Market position
 For what is the product/service used (description)? Are there substitutes? What are these?
 What are the company’s main markets?
 Who are the company’s customers (profile; downstream businesses, customers, etc)? How many are
there?
 Who are its main competitors? Where are they located - in the UK or abroad (EU vs. non-EU)?
 What is company’s market share?
 How large is this sector/market (total revenue, # companies)? How has it changed over the last five
years?
 What is the size profile of companies in the industry (small / medium / large)? What drives this profile
(e.g. existence of economies of scale and other entry barriers)?
Role of internet cookies
 How dependent is the company’s products and services on internet cookies (gathering of information,
personalisation)?
 Is acceptance of internet cookies necessary to use the products / services?
 Is the company using a single or multiple internet cookies? If multiple, how many are currently in
operation (stock)?
 How many new internet cookies were created last year (i.e.2010)? How many times were they
downloaded (flow)? What percentage of users accepted / did not accept internet cookies from the
company? What categories of customer/target did not accept them? Do you know the reasons why users
chose not to accept internet cookies? Has the company done any research in this area?
 For what purpose are these internet cookies used (personalisation, functionality of online shopping,
other)? What type of internet cookies are they (session based / persistent; first / second /third party
internet cookies)?
 Has the company undertaken any research that assesses and quantifies these impacts?
 Does the company have a privacy policy which describes how and why internet cookies are used by the
company, what they do and how one could opt-out?
 Has the company ever received complaints regarding the use of internet cookies? How many? On what
grounds? How have they responded?
Overall impact of internet cookies
Business model
 From a technical perspective, can you provide your product /service without using internet cookies? If
not, explain why not? Are there alternatives to internet cookies?
 How does the use of internet cookies shape your business model (for example advertising, customer
loyalty, performance)?
 Can you estimate what proportion of your revenue arises from products/services which directly or
indirectly depends on internet cookies? Is your revenue directly linked to internet cookies (for example
targeting and web analytics)?
Costs
 How (if at all) does the use of internet cookies affect your costs (creation of product, providing services)?
Prices
 Does the use of internet cookies enable you to offer your products/services at lower (more competitive)
prices?
 Do internet cookies enable you to provide services which provide a source of revenue (for example
through behavioural ads)?
PwC 79
Overall
 Have any of these questions been examined quantified from an industry perspective?
E-privacy Directive
 Is the company aware of the European Communications Framework and the changes required/envisaged
to the E-privacy Directive?
 Has the company publicly expressed its views?
 How well informed does the company feel about the potential changes?
Regulatory options – Opt in
‘Opt-in’ Approach: this would require internet users to confirm that they wish to accept every internet cookie
placed on their computer before the internet cookie is placed there. Under this option, users might see a pop-
up window appear on every web page they visit where an internet cookie is about to be used. This pop-up
would explain the purpose of the internet cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would
be used. It would then give the user the option to accept or reject the internet cookie.
 What (if anything) would the company need to do to ensure that its use products/services enable internet
cookies to be used in a way which complies with the regulatory option?
 What (technical) changes / solutions would need to be implemented to comply with the Directive?
 How long would it take to comply?
 How large would be the associated direct costs? Would they be one-off or recurring costs? What would
they involve? What determines their scale? Would there be any indirect costs? What would these be?
What determines their scale?
 Does the company see any problems with this approach (legal / technical)? If so, what are these? How
might they be overcome?
 What would be the implications if 10% of consumers rejected the companies’ internet cookies (where
previously/currently they would have accepted them)? (Reduced web visits, time spend on web site, less
convenient, impact on sales)? What evidence is there to support this view?
 Would your competitors be affected differently (for example because they use internet cookies
differently)? What would be the consequences of this? Can you quantify them?
 Would/could there be a competitive advantage / disadvantage in comparison to larger / smaller
companies? How significant would this be? And for companies based/operating overseas? Why? How
significant could this be?
 Overall, how significant would be the impact of this option be on the company’s business (no impact/
minor impact/ significant impact?
 What would be the overall industry impact?
Regulatory options – Enhanced browser settings
‘Enhanced Internet Brower Settings’ Approach: this would allow users to consent to the use of internet
cookies via their internet browser settings. It would mean that browser settings would need to be made more
visible to internet users and they would need to be provided with clear and comprehensive information about
internet cookies and how to opt-out of them if they wish.
 What (if anything) would the company need to do to ensure that its use products/services enable internet
cookies to be used in a way which complies with the regulatory option?
 What (technical) changes / solutions would need to be implemented to comply with the Directive?
 How long would it take to comply?
 How large would be the associated direct costs? Would they be one-off or recurring costs? What would
they involve? What determines their scale? Would there be any indirect costs? What would these be?
What determines their scale?
 Does the company see any problems with this approach (legal / technical)? If so, what are these? How
might they be overcome?
 What would be the implications if 10% of consumers rejected the companies’ internet cookies (where
previously/currently they would have accepted them)? (Reduced web visits, time spend on web site, less
convenient, impact on sales)? What evidence is there to support this view?
PwC 80
 Would your competitors be affected differently (for example because they use internet cookies
differently)? What would be the consequences of this? Can you quantify them?
 Would/could there be a competitive advantage / disadvantage in comparison to larger / smaller
companies? How significant would this be? And for companies based/operating overseas? Why? How
significant could this be?
 Overall, how significant would be the impact of this option be on the company’s business (no impact/
minor impact/ significant impact?
 What would be the overall industry impact?
Regulatory options – Comparison
 How would you compare the two regulatory options in terms of their impact on your company? How
would you summarise your views and preferences?
Industry self-regulation
 Are you aware of any industry led, self-regulatory responses (e.g. IAB initiative)? [IAB approach –
Explain: Icon for each ad containing a link to more detailed information the possibility to influence
settings.]
 Do you view (industry) self-regulation as a possible response given the environment the company
operates (industry / use of internet cookies)?
 What self-regulatory options can you envisage?
 Who would you envisage needing to drive this? Is there a central industry body which could deliver such
a solution? Would you be supportive of such an initiative? Under what conditions? Do you think others
would?
 What would be the nature of the benefits (in relation to the regulation)? Would there be any additional
costs and, if so, what form would they take?
Internet cookie users
Respondent
 What is the respondent’s role in the company and his position?
Company
 How many full time employees does the company have in the UK? And how many elsewhere in the EU?
And the RoW?
 What was the company’s annual revenue last year (if public)? Again, how does this breakdown by
geography?
 When did the company start doing business online – distinguish between having an online presence and
transacting online?
 How important is online business (i.e. sales) for the company (percentage of annual revenue)?
Market position
 What are the company’s main markets?
 Who are its main competitors? Where are they located - in the UK or abroad (EU vs. non-EU)?
 What is company’s market share?
 How large is this sector/market (total revenue, # companies)?
 What is the size profile of companies in the industry (small / medium / large)? What drives this profile
(e.g. existence of economies of scale and other entry barriers)?
Online activities
 What is the scope of the company’s online business?
 What parts of the companies’ value chain are handled online?
 Are distinct generic online services provided to customers or one integrated service (for example a large
company might offer search, e-mail and an online shop)?
 How many visitors, customers have these services / the webpage per day?
PwC 81
 What is the profile of online customers (age band, gender, etc.)?
Internet cookies
 Are internet cookies used by the company? What are they used for? How are they used?
 How dependent is the company on internet cookies (website functionality / online experience)?
 How many internet cookies have been downloaded from the company’s website? How many of these are
currently in operation (i.e. stock)?
 How many new internet cookies were downloaded last year (i.e. 2010 – the flow)?
 What percentage of users accept / do not accept internet cookies from the company? What categories of
customer/target do not accept them? What is the consequence for their online experience? Do you know
the reasons why users choose not to accept internet cookies? Has the company done any research in this
area?
 For what purpose are these internet cookies used (personalisation, functionality of online shopping,
other)? What type of internet cookies are they (session based / persistent; first / second /third party
internet cookies)?
 Has the company undertaken any research that assesses and quantifies these impacts?
 Is a privacy policy online which describes how and why internet cookies are used by the company, what
they do and how one could opt-out?
 Has the company ever complaints regarding the use of internet cookies? How many? On what grounds?
How have they responded?
Overall impact of internet cookies
Costs
 Do internet cookies reduce your costs (website programming, order processing)?
Prices
 Do internet cookies enable you to offer at lower (more competitive) prices?
 Do internet cookies provide a source of revenue (for example through behavioural ads)?
Volume
 Do internet cookies help to alert customers to interesting products/ special needs according to their
profile?
 Do internet cookies help to provide more tailored choice / options to visitors?
 Do internet cookies increase sales / temptation to buy?
Experience
 Do internet cookies affect the probability that individuals visit your site?
 Do internet cookies make navigation and browsing easier?
 Do internet cookies make a ‘log-in’ easier?
 Do internet cookies reduce/ increase a visitors’ time on your website? If so, for what?
 Do internet cookies increase customer loyalty?
Overall questions
 Overall, what is the impact of these factors (cost, price, volume, experience) on value added and revenue?
 Can you attach overall weights to cost /price/ volume/ experience (sum=10)?
 Overall, to what extent does your company’s ability to generate business depend on the use of internet
cookies? Can you please scale (0-10)?
 Have any of these relationships been quantified (own studies, estimates, industry studies)?
E-privacy Directive
 Is the company aware of the European Communications Framework and the changes required/envisaged
to the E-privacy Directive?
 Has the company publicly expressed its views?
 How well informed does the company feel?
PwC 82
Regulatory options – Opt-in
‘Opt-in’ Approach: this would require internet users to confirm that they wish to accept every internet cookie
placed on their computer before the internet cookie is placed there. Under this option, users might see a pop-
up window appear on every web page they visit where an internet cookie is about to be used. This pop-up
would explain the purpose of the internet cookie, the information it would hold and how this information would
be used. It would then give the user the option to accept or reject the internet cookie.
 What would the company need to do to ensure that its use of internet cookies complies with the option?
 What (technical) changes / solutions would need to be implemented to comply with the regulation?
 How long would it take to comply?
 How large would be the associated direct costs? Would they be one-off or recurring costs? What would
they involve? What determines their scale? Would there be any indirect costs? What would these be?
What determines their scale?
 What would be the implications if 10% of consumers rejected the companies’ internet cookies (where
previously/currently they would have accepted)? (reduced visits, time spend on site, less convenient,
impact on sales)? What evidence is there to support this view?
 Does the company see any problems with this approach (legal / technical)? If so, what are these? How
might they be overcome?
 Would your competitors be affected differently (for example because they use internet cookies
differently)?
 What would be the consequences of this? Can you quantify them?
 Would/could there be a competitive advantage / disadvantage in comparison to larger / smaller
companies? How significant would this be?
 Would/could there a competitive advantage / disadvantage in comparison to companies based/operating
overseas? Why? How significant could this be?
 What would be the overall industry impact (no impact on market size,...)?
 Overall what would be the impact of this option on the company’s business (no impact/ minor impact/
significant impact?
Regulatory options – Enhanced browser settings
‘Enhanced Internet Brower Settings’ Approach: this would allow users to consent to the use of internet
cookies via their internet browser settings. It would mean that browser settings would need to be made more
visible to internet users and they would need to be provided with clear and comprehensive information about
internet cookies and how to opt-out of them if they wish.
 What would the company need to do to ensure that its use of internet cookies complies with the option?
 What (technical) changes / solutions would need to be implemented to comply with the regulation?
 How long would it take to comply?
 How large would be the associated direct costs? Would they be one-off or recurring costs? What would
they involve? What determines their scale? Would there be any indirect costs? What would these be?
What determines their scale?
 What would be the implications if 10% of consumers rejected the companies’ internet cookies (where
previously/currently they would have accepted)? (reduced visits, time spend on site, less convenient,
impact on sales)? What evidence is there to support this view?
 Does the company see any problems with this approach (legal / technical)? If so, what are these? How
might they be overcome?
 Would your competitors be affected differently (for example because they use internet cookies
differently)?
 What would be the consequences of this? Can you quantify them?
 Would/could there be a competitive advantage / disadvantage in comparison to larger / smaller
companies? How significant would this be?
 Would/could there a competitive advantage / disadvantage in comparison to companies based/operating
overseas? Why? How significant could this be?
 What would be the overall industry impact (no impact on market size,...)?
 Overall what would be the impact of this option on the company’s business (no impact/ minor impact/
significant impact?
PwC 83
Regulatory options – Comparison
 Can you please briefly compare both options and summarise your views and preferences?
PwC 84
Appendix C: Business statistics
Table 22 provides a sectoral analysis of the UK business population, and estimates the overall number of
businesses with their own websites.
Table 22: Number of businesses by sector and size
Number of
enterprises
(ABS 2009)
Turnover of
enterprises
(£m)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(2010)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(10-49)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(50-249)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(250-999)
Number of
VAT based
enterprises
(1000+)
Agriculture, forestry & fishing 10,205 4,132 137,135 3,890 265 25 0
Production
Mining, quarrying & utilities 1,223 47,898 7,610 1,290 260 65 45
Manufacturing 127,993 456,917 127,370 23,080 6,115 1,045 230
Construction 273,241 192,655 274,415 17,535 2,140 235 70
Wholesale and retail; repair of
motor vehicles
356,557 1,170,382 359,380 33,940 4,525 730 295
Motor trades 5,310 850 140 35
Wholesale 104,465 14,595 2,280 310 80
Retail 188,320 14,035 1,395 280 180
Transport & storage (inc. postal) 67,267 126,567 67,530 6,975 1,285 230 120
Accommodation & food services 128,713 65,567 129,740 21,505 2,320 305 110
Information & communication 143,759 178,259 144,890 6,985 1,280 230 85
Finance & insurance 41,800 3,295 805 215 110
Property 73,753 44,125 75,110 3,855 565 175 35
Professional, scientific & technical 320,734 189,404 324,015 19,420 2,960 455 130
Business administration and
support services
150,730 147,426 147,370 12,825 3,460 705 225
Public administration and defence 2,805 260 100 255 150
Education 29,494 29,217 31,140 4,560 2,040 575 375
Health 52,552 37,662 79,935 24,340 3,835 525 480
Arts, entertainment, recreation and
other services
150,254 119,173 150,125 12,770 1,650 350 70
Total 1,886,475 2,809,384 2,100,370 196,525 33,605 6,120 2,530
Estimated number of websites 142,088 30,849 5,955 2,492
Source: PwC analysis based on ONS
Table 23 provides an analysis of website sales by sector in 2009.
Table 23: Analysis of website sales by sector (2009)
Number of
enterprises
(ABS 2009)
Turnover of
enterprises
(£m)
Website
sales (2009,
£bn)
Website sales
as % of
turnover
ICT sales
(2009, £bn)
% sales over
website
(2009)
% sales over
ICT (2009)
Agriculture, forestry & fishing 10,205 4,132
Production
Mining, quarrying & utilities 1,223 47,898 8.1 17% 7.4 21.6 3
Manufacturing 127,993 456,917 8.7 2% 117.2 14.1 11.5
PwC 85
Number of
enterprises
(ABS 2009)
Turnover of
enterprises
(£m)
Website
sales (2009,
£bn)
Website sales
as % of
turnover
ICT sales
(2009, £bn)
% sales over
website
(2009)
% sales over
ICT (2009)
Construction 273,241 192,655 0.9 0% 3.2 3.8 3.6
Wholesale and retail; repair of
motor vehicles
356,557 1,170,382 58.7 5% 119.3
Motor trades
Wholesale 48.2 --- 116.9 22.9 14.5
Retail 10.5 --- 2.4 25.2 4.2
Transport & storage (inc. postal) 67,267 126,567 14.1 11% 27.5 21.3 7.4
Accommodation & food services 128,713 65,567 4.3 7% 27.5 10.9 5
Information & communication 143,759 178,259 11.4 6% 10.9 28.2 9
Finance & insurance
Property 73,753 44,125
8.9 20% 6.4 11.4 3.2
Professional, scientific & technical 320,734 189,404
Business administration and
support services
150,730 147,426
Public administration and defence
Education 29,494 29,217
Health 52,552 37,662
Arts, entertainment, recreation and
other services
150,254 119,173
Total 1,886,475 2,809,384 115.1 4% 319.4 15% 7%
Source: PwC analysis based on ONS
This Report has been prepared by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC) solely on the instructions of its clients, the Department for
Business, Innovation & Skills (BIS) and Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) and with only BIS and DCMS’s interests in mind.
It should not be quoted in whole or part without the prior consent of PwC. To the extent permitted by law, PwC, its members, partners,
employees and agents specifically disclaim any duty or responsibility to any third party which may view or otherwise access the Report,
whether in contract or in tort (including without limitation, negligence and breach of statutory duty) or howsoever otherwise arising, and shall
not be liable in respect of any loss, damage or expense of whatsoever nature which is caused by or as a consequence of such viewing of
or access to the Report by any such third party. Third parties are advised that this Report does not constitute professional advice or a
substitute for professional advice, should not be relied on in relation to any business or other decisions or otherwise and is not intended to
replace the expertise and judgement of such third parties independent professional advisers.
In the event that, pursuant to a request which BIS or DCMS has received under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 or the Environmental
Information Regulations 2004 (as the same may be amended or re-enacted from time to time) or any subordinate legislation made there
under (collectively, the "Legislation"), BIS or DCMS is required to disclose any information contained in this report, it will notify PwC
promptly and will consult with PwC prior to disclosing such information. BIS and/or DCMS agree to pay due regard to any representations
which PwC may make in connection with such disclosure and to apply any relevant exemptions which may exist under the Legislation to
such information. If, following consultation with PwC, BIS or DCMS disclose any such information, it shall ensure that any disclaimer which
PwC has included or may subsequently wish to include in the information is reproduced in full in any copies disclosed.
© 2011 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. All rights reserved. “PricewaterhouseCoopers” refers to the PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (a
limited liability partnership in the United Kingdom) or, as the context requires, other member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International
Limited, each of which is a separate and independent legal entity.

