   JALA International, Inc.  
971 Stonehill Lane    Los Angeles, CA 90049 
www.jala.com 
Telecommunications and Organizational Decentralization 
JACK M. NILLES 
This is a reproduction of a paper originally published in October 1975 in the IEEE Transactions on Communications, Volume 
COM-23, No. 10, pages 1142-1147. Because of some minor amendments and formatting changes, this paper is not an exact du-
plicate. However, the substantive content is identical to the original. We have reproduced it in response to continued demand for 
copies and their unavailability elsewhere. However, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc. retains the 1975 
copyright to the original paper. 
Please note that this paper was written before there was such a thing as a personal computer, and when the Internet’s predeces-
sor, the ARPANET, was in its early developmental stages. 
 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. COM-23, NO.10, OCTOBER 1975 1142 
 
Telecommunications and Organizational Decentralization 
JACK M. NILLES 
Abstract—In recent years, several phenomena have caused 
significant pressures on the traditional, centralized urban 
structure. These phenomena include urban sprawl, separation 
of business and residential areas and concomitant dependence 
on transportation, the absence of effective or widespread mass 
transit, and declining oil reserves with rising energy costs. 
These conditions have made decentralization more attractive 
to many large organizations currently located in the central 
business districts (CBD’s) of major urban areas. The increas-
ing availability of sophisticated communications and com-
puter technologies may encourage the continued growth and 
future decentralization of “information industries,” thereby 
producing major urban changes. The telecommunications-
augmented decentralization of a traditional centralized or-
ganization to a diffused one with an intraorganizational tele-
communications network is described. The key factors in this 
process are discussed: 1) the ability of new telecommunica-
tions and computer technologies to maintain or increase pro-
ductivity for routine clerical and management functions, 2) 
their availability, and 3) their costs relative to urban transpor-
tation systems. Telecommunications-augmented decentraliza-
tion can have significant impacts on transportation, telecom-
munications, labor, and land-use policies; specific areas of 
impact are discussed. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
RBAN and suburban sprawl during the last three dec-
ades has created, and continues to create, major con-
urbations linked by extensive freeway systems. De-
pendence on the private automobile has defeated most at-
tempts at rapid mass transit in urban areas. However, in 
recent years, the costs of commuting by private automobile 
have risen dramatically, urban air pollution has become a 
major national problem, and central business districts 
(CBD’s) have suffered from declining residential popula-
tions. 
Some urban planners have recommended the develop-
ment of regional business and governmental centers as an 
alternative to the continued expansion of the traditional, 
monolithic CBD.1 Recent developments in telecommunica-
                                                          
Manuscript received December 17, 1974 revised May 14, 1975. 
This work was supported in part by the National Science Founda-
tion under Grant UI 39019. This paper was presented at the Na-
tional Telecommunications Conference, San Diego, Calif., Dec. 
2—4, 1974. The principal co-contributors to this research were: F. 
R. Carlson, Assistant Professor, School of Engineering, Univer-
sity of Southern California (USC); P. Gray, Associate Professor, 
Graduate School of Business Administration and Senior Research 
Associate, Center for Futures Research, USC, and G. Hanneman, 
tions and information-processing technologies are providing 
the catalyst to introduce alternatives to transportation which 
facilitate new urban and organizational forms and which 
mitigate transportation-related problems. Large organiza-
tions that engage primarily in information processing can 
effectively utilize these technologies to decentralize and 
relocate their organizational elements within regional cen-
ters. This paper describes research at the University of 
Southern California that estimates the magnitude, direction, 
and rate of innovation of telecommunications-augmented 
decentralization of “information industry” organizations. 
II. DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
DECENTRALIZATION-INDUCING 
ENVIRONMENT 
Three factors have been instrumental in creating a favor-
able environment for the effective decentralization of large 
and medium-sized organizations.2 These are: 1) the growth 
of the “information industry”; 2) the development of in-
creasingly effective, relatively low-cost communications 
and computer technologies; and 3) the increasing magni-
tude and variety of forces which motivate organizations to 
decentralize. 
Throughout this paper, any organization or organiza-
tional component whose primary function is the creation, 
manipulation, or transfer of information is considered a 
member of the information industry. The term encompasses 
many government organizations, much of the banking and 
financial industry, the administrative functions of most 
major companies, and the automated or semi-automated 
production of goods. Because there is a steady trend in the 
United States toward service functions, as opposed to the 
                                                                                                
Associate Professor, Annenberg School of Communications, 
USC. 
The author is Director, Interdisciplinary Program Development, 
Office of Academic Administration and Research, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, Calif. 90007. 
1 V. Gruen, Centers for the Urban Environment: Survival of the 
Cities. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1973. 
2  The lower level of organization size discussed is in the order of 
40-50 employees, although for some organizational functions an 
even smaller number of 4—5 employees could perform effec-
tively in a decentralized group. Several small research groups in 
the U. S. and Canada are now operating this way.  
U 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. COM-23, NO.10, OCTOBER 1975 
 
1143 
production of goods, the information industry is growing 
steadily and its members constitute approximately half the 
workers in the United States.3 A typical characteristic of an 
information industry organization is that the workers inter-
face frequently with computers. Currently, this interface is 
effected by collocating workers and computers in large 
structures in or near urban business centers. 
Over the past decade, computer technology has become 
very sophisticated, permitting expanded applications and 
lower costs. One application is the coupling of components 
of large computers by means of various communications 
networks. This has been done on a strictly computer-to-
computer scale, with high data rates being used in the trans-
fer process, and on a more diverse scale, using time-sharing 
services which connect a multiplicity of remote terminals to 
a data-processing center.4 Primary intermediaries in the 
growth of “teleprocessing” have been the telephone compa-
nies, the specialized common carriers, and teleprocessing 
networks like ARPANET.5 
Our research at the University of Southern California 
(USC) included an investigation of the technologies re-
quired for “telecommuting.” A telecommuting network has 
computational and telecommunications components which 
enable employees of large organizations to work in offices 
close to (but generally not in) their homes, rather than 
commute long distances to a central office. The USC re-
searchers arrived at an important conclusion: most informa-
tion-transfer functions performed in an information indus-
try organization can be adapted to an intraorganizational 
telecommunications environment, using primarily conven-
tional telephone channel bandwidths, provided suitable 
man—machine interfaces (i.e., properly designed termi-
nals) are available.6 Further, the requisite telecommunica-
                                                          
3 In 1970, professional, technical, clerical, and sales workers, 
managers, officials, and proprietors constituted 48.3 percent of the 
U. S. labor force, with an average annual growth rate, from 1960 
to 1970, of 1.6 percent (U. S. Department of Labor, Manpower 
Report to the President. Washington, D. C.: Government Printing 
Office, 1973). The 1960 to 1970 growth rate extrapolated to 1975 
indicates that these workers might constitute 57.2 percent of the 
work force. Although some of the technical workers, profession-
als, and proprietors are not strictly information industry workers, 
most are. 
4 An estimate has been made that by 1980, 2.5 million terminals 
will be in use, with 32 billion data calls. “Crisis in data-
communications: Some projections of growth,” in Comput. 
Deciaion, p. C 7, Nov. 1970. 
5  ‘These networks can offer both sophisticated and routine data-
processing capabilities. For example, through research performed 
at the Institute for the Future (IFF), ARPA has been instrumental 
in developing new software for teleconferencing (i.e., the use of a 
computer to provide a sophisticated store-and-forward system 
which permits geographically dispersed participants to communi-
cate with each other over long distances via computer terminals). 
IFF’s system is becoming available on at least one commercial 
time-sharing service under its new name: CONFER. 
6 J. M. Nilles, F. R. Carlson, P. Gray, and G. Hanneman, “Tele-
communications-transportation tradeoffs,” Univ. Southern Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles, Calif., Rep. No. NSF-RA-5-74-020, prepared 
tions and computer technology exists to enable organiza-
tional decentralization that is economical and societally 
significant. 
Although necessary, the above factors are insufficient to 
motivate many business and governmental organizations to 
decentralize. Other conditions, however, present tangible 
inducements. One persuasive factor is the increasing cost of 
transportation in urban areas. Our research results showed 
that the costs of commuting to work, for a typical employee 
of an information industry organization, are comparable to 
the operational and amortization costs of a telecommunica-
tions-computer network that would allow the employee to 
telecommute.7 When an information industry organization 
is located in an urban CBD, at least some of the transporta-
tion costs are borne by the employer, if only indirectly. For 
example, the CBD employer must offer higher wages and 
additional fringe benefits. These costs, including higher 
office rental costs, can be as much as three times the cost of 
telecommuting for the employer. Finally, the unavailability 
of gasoline and/or higher gasoline prices and the conse-
quent inability of workers to commute long distances, can 
accentuate this factor in the decision to decentralize. 
Organizations also decentralize on a national scale. 
Again, the increasing effectiveness and decreasing cost of 
computer-augmented communications and, in some cases, 
teleconferencing, can enhance the attractiveness of con-
ducting business meetings using telecommunications, 
rather than transporting the participants to a meeting loca-
tion.8,9,10 We anticipate increased use of telecom-
munications by information industry organizations, parti-
cularly of teleconferences supplemented by periodic face-
to-face meetings. 
The accessibility of new labor pools is another major impe-
tus to organizational decentralization. In many CBD’s, par-
ticularly in older cities, local labor sources have been de-
pleted; consequently, the residential origin of the workers 
employed in the CBD has been steadily increasing in dis-
                                                                                                
for the National Science Foundation, RANN Program, 1974, pp. 
47—48. 
7 lbid., pp. 80—109. 
8 The following organizations have been engaged in research in 
the effectiveness of teleconferencing: the Communications Study 
Group, Joint Unit for Planning Research, at the University Col-
lege London, where extensive work has been done on the psycho-
logical aspects of telecommunications; Human Sciences Research 
Institute at McLean, Va.; the Business Planning Group of Bell 
Canada; Stanford Research Institute; and the Metropolitan Re-
gional Council (MRC) in New York City. 
9 Some major national corporations already have video conferenc-
ing networks connecting regional offices. Several federal agen-
cies, NASA and DOD among them, are increasing their uses of 
teleconferencing to reduce intercity travel. Video teleconferencing 
has generally been less enthusiastically received because of its 
high cost. Innovations like fiber optics transmission lines may 
make this option considerably more attractive by materially reduc-
ing the transmission costs that are the major cost element in long 
distance video conferencing. 
10 E. M. Dickson and R. Bowers, “The video telephone,” Cornell 
Univ., Ithaca, N. Y., June 1973. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. COM-23, NO.10, OCTOBER 1975 
 
1144 
tance from the OBD. Decentralization enables an organiza-
tion to establish subunits in locations closer to the desired 
work force. For example, a company studied by the USC 
research team is beginning to decentralize. largely because 
it can attract higher quality clerical staff at locations re-
moved from the CBD. The company is interested also in 
attracting part-time workers, including handicapped per-
sons, students, or housewives who, although otherwise 
qualified, would be unable to commute to the downtown 
location. Finally, the increasing emphasis on equal job op-
portunity is causing employers to consider locating organ-
izational subunits in minority areas where public transpor-
tation is often poor or unavailable. None of these options is 
effectively open to a firm unless quality communications 
are possible between the scattered subunits.11 
III. OTHER INFLUENTIAL FACTORS 
A crucial question in telecommunications-augmented, or-
ganizational decentralization is whether productivity can be 
maintained or improved when information industry workers 
use computer terminals.12,13 Research on this question is 
just beginning, but it appears, from our own research and 
that of others, that most clerical and routine administrative 
functions can be effectively performed using commercially 
available computer terminals. Initial tests at a company 
studied by USC indicate that productivity is increased in 
this mode as compared to the traditional mode. However, it 
is too early to determine if there is a “Hawthorne” effect 
(i.e., whether the uniqueness of the situation is spurring 
workers to increased effort). On the other hand, the feed-
back properties of the computer terminal, when equipped 
with appropriate software, may provide precisely the pro-
ductivity-increasing operant reinforcement that was ob-
served in the most noted experiment at Hawthorne.14 
Some corporations have experienced adverse effects on 
productivity when computer terminals were introduced to 
portions of their work force. The primary reason appears to 
be that the human-factors aspects of the problem (i.e., the 
psychology of introducing new methods or the develop-
ment of effective operating interactive software) were not 
considered fully before introduction of the new operating 
mode.15  
                                                          
11 As a case in point, one firm was studied during the research be-
cause it is recentralizing from a set of six locations dispersed 
around the Los Angeles CBD. The newly centralized location will 
be more than 60 miles from the CBD, although a CBD headquar-
ters office will be maintained. One major reason given for the 
recentralization was poor communications quality between the 
dispersed offices. The firm did not use sophisticated telecommu-
nications technology. 
12 J. M. Nilles et al., op. cit. 
13 J. W. Lawrie et al., “Terminals and their impact on employee 
motivation,” Datamation, pp. 59—62, Aug. 1974. 
14 H. M. Parsons, “What happened at Hawthorne?,” Science, vol. 
183, pp. 922—932, Mar. 8, 1974. 
15 For example, the management of one company interviewed by 
G. Hanneman during our research experienced severe difficulties 
in introducing terminals to the clerical staff. These problems were 
attributed to feelings of fear for job security resulting from an 
The question of effectiveness of management functions 
in the telecommunications mode is more complicated, pri-
marily because of the greater complexity and variety of 
management tasks. As the level of management increases, 
so does the tendency to insist on face-to-face meetings be-
tween the manager and his peers or subordinates.16 Al-
though managers feel diminished confidence in decisions 
made using various telecommunications systems, compared 
to their confidence in decisions reached after face-to-face 
meetings, researchers have concluded that the actual deci-
sions are the same in both cases.17 The key point seems to 
be that the optimum management use of telecommunica-
tions in a decentralized organization is through occasional 
face-to-face meetings to renew confidence in verbal cues, 
perceptions of attitudes, and similar imponderables not 
easily transmitted through a telecommunications system, 
supplemented by the use of telecommunications in the in-
terim periods. An important element in the managerial use 
of telecommunications appears to be the availability of 
some form of graphic-display capability (not necessarily 
transmitted at video bandwidths) so that data, curves, line 
drawings, etc. can be transmitted. Either a CRT display or 
hard copy would suffice for this purpose.18,19 
One factor influencing the extent and rate of organiza-
tional decentralization is the operational availability of 
adequate communications networks and components. A 
reliable baseline network, the telephone system, already 
exists. A substantial and rapidly growing industry is en-
gaged in the development and production of computers, 
terminals, software and interconnect systems. However, 
commitment by a decentralizing company to a customized, 
self-owned telecommunications system design, hardware, 
                                                                                                
abrupt and arbitrary introduction of the new system. The problem 
was particularly severe among older clerical personnel, some of 
whom went to the extent of trying to sabotage the system. 
16  “People contact counts more than computers,” Business Week, 
pp. 80—81, May 4, 1974. 
17 A. A. L. Reid, Head, Long Range Studies Division, British Post 
Office Telecommunications, statements made during the National 
Conference on Telecommunications Policy, Airlie House, Va., 
Apr. 1974. 
18 A. E. Casey-Stahmer and M. D. Havron, “Planning research in 
teleconference systems,” Human Sciences Research, Inc., 
McLean, Va., 1973. 
19 My discussions with various users of video telephone systems 
have tended to support this conclusion. After a user of the video 
telephone system becomes accustomed to it, he tends to concen-
trate on seeing graphical material displayed rather than on facial 
expressions. One of the most common criticisms of AT & T’s 
Picturephone® (registered service mark of the American Tele-
phone and Telegraph Company) has been its insufficient ability to 
transmit graphic and textual material. Since much of the unwill-
ingness of managers to buy video telephone services has been due 
to their high cost, for the small increment in effectiveness, it has 
become increasingly evident that systems providing quality 
graphic displays and using lower bandwidth technologies (and 
hence, providing information at lower costs than video tele-
phones) are probably quite adequate for the majority of manage-
ment functions that would utilize telecommunications media. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. COM-23, NO.10, OCTOBER 1975 
 
1145 
and software could require a significant initial investment 
and long-term planning to ensure system effectiveness. 
IV. MODES OF ORGANIZATIONAL 
EVOLUTION 
As part of the USC research, the evolutionary phases of 
information industry organizations were defined in the con-
text of telecommunications-augmented decentralization. 
Four evolutionary phases can be described: 1) centraliza-
tion, 2) fragmentation, 3) dispersion, and 4) diffusion (Fig. 
1) 
A. Centralization 
Centralization represents the current mode. All ad-
ministrative operations are located at a single central site, 
with workers divided into functional groups according to 
their primary information product. Where national organi-
zations divide into regional offices, the regional home of-
fice replicates this monolithic structure. Both corporations 
A and B are centralized in Fig. 1(a). 
Figure 1. Organizational evolution: two cases, Corporations A and B. 
(a) Centralization. (b) Fragmentation. (c) Dispersion. (d) Diffusion. 
B. Fragmentation 
In this phase, coherent subunits of the central organization 
separate and relocate elsewhere. The communications 
boundaries of the organization are stretched and replaced 
by telecommunications or mail, but the communications 
within the unit remain intact. Two common variations of 
fragmentation are branching, such as occurs in banks, 
where the fragmented unit is a miniature replica of the par-
ent, and segmenting, where functional units such as data 
processing, accounting, or marketing are separated from the 
central organization [Corporation A in Fig. 1(b)]. Unfortu-
nately, fragmentation often increases commuting. This can 
be seen from the experience of many cities (e.g., Atlanta, 
Ga., Boston, Mass., Washington, D.C.) where a beltway 
has been built around the city. New commercial centers are 
built along the beltway, particularly at the intersections 
with freeways that lead to the downtown. People who live 
on one part of the perimeter tend to work, by the perversity 
of nature, on another part of the perimeter. Furthermore, 
many people who live inside the perimeter travel through 
downtown to reach their place of work at the perimeter. 
The net effect has been to increase the downtown traffic 
congestion beyond that which would result from the growth 
of downtown office space, because of the large number of 
people who pass through the downtown. In Los Angeles, 
for example, the City Traffic Engineer states that only 42 
percent of the people who travel into the downtown free-
way interchanges actually stop in the CBD.20 
C. Dispersion 
The third stage of decentralization is dispersion. In this 
stage, the firm establishes a number of work centers at lo-
cations throughout the city. Employees report to the center 
nearest their homes, irrespective of the organizational sub-
unit in which they work (Corporation A in Fig. 1(c); Corpo-
ration B is still centralized). Employees obtain their infor-
mation through the “central” computer, which can be 
physically located anywhere in the network. Supervision 
and coordination activities often use telecommunications 
rather than line-of-sight surveillance, although there would 
be general supervisors at each location. In dispersion, ex-
ecutives who require many face-to-face contacts to perform 
their jobs may still travel frequently to a central location to 
permit such interaction, but the majority of clerical workers 
would be able to achieve substantial reductions in their 
commuting. Dispersion would also permit firms to tap la-
bor markets that are not available currently to them; for 
example, housewives working while their children are in 
school and high schoolers in the later afternoon. 
D. Diffusion 
The ultimate stage in this telecommunications-augmented 
process is diffusion. In diffusion, firms would maintain a 
relatively small core staff which may be dispersed. Peaks in 
work load would be handled by individual workers who 
would offer their services through a telecommunications 
network to several different firms or clients  [both corpora-
tions of Fig. 1(d)]. This could be done by workers in their 
homes, in the totally diffused case, or by a variant of dis-
persion in which workers with the same groups of capabili-
ties would report to offices near their homes. This particu-
lar phenomenon is beginning to appear in the form of com-
panies that offer temporary secretarial services and, of 
course, is common in the professions such as law. A sig-
nificant difference is that diffusion requires the widespread 
availability of switched data networks, either between re-
gional centers or, in its ultimate form, between centers and 
home, rather than small private networks or leased line 
                                                          
20 Los Angeles City Traffic Department, Transportation Planning 
Division “Staff report: Home-to-work trip making characteristics 
of vehicle drivers and bus passengers for the ‘cordon count’ area,” 
Los Angeles, Calif., June 20, 1973, p. 7. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. COM-23, NO.10, OCTOBER 1975 
 
1146 
systems. For a variety of reasons, it is unlikely that the dif-
fusion stage of decentralization will be acceptable to many 
large organizations in the near future. However, the possi-
bilities of this mode of work will become increasingly at-
tractive to those smaller, service-providing organizations 
which constitute a growing portion of society. 
V. SOME SOCIETAL IMPACTS 
A. Transportation and Communications Systems 
If large numbers of organizations disperse their opera-
tions because of the increased capabilities of telecommuni-
cations and computer technology, some significant impacts 
on societal structure may occur. The most immediate 
physical impact will be on the design and operation of both 
transportation and telecommunications systems. For exam-
ple, since a large fraction of the activities occurring in ma-
jor urban business districts are information industry related, 
a substantial displacement of these workers to outlying 
regional business centers could alter completely the. design 
of transportation systems which are currently commuter 
oriented.21 Different forms of mass transit would be re-
quired that would be oriented more toward bringing em-
ployees relatively short distances to local work centers. 
The enhanced possibility of collocating information in-
dustry workers in a discrete number of regional business 
centers within a conurbation invites new ideas in tele-
communications system design. For example, the develop-
ment of a new specialized common carrier service, either 
by existing telephone companies or by others, becomes an 
increasingly real possibility. Such a service would provide 
a broad-band communications capability linking all the 
regional business centers within a conurbation, either 
through coaxial cable or, ultimately, through fiber optics 
transmission lines, leasing its communications capabilities 
to organizations in each business center. This would allow 
each organization to operate their private communications 
without going through the conventional switching system 
provided by the telephone company. The intriguing feature 
of a specialized local service, if it were to be provided by 
other than a telephone company, is that the carrier would 
not be engaged in interstate commerce in most areas and, 
since it would not use broadcast transmission of any sort, 
its operations would not fall under the regulatory jurisdic-
tion of the Federal Communications Commission. Such a 
network could be regulated as a public utility by state or 
local government, but many state, and many more local 
governments, do not have suitable regulatory policies to 
deal with this type of service. 
The impact on the telecommunications and computer 
manufacturing and service industries would also be pro-
nounced. Requirements for more versatile, reliable, and/or 
lower cost computer terminal capabilities, coupled with an 
                                                          
21 J. M. Nilles, F. R. Carlson, P. Gray, and G. Hanneman, “Tele-
commuting—Telecommunications or transportation,” in Proc. 
TRANSPO LA: The Future Is Now!, Los Angeles Council of Engi-
neers and Scientists, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
nautics, Oct. 1974. 
increasing market potential, should lead to significant de-
velopments in terminals, minicomputers, and their accom-
panying software packages. These developments will make 
standardization of some aspects of teleprocessing technolo-
gies more urgent if compatibility between systems is to be 
achieved without simultaneously stifling innovation. 
B. Labor Force 
The possibilities for greater involvement of presently 
underutilized components of the national labor force have 
already been mentioned as direct consequences of organ-
izational decentralization. Training, by both school and 
information industry organizations, may be necessary to 
prepare workers for the new work mode. On a larger scale, 
federal policies regulating labor should be reviewed. Right-
to-work laws, fair employment practices, unionization poli-
cies, and other externally imposed constraints can be potent 
factors in the decision to decentralize. Organizations in-
volved in or concerned with the regulation of the labor 
force should anticipate and evaluate the possible impacts of 
telecommunications-associated decentralization. 
C. Land Use and Urban Growth Patterns 
Potentially conflicting, communication-related pressures 
can be foreseen in the area of urban growth. Some of these 
forces encourage greater concentration within the cities, 
while others could increase urban sprawl. Goldmark is 
conducting experiments oriented toward development of 
“new rural communities,” located in areas of low popula-
tion density.22 The inhabitants of these communities use 
telecommunications to communicate with each other and to 
perform their work; as a consequence, they enjoy lower 
crime rates, decreased pollution, and other benefits of rural 
living. However, I feel that the “rural city,” which mixes 
the familiar downtown business area and suburban living, 
is a more likely near-term consequence of telecommuting. 
One anticipated outcome of telecommunications-aug-
mented decentralization could be that future regional busi-
ness districts (or, more properly, activity centers) will no 
longer have their present single-use characteristics. Instead 
of monolithic buildings devoted solely to office use, activ-
ity centers may contain a mixture of offices, living quarters, 
and entertainment facilities. This has already occurred, to 
some extent, in downtown Chicago. Suburbanites would 
have some advantages of small town living, in that they 
would live and work in the same general area, thereby de-
veloping a greater sense of community and lessening many 
of the urban problems, while enjoying the cultural advan-
tages and activities of a major metropolitan area. 
As with all cases of increasing freedom of choice, free-
dom may become license, producing the urban growth 
                                                          
22 P. C. Goldmark, “Communication in the new rural society,” 
Department of Communication Arts, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
N. Y., paper presented as part of the 1973 University Lecture 
Series. 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. COM-23, NO.10, OCTOBER 1975 
 
1147 
equivalent of the “tragedy of the commons.”23 Clearly, one 
of the potential results of the greater ability to relocate be-
cause of improved and less expensive telecommunications 
technology is that people will move to areas of great scenic 
beauty or recreational potential in such numbers as to de-
stroy the resource they have moved to be near. The choices 
are to risk the destruction of such major natural resources 
through inadequate planning for this possibility or, through 
careful planning, including deliberate limitation of trans-
portation facilities and rigidly enforced zoning restrictions, 
provide scenic and recreational areas in the cities. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
Although it is too early, at this point, to predict the rate 
and extent of telecommunications-augmented de-
centralization, it is clear that favorable conditions exist for 
such decentralization. Growing numbers of information 
industry organizations and increased availability and so-
phistication of computer and telecommunications tech-
nologies allow unprecedented opportunities for increased 
flexibility in organizational development and diversity.24 
Information industries are particularly amenable to tele-
communications-augmented decentralization, since the 
majority of their employees perform routine clerical or 
middle management tasks that can be adapted easily to a 
telecommunications mode. In many cases, computer and 
telecommunications technologies allow organizations to 
                                                          
23 G. Hardin, “The tragedy of the commons,” Science, vol. 162, 
pp. 1243—1248, Dec. 13, 1968. 
24 R. Bretz, “Two-way TV teleconferencing for government: The 
MRC-TV system,” RAND Corp., Santa Monica, Calif., Rep. R-
1489-MRC, Apr. 1974. The MRC system permitted interagency 
coordination to occur where it has rarely occurred before. The use 
of teleconferencing to enable an organization to have better (or 
any) access to a scarce resource (e.g., specialists, information, 
labor markets) can allow greater operational flexibility. 
perform at least as effectively as they do now and may in-
crease productivity if care is taken to satisfy human factors 
requirements and to provide software that permits a posi-
tive man-machine interface. Telecommunications-
augmented decentralization represents an important alterna-
tive to current patterns of organizational and urban struc-
ture. Consequently, public planners and policy makers on 
all levels of government should investigate possible im-
pacts of these technologies and formulate the requisite poli-
cies to maximize the positive benefits and to minimize any 
negative impacts. 
 
Jack M. Nilles had 18 years of 
military and industrial experience 
prior to 1972. During the latter part of 
this period, he was responsible for 
initiation, development, and direction 
of civil systems programs at The 
Aerospace Corporation. These 
programs were in the areas of 
transportation, resource management, 
communications, law enforcement, 
and medical engineering. Prior to this 
experience, he was Director of 
Advanced Planning operations for several military space 
systems at The Aerospace Corporation, TRW Systems, its 
predecessor, Space Technology Laboratories, and the U.S. 
Air Force. Since 1972 he has been with the University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, where he is currently 
Director of Interdisciplinary Program Development, re-
sponsible for the development of interdisciplinary research 
programs on a university-wide basis. Particular emphasis is 
placed on programs that involve significant business and 
community participation and involvement. One of these 
programs is the NSF-sponsored program discussed in this 
paper.  

