Journal of Information Technology Education Volume 4, 2005 
Editor: Chris Cope 
Specializing in Telecommunications: Networking  
Curricula of IS Programs in the United States 
Stephen Hawk 
University of Wisconsin, Parkside, WI, USA 
stephen.hawk@uwp.edu 
Executive Summary 
Preparation for employment in the telecommunications area is not a major emphasis in most in-
formation system (IS) programs. The curricula of most programs include only one or two courses 
related to telecommunications. As a result, most do not provide much preparation for employ-
ment in this area. There may be, however, increasing employment opportunities in this area that 
could be met by IS graduates.  
The current study investigates IS programs that allow students to develop their knowledge and 
skills in telecommunications. Not only is little known about the curricula of such programs, 
knowledge of their existence is relatively limited. The purpose of this study primarily is descrip-
tive. A good place to start in understanding how networking curricula could be structured is to 
examine programs that are already in place. The specific telecommunications courses included in 
these programs and how they have been combined with more general IS courses provide exam-
ples that should be useful for understanding how IS programs can prepare students for working in 
the networking field.  
A survey was conducted by examining fourteen IS programs in the United States that allow stu-
dents to specialize in telecommunications. Data describing the general IS and the networking 
courses in these programs were gathered.  
The results show that most networking specializations provided a broad IS education to some ex-
tent. That is, all programs were part of a comprehensive business program, and most of these also 
provided some preparation in typical IS courses such as Computer Programming, Database and 
Systems Analysis and Design along with some IS coursework beyond this. On average, the net-
working specializations required 5.21 IS courses outside of the telecommunications area.  
Coursework specific to the telecommunications field was also analyzed to determine which 
courses were typically included as requirements and / or electives. The results show that on aver-
age, the specializations required 4.86 courses in telecommunications; 3.29 of these were specifi-
cally required courses with the remainder allowing students to choose among telecommunication 
electives. The foundation course in 
Networking and Telecommunications 
was required in all but one of the pro-
grams. Beyond this, there was consid-
erable variation in what courses were 
required and offered as electives. The 
curricula tended to stress developing 
competencies in technical areas with 
much less attention being paid to tele-
Material published as part of this journal, either on-line or in 
print, is copyrighted by the publisher of the Journal of Informa-
tion Technology Education. Permission to make digital or paper 
copy of part or all of these works for personal or classroom use is 
granted without fee provided that the copies are not made or dis-
tributed for profit or commercial advantage AND that copies 1) 
bear this notice in full and 2) give the full citation on the first 
page. It is permissible to abstract these works so long as credit is 
given. To copy in all other cases or to republish or to post on a 
server or to redistribute to lists requires specific permission and 
payment of a fee. Contact Editor@JITE.org to request redistribu-
tion permission.  
Specializing in Telecommunications 
374 
communications management and policy issues.  
Keywords: Telecommunications, networking, data communications, education, curriculum 
Introduction 
Telecommunications is not typically an area that receives much emphasis in IS curricula. Gambill 
and Maier’s survey of IS programs (1998) indicates that systems development subjects such as 
programming, database, and systems analysis and design comprise the bulk of IS-specific 
coursework. This emphasis may be understandable given that many IS graduates start out in en-
try-level application development and support positions and see this as their initial career path.  
An application development emphasis is also found in the IS 2002 model curriculum (Gorgone et 
al., 2002). Five out of the ten courses in the model curriculum relate directly to systems develop-
ment skills and knowledge, while only two are telecommunications-related. These two courses 
are IS 2002.4 Information Technology Hardware and Software, and IS 2002.6 Networks and 
Telecommunications. IS 2002.4 is not a telecommunications course per se since it deals with the 
broader information technology (IT) infrastructure as well as telecommunications topics that 
serve as a prerequisite for IS 2002.6. Gambill and Maier’s results (1998) showed, however, that 
only 78% of IS programs offered a data communications course and that only 38% included it as 
a program requirement. Even fewer (1.5 %) offered a course similar to IS 2002.4, with no pro-
gram requiring it at all. Although this study predates the IS 2002 model curriculum by a few 
years, a similar level of coverage of the topics included in IS 2002.4 and IS 2002.6 existed in IS 
1997, the prior version of the model curriculum.  
Anecdotal evidence from our IS program over the years suggests that there is a sizable minority 
of students who prefer the computer networking area over application development. In some 
cases this may result from having strengths in technical areas besides programming. In others, 
students are simply drawn to the computer networking and IS technical infrastructure subjects. 
Additionally, some employers hire IS graduates into positions involving networking and infra-
structure support. Experience with such students and employment opportunities for them led to an 
interest in investigating IS programs that allow students to specialize in telecommunications.  
A number of similar terms are used to refer to this field. Telecommunications has broader conno-
tations than computer networking or data communications. In addition to voice and data commu-
nications, telecommunications can also refer to broadcast telecommunications such as television 
and radio. The main emphasis here when the terms networking or telecommunications are used is 
on voice and data communications, which can of course include the use of telecommunication 
technologies for carrying video or audio data.  
Employment Opportunities in the Networking Field 
What opportunities exist for IS students who seek employment in the networking area? In dis-
cussing the future for American programmers, Mander (2001) notes that there is an undoubted 
skills shortage in the area of computer networking as this technology has increased in strategic 
importance during the 1990s. A study conducted in the late 1990’s indicated that significant de-
mand existed for IT graduates with skills in telecommunications and infrastructure support (Gon-
zenbach, 1998).  
More recent estimates provided by US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2004) of employment growth 
in different occupations from 2002-2012 suggests the networking field may offer increasing em-
ployment opportunities in the future. “Network and Computer Systems Administrators” and 
“Network Systems and Data Communications Analysts” are among the 30 occupations expected 
 Hawk 
 375 
to grow the fastest from 2002 to 2012, with predicted growth rates of 37% and 57% respectively. 
One of these, “Network Systems and Data Communications Analysts”, is predicted to be the sec-
ond fastest growing occupation in the USA during this period. Total 2012 employment for “Net-
work and Computer Systems Administrators” and “Network Systems and Data Communications 
Analysts” is estimated to be 345,000 and 292,000 respectively with a combined employment of 
637,000. Thus, there should continue to be good employment opportunities in this field for the 
foreseeable future.  
One potential threat to future employment in the IS field is offshore outsourcing. Offshore out-
sourcing shifts jobs from domestic employees to foreign workers. Although employment oppor-
tunities overall in the IS field in the USA are still predicted to grow for the foreseeable future, one 
estimate indicates that there will be 246,000 fewer IT jobs in the USA in 2008 compared to the 
situation were none of this work to be done offshore (Information Technology Association of 
America, 2004).  
Does offshore outsourcing affect all types of IS occupations equally? So far, the impact is the 
greatest in the software development area, with relatively little impact on demand for employees 
in the networking field (Gartner Group, 2003). US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2004) employment 
estimates provide some support for this; estimated growth in jobs for computer programmers is 
the lowest of all the IS occupations and the two networking occupations are both in the top 30 
high growth areas. Carmel and Tjia (2005) note that one reason why certain IT activities such as 
networking do not lend themselves to being done offshore is simply the need for much of the 
work to be done in close proximity to the using-organization. Although there is nothing to guar-
antee that telecommunications won’t eventually be affected, the networking field is relatively 
immune to the threat of being shipped offshore for the time being. Given all this, networking oc-
cupations may become a more important destination for IS graduates than they have been in the 
past.  
All of this does not directly answer the question of what employment opportunities exist for IS 
students who specialize in networking since demand for employees in this area could be filled 
from other sources, such as by hiring computer science, electrical engineering or technical college 
graduates. The increasing demand in this area presumably could be met in part by IS graduates. 
Offering a specialization in telecommunications should better enable an IS program to meet the 
demands for IT talent in this area. 
Prior Research on Networking Specializations 
Shariat and Benjamin (1999) contrast the objectives of telecommunications curricula in computer 
science, computer engineering and IS. Computer science and computer engineering programs 
need more of a detailed, technical orientation than IS. IS, on the other hand, needs to be more 
concerned with the application of networks as a means to achieve organizational goals. Thomp-
son (2003) also distinguishes between these three disciplines and notes that programs housed 
within a Business School may have somewhat technical courses in network management and 
telecommunications administration. Computer science programs, on the other hand, would go 
into greater technical detail on networks, protocols and distributed processes; and computer engi-
neering programs would have greater emphasis on topics such as electronics, math, electromag-
netic theory, and signal processing.  
One study specifically addresses the issue of providing a networking specialization within a Busi-
ness program (Minch & Tabor, 2003). Their view of the purpose of such a specialization is to 
produce “graduates who are not only technically proficient, but who understand the diverse busi-
ness functions and organizational drivers that dictate technical solutions” (p. 52). The curriculum 
they describe provides an illustration of how one program accomplished this by combining a tra-
Specializing in Telecommunications 
376 
ditional foundation in business subjects, some courses that are typically found in IS programs 
(e.g. Programming, Database, and Systems Analysis and Design), as well as courses on telecom-
munications.  
Snow and Lowman (2004) express a similar view regarding the scope of telecommunications 
programs as above. Without identifying which discipline would offer a telecommunications spe-
cialization, they note that curricula in this area need to go beyond developing technical compe-
tence and should pay some attention to telecommunications policy and management. This broad 
view of the field would seem especially appropriate for specializations within business-oriented 
IS programs.  
Other literature on telecommunications education does not address the curricula of telecommuni-
cations specializations per se. Rather, it discusses how specific telecommunications courses could 
be structured and / or delivered. Examples are the IS 2002.6 networking and telecommunications 
course (Johnson, Stellar, and Tanner, 1999), computer and network security (Bergström, Grahn, 
Karlström, Pulkkis, & Åström, 2004; Steele, Stojkovic, & Zaveri, 2004), project management and 
requirements assessment for telecommunications (Snow & Lowman, 2004), and management of 
telecommunications services (Choi, Teer, & Teer, 2005). While these studies provide insight into 
the teaching of specific telecommunications courses, they do not describe the structure of tele-
communications curricula where such courses might be found. 
The main research question addressed by the current study is:  
What are the curricula of IS programs that provide networking specializations? 
Specifically, how have these programs structured their IS curricula in general, as well as the 
courses within the telecommunications area? What telecommunications courses are typically of-
fered in these specializations? This study will describe in some detail how this has been accom-
plished in a number of universities. 
The following, adapted from Minch and Tabor (2003), provides a conceptual overview of what 
the structure of such programs was expected to look like in general.  
1. University Core – The basic undergraduate requirements for all majors, e.g. Humanities 
and the Arts, Social Sciences, Science, etc.  
2. Business Core: This would include foundation courses such as Math, Economics, Statis-
tics, Oral or Written Communications, Legal Environment of Business, as well as courses 
in the Business functions such as Accounting, Marketing, Finance, Organizational Be-
havior or Theory, Operations Management, and Business Policy and Strategy.  
3. IS Courses: Courses that are typically found in IS programs such as Computer Program-
ming, Database, Systems Analysis and Design, and IS Policy and Strategy. 
4. Telecommunications Courses: Courses specific to the networking area.  
The first three categories describe how most IS programs are structured; Information Systems is 
embedded within the Business curriculum, which in turn assumes the broader education provided 
by the University Core. Telecommunications, the last category, provides more targeted IS 
coursework specific to the networking specialization. The emphasis of this study is on the latter 
two categories. That is, what general IS courses are in the curricula, and what are the telecommu-
nications-specific courses?  
 Hawk 
 377 
Research Method 
A survey was conducted to provide information on undergraduate IS programs that allowed stu-
dents to specialize in telecommunications while obtaining a broader business education. If a pro-
gram claimed that it offered a specialization in telecommunications, it was a candidate for inclu-
sion in the sample. It was expected that any networking specialization would go beyond including 
just two telecommunications courses since this is the number of such courses in the IS 2002 
model curriculum. Besides allowing students to specialize in telecommunications, the IS program 
had to be part of a broader Business curriculum to be included in the sample. That is, the program 
had to provide a preparation in the typical Business foundation and Business functional area 
courses 
Besides IS, other names a program could go by include management information system, com-
puter information systems (CIS), information technology, and telecommunications. In some cases 
the telecommunications specialization could be found within an IS curriculum that allowed stu-
dents to concentrate in this field as a sub-specialty within a broader IS program, while in others, 
the networking specialization could itself be the IS program.  
IS programs can either award a degree in IS or a Business degree where students concentrate in 
IS. Other terms that refer to the same thing as concentration are “track”, “option” or “area of em-
phasis”. The distinction between an IS concentration and an IS degree may not have too much 
significance in that no standard exists for defining how they differ. The IS and broader business 
curricula of two programs could be very similar, yet either program could award a Business de-
gree with an IS concentration or an IS degree. This research will include programs going by ei-
ther name. The primary interest is program content, not program name.  
A number of approaches were used to locate programs to include in the sample. The main ap-
proach was to conduct web searches using various search engines to find the programs’ web sites. 
Terms such as telecommunications, data communications or networking were used along with 
terms such as major, concentration, specialization, or track to identify these programs. Searches 
were normally limited to the *.edu domain since academic programs should be on a host within 
this domain. Promising hits from these searches were investigated further by examining the web 
sites to see if they met the above criteria. Eventually after performing several different searches, 
this approach converged on the same 10 qualifying programs. 
Another approach was to use the attendee list from the Telecommunications and Information 
Technology conference held in Louisville, KY, April 1-3, 2004. Most attendees of this confer-
ence were involved in telecommunications programs in various disciplines, and had interest in 
teaching and curricular issues related to this field. An examination of attendees’ web sites yielded 
three additional programs.  
A third approach was to examine a random selection of AACSB accredited undergraduate pro-
grams of business (Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business, 2004), checking each 
for the existence of a telecommunication specialization. To obtain a random sample, the listing of 
accredited business programs was imported into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. A random num-
ber was assigned to each program and the resulting list was sorted in decreasing order of the as-
signed random number. Programs were then selected in first to last order from this sorted list. 
This ended up in the examination of a random sample of half (230) of the AACSB accredited un-
dergraduate programs of business. This brute-force, time consuming effort yielded only one addi-
tional program that was not found using the first two approaches. Due to the low payoff for the 
effort, and with no expectation that the other half of the AACSB programs would provide better 
results, the remaining half of AACSB programs were not examined.  
Specializing in Telecommunications 
378 
All three of the above methods for locating telecommunications programs would be expected to 
generate a sample that would primarily be located in the United States. Programs identified by the 
.edu domain are mostly within the US. All of the conference attendees and most of the AACSB 
accredited programs were located in the United States.  
Data were collected by recording program requirements and course descriptions for general IS 
and telecommunications-specific courses into a document that described each program. These 
documents provided the raw data for creating the results tables.  
Telecommunications builds on and is complementary with other areas such as technical infra-
structure (hardware & operating systems), computer and network security, and the legal and regu-
latory environment of telecommunications. All these types of courses will be considered as part 
of telecommunications-specific coursework. Some courses had titles such as “network program-
ming” or “internet programming” suggesting they were telecommunications courses. Courses 
with such titles sometimes turned out to be web-based application development courses (e.g. 
HTML, JavaScript, Active Server Pages). Unless there was some emphasis on networking issues 
per se, these courses were classified as web-development courses in the general IS curricula, and 
not included among the telecommunications-specific courses.  
Results 
The institutions and the telecommunications specializations included in the sample are shown in 
Table 1. All programs were located in the United States. The most common type of specializa-
tion, found at seven of the fourteen sampled institutions, was to provide a bachelor’s degree in IS 
with the option to complete a concentration in the telecommunications area. The next most com-
mon type of specialization, found at three institutions, was for the business program to directly 
offer a bachelor’s degree in telecommunications or networking (Boise State, California State - 
Hayward, and Western Michigan). One program offered a telecommunications track within an IS 
concentration (California State – Long Beach). Another had a telecommunications concentration 
directly within the business degree (Golden Gate).  
Two of the fourteen institutions included in the sample offered neither a telecommunications con-
centration nor a telecommunications degree. University of Mississippi provided a degree in IS 
and an interdisciplinary telecommunications minor. Requirements for the minor overlapped IS 
degree requirements in a way that allowed IS students to complete its requirements while simul-
taneously fulfilling the requirements of the IS degree. Finally, one program (Dakota State) made 
no mention of allowing IS students to specialize in telecommunications. Dakota State, however, 
offered a non-business CIS degree that had seven networking-related courses that could be taken 
by IS majors. IS majors were required to take four elective courses from CIS or computer science, 
so IS majors could put together a telecommunications specialization informally by choosing elec-
tives from these courses in the CIS program. In order to analyze Dakota State in the same manner 
as the other programs, it was assumed that students who informally specialized in telecommuni-
cations would take all four IS electives in the telecommunications area. 
All the sampled programs were integrated within broader Business curricula. Ten were found in 
AACSB accredited programs, and four were not. Being in an AACSB accredited program guar-
anteed a solid grounding in Business core subjects. All specializations, however, required a broad 
education in Business core subjects as described earlier. No program had fewer than 33 credits in 
its required business core, and all institutions required additional foundation courses beyond this 
(e.g. Economics, Math, Statistics). The purpose of this paper, however, is not to document all re-
quirements for graduation, but rather to confirm that the specializations were embedded in com-
prehensive Business programs instead of merely drawing upon a select, small group of Business 
courses designed to give a highly technical program a business-oriented flavor.  
 Hawk 
 379 
All but two programs expressed program requirements in terms of “credits” where one credit 
translated into 15 class hours for an academic term. Two quarter-based programs did not (Univer-
sity of California at Hayward, Milwaukee School of Engineering). The class hours of these two 
programs were converted into 15 hour per term credits using formulas provided on their websites. 
All credits shown in the results can therefore be interpreted in the same way. All other programs 
mostly offered 3 credit courses, with a few courses being one or two credits.  
General Program Structure 
Table 1 shows the IS curricula in the 14 specializations by identifying the general IS courses re-
quired in each program, and how many telecommunication courses were in the programs on a 
required and elective basis. The most common general IS courses were Computer Programming, 
Database and Systems Analysis and Design. Other frequently required courses were Web Devel-
opment, E-commerce and IS Policy and Strategy. All programs of course also included network-
ing courses. Some summary figures for the programs are as follows: 
1. The 14 programs required 5.21 IS courses on average outside of the telecommunications 
area.  
2. On average, the programs required 3.29 specifically designated telecommunication 
courses. 
3. On average, the programs required an additional 1.57 elective courses in the telecommu-
nications area.  
4. Combining the required and elective courses, 4.86 telecommunications courses were re-
quired on average.  
5. Adding the general IS and the telecommunications courses resulted with the requirement 
for students to take 10.07 courses on average in order to complete the specialization. 
6. Finally, on average, the telecommunications courses represented 48.3 % of the courses in 
the overall IS curricula.  
All of the specializations required three or more networking courses. There were no cases of pro-
grams claiming to offer a networking specialization that failed to meet this minimum threshold. 
Therefore, all specializations provided at least a little more in-depth coverage of networking top-
ics than what is included in the IS 2002 model curriculum.  
Golden State University had no specific telecommunications courses required. An examination of 
course prerequisites showed that only one telecommunications course had another telecommuni-
cations course as a prerequisite. So unless students wanted that course having the prerequisite, 
there were no restrictions on what networking courses they could take. Dakota State also had no 
specifically required telecommunications courses, so students could theoretically choose any 4 
courses in this area. In practice though, taking 4 telecommunications courses required students to 
take one of the telecommunications courses due to prerequisites of the other courses.  
Most of the curricula shown in Table 1 provided a well-rounded preparation in conventional IS 
topics, at least to some extent, by requiring several of the courses in the IS 2002 model curricu-
lum. A few of the specializations, however, did not. Golden Gate University was the most ex-
treme in this regard with the entire curriculum being comprised of networking courses. California 
State University, Hayward provided a single programming course and two web development 
courses that covered topics such as HTML, multimedia, JavaScript and the CGI Interface. Dakota 
State required three programming courses and one database course. All of the other programs re-
quired at least one programming and one database course along with one or more courses in areas 
Specializing in Telecommunications 
380 
outside of telecommunications that typically included either Systems Analysis and Design or a 
system development field-project.  
Telecommunication Course Requirements  
Course names and their descriptions were developed from the courses in the 14 programs. De-
scriptions of the courses that were considered to be examples of the same course were grouped 
together and compared with each other as well as contrasted with courses placed in other catego-
ries. The goal of this was to ensure that courses put into the same category were very similar in 
objective and topics included, as well as being different from the objectives and topics of other 
course categories. The results of this were reviewed by two colleagues who teach in the telecom-
munications area with some minor revisions being made as a result.  
Table 2 shows the telecommunications courses that were required in two or more programs. For 
each course category, Table 2 shows how many different courses fit each category at an institu-
tion both as a requirement and as an elective. In a few cases, an institution offered or required 
more than one variation of the course. For instance, Arkansas State University required two dif-
ferent Local Area Network courses and Dakota State University provided 4 different Computer 
and Network Security courses as electives. The “other” category included courses that were re-
quired in only one program or that were offered only as electives. Ten courses are shown left to 
right in decreasing order of how many programs required them. The Appendix provides a brief 
description of the courses that were included in Table 2. 
The most commonly required course was Networks and Telecommunications, the course that cor-
responds to the IS 2002.6 telecommunications course defined in the IS 2002 model curriculum. It 
was offered in all fourteen programs, and was required in all but one. Golden Gate University had 
no specific telecommunications courses required. Neither did Dakota State officially, but due to 
this course being a prerequisite for other networking courses, it would end up being a required 
course in practice for most students. This course served a similar role in all programs that re-
quired it in that it provided a foundation in the principles, standards, protocols and managerial 
issues related to telecommunications that subsequent courses built upon.  
No other course came close to IS 2002.6 Networks and Telecommunications in being so widely 
required. The next most commonly required course, “Local Area Networks” was required in only 
5 of the programs and offered in a sixth as an elective. This course emphasized standards and pro-
tocols relevant for LANs, LAN server administration as well as hands-on lab exercises related to 
the implementation and administration of LANs and LAN servers.  
Following closely behind Local Area Networks were “Network Design” and “Networks and 
Telecommunications II” with each being required in four programs and offered in two as an 
elective. “Network Design” provided a systematic approach for defining network solutions to 
business needs, with additional content related to the implementation and administration of net-
works typically being included. Although the topics found in “Networks and Telecommunica-
tions II” overlapped those found in IS 2002.6 “Networks and Telecommunications”, this second, 
follow-on course built on the foundation provided by the first course by providing practical ap-
plication and extension of those concepts. It tended to provide more hands-on experiences such 
as setting up, configuring and administering networks and internetworking devices as well as 
providing more in-depth coverage of certain issues such as TCP/IP and security.  
“Legal, and Regulatory Environment of Telecommunications” was a requirement in three pro-
grams and was offered as an elective in three others. “Information Technology and System Soft-
ware” corresponds to IS 2002.4, the IT Infrastructure course defined in IS 2002. IS 2002.4 pro-
vides a foundation in broader IT infrastructure issues such as computer architecture, networking 
 Hawk 
 381 
technologies and system software. Although this course is recommended as a requirement for any 
IS degree (Gorgone et al., 2002), it was required in only in three of the sampled programs. 
“Computer and Network Security” was offered more often as an elective than a required tele-
communications course. Although not regarded as critical enough to merit a dedicated required 
course in most specializations, it apparently was viewed as important enough to be offered as an 
elective in more programs than any other telecommunications course. Dakota State went so far as 
to provide 4 courses on security. Students at Dakota State could select up to 3 of their 4 network-
ing courses from among the security courses and could therefore develop a depth of knowledge in 
this area that was unique among the sampled programs. At Ball State University this course could 
be used as a general IS elective for all IS majors, but the networking specialization itself didn’t 
specify telecommunication electives.  
“Applied Operating Systems” had a very practical orientation by concentrating on specific ad-
ministration skills along with some basic principals. In two programs the course was oriented 
mostly towards vendor certification. The program at Milwaukee School of Engineering went fur-
thest in this regard by preparing students to certify in several courses within the Microsoft and 
Novell curricula.  
The “Internetworking/WAN” course could be considered a complementary course to the local 
area networking course in that together they represented the range of networking issues from lo-
cal to wide area networking, although only one program required both. The LAN course dealt 
with managing local networks without much emphasis on how LANs are connected, while the 
Internetworking course concentrated on the enterprise, wide area connectivity of networks, in-
cluding LANs.  
Finally, only “Management of Telecommunications” dealt substantially with softer managerial 
issues such as telecommunications planning and management of the telecommunications func-
tion. Despite use of the term “management” in the titles of some courses, there were only 4 insti-
tutions that offered courses that primarily dealt with management of telecommunication. Only 
two required it.  
There were a few commonalities in the courses included in the “Other” category. Four programs 
gave credit for a networking internship with one of them including it as a required course. Three 
programs offered a course on TCP/IP with one case of it being required. Besides this, other mis-
cellaneous courses include IP telephony, wireless networking, network simulation, business web 
architecture, A+ certification, data center management and automated data capture.  
Conclusion and Discussion 
The analysis of programs with networking specializations provides models of how different Uni-
versities prepare students for work in this area. The results provide examples of telecommunica-
tions curricula that could be useful for other IS programs considering the creation of a networking 
specialization. For an institution that already offers such a specialization, the results could still be 
useful for suggesting other alternatives. 
Most of the specializations are structured as sub-specialties within IS programs that to some ex-
tent provide a well-rounded background in IS. Most programs provide students some background 
in the courses traditionally found in IS programs such as Programming, Database, and Systems 
Analysis and Design, as well as some additional IS courses. Besides gaining a background for 
entry-level networking positions, the graduates of most specializations would therefore have 
some credentials to seek work in other IS areas. Even if graduates end up in a telecommunica-
tions position, the variety in IS coursework provided by most programs would help in understand-
ing the broader IT function of their employers. This background would presumably be useful as 
Specializing in Telecommunications 
382 
they rise through the telecommunications ranks and could make it easier for graduates to move 
into other functions within IS later on if they desired.  
There were some programs, however, that provided only a limited number of IS courses outside 
the telecommunications area. Golden Gate University and California State University, Hayward 
are the leading examples of this. These specializations do not necessarily go into greater depth in 
telecommunications coursework, but rather allow students to complete the specialization with 
fewer courses overall within the combined general IS and telecommunications areas. The view 
implicit in these curricula apparently is that having a narrower focus on telecommunications pro-
vides acceptable preparation for work in this area.  
The specializations provide a mixture of theory and conceptual learning along with hands-on ex-
periential learning in a lab and/or field setting. “Networks and Telecommunications” tends to 
concentrate on theory and concepts while other courses such as “Local Area Networks”, “Net-
works and Telecommunications II”, “Applied Operating Systems” and “Internetworking/WANs” 
tend to provide significant hands-on experiences in addition to theory and concepts. “Network 
Design” more than other courses provides experiential learning via field projects.  
Taken as a whole, the telecommunications-specific courses place much greater emphasis on tech-
nical than non-technical topics. The main courses featuring a substantial degree of non-technical 
content include “Network Design”, “Legal, & Regulatory Environment of Telecommunications” 
and “Management of Telecommunications”. These courses are required in seven of the speciali-
zations, with only two programs requiring more than one of them. Although other telecommuni-
cations courses include some content found in these three courses to a limited extent, seven of the 
specializations do not require any course that significantly emphasizes non-technical topics.  
In discussing the educational requirements for the telecommunications discipline, Snow and 
Lowman (2004) suggest that programs should include “concepts in each of the three dimensions 
of telecommunications, namely; telecommunications technology, policy, and management … Al-
though some educational programs might place particular emphasis on one of these dimensions, it 
is important to pass on to the student the core competencies of each” (p. 1). Many of the programs 
in the sample, however, concentrate on the development of technology competencies without 
much attention being paid to the others. Although technology competencies would likely be the 
most important for entry level positions, the importance of the others should increase as graduates 
advance into more senior positions in this field.  
Besides being limited by the number of courses that can be required of students, one possible rea-
son for this technical emphasis may be that other general IS courses include these issues to a cer-
tain extent. For instance, Systems Analysis and Design provides a problem solving approach that 
could be adapted for network design. Also, the broader Business curriculum provides education 
in topics relevant for policy and management in the telecommunications area. However, greater 
attention to the non-technical issues within the telecommunications courses themselves may still 
be warranted.  
The discussion of networking curricula highlighted those courses that were designated as net-
working or infrastructure-related. Telecommunications however, would likely be included to 
some extent in other courses outside of these in most programs. For instance Electronic Business 
(IS 2002.2) and IS Policy and Strategy (IS 2002.4) would both pay some attention to networking 
and infrastructure issues. To the extent that computer networking content is embedded into these 
courses, the results presented here would tend to understate the coverage of these topics in the 
networking curricula. IS 2002.2, however, would probably include infrastructure and security 
issues at a relatively simple level due to its assumption of no prior computer networking back-
ground. The integration of networking and infrastructure topics into courses such as this would 
still provide a useful addition to the networking courses in that they would help students under-
 Hawk 
 383 
stand how networking and infrastructure issues relate to other areas of IS. IS Policy and Strategy 
(IS 2002.4) would also provide a useful complement to the technically-oriented networking 
courses, especially if a program has no “Management of Telecommunications” course.  
The relatively low emphasis given to proprietary knowledge such as teaching Windows, Net-
Ware, or CISCO for the purpose of preparing students for certification is worth noting. Although 
many courses include these technologies, Milwaukee School of Engineering is the only speciali-
zation that offers several courses geared specifically towards vendor certification. Only a few 
other courses at other institutions were found related to Windows or CISCO certification.  
The effort required to locate the 14 specializations in the sample suggests that not too many un-
dergraduate IS programs provide the telecommunications option in the United States. Perhaps 
future research using other search strategies could uncover more programs that provide a spe-
cialization in this area. The sample could be expanded by attempting to locate programs outside 
of the United States. Limiting internet searches to the .edu domain in this study was done to avoid 
having a result set that was so large that it would be difficult to find qualifying networking pro-
grams. The result, however, was that the programs uncovered were all in the United States. Use 
of domain names that identify institutions of higher education elsewhere could help international-
ize the sample in future studies. It would be useful to investigate the similarities and differences 
of networking programs found in other countries with those in the United States.  
Networking specializations offered by undergraduate IS programs face a challenge in needing to 
meet so many requirements, particularly if a broad background in non-telecommunications IS 
topics is to be provided. Can the relatively limited number of courses in the telecommunications 
area really provide adequate credentials for work in this area? The fourteen programs examined 
by this study apparently believe so.  
The current study is descriptive in nature; it describes what has been done but does not go too far 
in evaluating the suitability of the curricula for preparing graduates for work in the networking 
field. More research is needed on the occupations and career paths of telecommunications profes-
sionals and what education and experience is needed to prepare students for this work. The results 
of this should shed light on how networking curricula could be structured to meet these needs, as 
well as the types of positions that graduates of IS programs fill versus graduates from other types 
of programs such as technical colleges, or 4-year computer science or electrical engineering pro-
grams. 
 
 
Table 1. Structure of Telecommunications Programs 
 
General IS Course Requirements 
Telecommunications 
Courses  
Institution 
Degree / specialization 
name A
A
C
SB
 
A
cc
re
di
te
d?
 
Pr
og
ra
m
m
in
g 
D
at
ab
as
e 
SA
 &
 D
es
ig
n 
W
eb
 D
ev
el
op
-
m
en
t 
E
-c
om
m
er
ce
 
IS
 P
ol
ic
y 
&
 
St
ra
te
gy
 
O
th
er
 
IS
 E
le
ct
iv
e 
 Total 
Non-
telecom 
courses / 
(credits) R
eq
ui
re
d 
T
el
ec
om
 
C
ou
rs
es
 
T
el
ec
om
  
E
le
ct
iv
es
 
Total 
 Telecom 
courses / 
(credits) 
required 
Total IS 
courses / 
(credits)  
Arkansas State 
Univ. - Jonesboro 
MIS degree with Networking 
Emphasis Y 1 1 1      3 (9 cr.) 6  6 (18 cr.) 9 (27 cr.) 
Auburn Univ. - 
Montgomery 
BSBA in IS with Data Commu-
nications Option Y 1 1     1 1 4 (12 cr.) 4  4 (12 cr.) 8 (24 cr.) 
Ball State Univ. Bachelors IS with Network 
Management option Y 1 1 1    2 2 7 (18 cr.) 3  3 (9 cr.) 10 (27 cr.) 
Boise State Univ. BBA Networking & Telecom-
munications Y 1 1 1 1 1 1   6 (18 cr.) 4 2 6 (18 cr.) 12 (36 cr.) 
California State 
Univ. - Hayward 
BS Telecommunications Man-
agement  Y 1   2     3 (8 cr.) 4  
4  
(10.7 cr.) 7 (18.7 cr.) 
California State 
Univ. - Long Beach 
IS option in the BSBA degree. 
Telecommunications track Y 1 1     1  3 (9 cr.) 2 1 3 (9 cr.) 6 (18 cr.) 
Dakota State Uni-
versity 
Bachelors MIS, up to 4 Telecom 
electives N 3 1       4 (12 cr.) 1 3 
4  
 (12 cr.) 8 (24 cr.) 
Eastern Illinois 
University 
CIS Major with Telecom Con-
centration Y 2 1 1  1   1 6 (18 cr.) 3  3 (9 cr.) 9 (27 cr.) 
Golden Gate Uni-
versity 
BBA with Concentration In 
Telecom Management N         0 (0 cr.) 0 5 5 (15 cr.) 5 (15 cr.) 
Our Lady of the 
Lake University 
BBA in CIS and Security - 
Web/Network Admin. Track N 2 1 1 1 1  1  7 (21 cr.) 5  5 (15 cr.) 12 (36 cr.) 
Milwaukee School 
of Engineering 
BBA MIS with Computer Sys-
tem Infrastructure Concentration N 4 1 1 1 1  1  
9 
(19.3 cr.) 5 8 
13  
(26.7-32 cr.)
22  
(46-51.3 cr.) 
University of Mis-
sissippi 
BBA MIS - with telecom minor  Y 4 2 2   1 2  11 (33 cr.) 3  3 (9 cr.) 14 (42 cr.) 
Univ. of Wisconsin 
- Parkside 
BS in MIS with telecom track 
Y 2 1 1 1  1   6 (16 cr.) 3 1 4  (10-11 cr.) 
10  
(26-27 cr.) 
Western Michigan 
University 
BBA Telecommunications &  
Information Management Y 1 1 1    1  4 (12 cr.) 4 2 6 (18 cr.) 10 (30 cr.) 
 
  
Table 2. Required and Elective Telecommunications Courses 
  
 Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El Rq El 
Arkansas State University 1  2  1                2  
Auburn University - Mont-
gomery 1    1  1          1      
Ball State University 1  1          1 1         
Boise State University 1      1   1 1   1     1   5 
California State Univ. - Hay-
ward 1    1    1      1        
California State Univ. - Long 
Beach 1  1               1    1 
Dakota State University 1   1          4  2      1 
Eastern Illinois University 1  1              1      
Golden Gate University  1    1    1    1  1  1  1  2 
Our Lady of the Lake Univer-
sity 1    1  1    1  1          
Milwaukee School of Engi-
neering 1       1      1 4 9  2  1  4 
University of Mississippi 1      1  1              
University of Wisconsin -
Parkside 1          1   1  1     1  
Western Michigan University 1  1   1  1 1 1         1   5 
Number of programs that re-
quire the course / Number of 
programs that offer the course 
as an elective 
13 1 5 1 4 2 4 2 3 3 3 0 2 6 2 4 2 3 2 2 2 6 
 
Specializing in Telecommunications 
386 
References 
Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business [AACSB]. (2004). Schools accredited in business. 
Retrieved December 12, 2004, from http://www.aacsb.edu/General/InstLists.asp?lid=2  
Bergström, L., Grahn, K., Karlström, P., Pulkkis, G. & Åström, P. (2004). Teaching Network Security in a 
Virtual Learning Environment. Journal of Information Technology Education. 3, 189-154. 
Carmel, E., & Tjia, P. (2005). Offshoring Information Technology: Sourcing and Outsourcing to a Global 
Workforce, Cambridge, UK, Combridge University Press.  
Choi, Y., Teer, F., & Teer, H. (2005). Management of Telecommunications Services: A Vital New Content 
Area and a Course Model for the College of Business. International Journal of Information and Com-
munication Technology Education. 1 (3), 60-73. 
Gambill, S., & Maier, J. (1998). CIS/MIS Curriculums in AACSB and Non-AACSB Accredited Colleges 
of Business. Journal of Information Systems Education. 12 (1-2), 59-67. 
Gartner Group. (2003). Organizational Implications of Offshore Outsourcing. Retrieved April 5, 2005, 
from http://www.gartner.com/resources/118100/118136/118136.pdf 
Gonzenbach, N. (1998). Developing an Information Systems’ Curriculum with Input from Business and 
Industry. Office Systems Research Journal. 16 (1), 9-14. 
Gorgone, J., Davis, G., Valacich, J., Topi, H., Feinstein, D. & Longenecker, H. (2002). IS 2002: Model 
curriculum and guidelines for undergraduate programs in information systems. Retrieved January 28, 
2004, from http://www.acm.org/education/is2002.pdf  
Information Technology Association of America. (2004). Executive Summary:  The Impact of Offshore IT 
Software and Services Outsourcing on the US Economy and the IT Industry [Research study]. Re-
trieved March 24, 2005, from http://www.itaa.org/eweb/upload/execsum%20final.pdf 
Johnson, L., Stellar, J., & Tanner, J. (1999). An Empirical Analysis of the Content of the Data Communica-
tions Course: Academics’ and Practitioners’ Perspective. Information Technology, Learning, and Per-
formance Journal. 17 (2), 1-14.  
Mander, K. (2001). Decline and Fall of the American Programmer, Communications of the ACM, 44 (7), 
43-44. 
Minch. R., & Tabor, S. (2003). Networking Education for the New Economy. Journal of Information Tech-
nology Education. 2, 51-59.  
Shariat, M., & Benjamin, C. (1999). Contrasting Computer Networking and Data Communication Curric-
ula. 1999 ASEE (American Society for Engineering Education) Annual Conference & Exposition in 
Charlotte, NC, June 20-23, 1999. 
Snow, A., & Lowman, C. (2004). Project Management for Telecommunication and Networking – A Meth-
odology of Our Own, Proceedings of the Third Annual Telecommunications/Information Technology 
Conference, Louisville, KY, April 1-3. 
Steele, G., Stojkovic, V., & Zaveri, J. (2004). An Information System Security Course for the Undergradu-
ate Information Systems Curriculum, Information Systems Education Journal, 2 (3), February 2, 2004. 
Thompson, R. A. (2003). Telecommunications – A Discipline of Our Own. Proceedings of the Second An-
nual Telecommunications/Information Technology Conference, Louisville, KY, April 3-5. 
US Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2004). Occupational Employment Projections to 2012. Retrieved April 13, 
2005, from http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2004/02/art5full.pdf  
 Hawk 
 387 
Appendix: Description of Networking Courses 
1. Networks and Telecommunications 
This course corresponds to IS 2002.6 and provides a foundation in the technical and management 
aspects of business data communication and networking. Among the topics included are layered 
network models, network hardware and transmission media, standards and protocols, network 
design and management, local area and wide area networking  
2. Local Area Networks 
Topics pertinent to the setup, configuration and administration of local area networks (LAN), 
characterized by standards and protocols relevant for LANs and LAN planning and installation. 
LAN server administration, including topics such as user and group administration, file and print 
sharing, and server security.  
3. Network Design 
Identification of local, metropolitan and wide area solutions to match business needs. Provides 
methodology and tools for analyzing needs, capacity planning, identifying solutions, site plan-
ning, and designing the network infrastructure. Network setup and testing, troubleshooting meth-
ods and diagnostic tools, and network management tools. Typically uses case studies or a field 
project.  
4. Networks and Telecommunications II 
This course is similar in breadth to IS 2002.6 Networks and Telecommunications, and included 
many topics in common with those found in the first Networks and Telecommunications course. 
Since this course is a follow-on course to the first course, it covered these topics at a more ad-
vanced level. Other differences found are greater emphasis on hands-on experience with the in-
stallation, configuration, performance tuning, and troubleshooting of a network, internetworking 
devices, client and server operating systems, as well as more in-depth treatment of specific topics 
such as TCP/IP, wireless networking or security.  
5. Legal & Regulatory Environment of Telecommunications 
Overview of laws, regulations, governing bodies and the industry and political environment of 
telecommunications. Telecommunications contracting and preparing an RFP. Social and ethical 
issues related to telecommunications.  
6. Information Technology and System Software  
This course corresponds to IS 2002.4 and provides a basic foundation in the principles and appli-
cation of computer hardware, networking technologies and system software. Example topics in-
clude computer architecture, principals and functions of operating systems, networking hardware 
media and standards, configuration of hardware and system software, understanding tradeoffs in 
architecture choices 
7. Computer and Network Security 
Overview of computer and network security. Securing computers and networks against hacking 
techniques or known vulnerabilities. Topics include security risk assessment, tools and techniques 
used by security violators, tools and techniques used to protect against security violator (e.g. 
cryptography, firewalls, file system security, user authentication, non-repudiation), policies, pro-
cedures and training to improve security 
Specializing in Telecommunications 
388 
8. Applied Operating Systems 
This course typically allowed students to learn the fundamentals and how to administer a single 
operating system, including Windows, UNIX, NetWare, or IBM Mainframe OS. In two cases, the 
course introduced operating system principles and provided an introduction to Windows, UNIX 
and NetWare. In two programs (MSOE and Golden Gate University) the Windows or NetWare 
courses prepared students for vendor certification exams.  
9. Internetworking / WANs   
Internetworking concepts, internetwork design, security, and administration. Technologies and 
protocols for internetworking; switches, routers, and gateways. Issues for enterprise networking, 
wide area networking.  
10. Management of Telecommunications 
Courses were included in this category only if they emphasized the planning and management of 
telecommunications and telecommunications services. A few courses were named using terms 
such as “Network Administration” or “Management of Telecommunications” turned out on closer 
inspection to primarily cover technical aspects of networking and network administration. These 
were not counted in this category. Some of the courses included in “Management of Telecommu-
nications” category included technical administration issues (e.g. diagnostic, monitoring and 
management tools) but included these among a broader set of non-technical management issues. 
Biography 
Stephen Hawk is an Associate Professor of MIS in the School of 
Business at Technology at the University of Wisconsin, Parkside. His 
has conducted research on offshore software development, skill needs 
in the IT workforce, e-commerce in developing countries, the offshore 
software development industry in Russia, and networking courses in IT 
programs. His recent publications have appeared in MIS Quarterly Ex-
ecutive, Electronic Commerce Research, Information Technology for 
Development, International Journal of Information Technology and 
Communication Education, and Management Decision. His Ph.D. is 
from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. 

