WILEY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 2002 (PREPRINT) 1
Wireless Infrared Communications
Jeffrey B. Carruthers
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215 USA.
I. Introduction
Wireless infrared communications refers to the
use of free-space propagation of light waves in the
near infrared band as a transmission medium for
communication(1-3), as shown in Figure 1. The com-
munication can be between one portable communi-
cation device and another or between a portable de-
vice and a tethered device, called an access point
or base station. Typical portable devices include
laptop computers, personal digital assistants, and
portable telephones, while the base stations are usu-
ally connected to a computer with other networked
connections. Although infrared light is usually used,
other regions of the optical spectrum can be used (so
the term “wireless optical communications” instead
of “wireless infrared communications” is sometimes
used).
Wireless infrared communication systems can be
characterized by the application for which they are
designed or by the link type, as described below.
A. Applications
The primary commercial applications are as fol-
lows:
• short-term cable-less connectivity for information
exchange (business cards, schedules, file sharing) be-
tween two users. The primary example is IrDA sys-
tems (see Section 4).
• wireless local area networks (WLANs) provide net-
work connectivity inside buildings. This can either
be an extension of existing LANs to facilitate mobil-
ity, or to establish “ad hoc” networks where there is
no LAN. The primary example is the IEEE 802.11
standard (see Section 4).
• building-to-building connections for high-speed
network access or metropolitan- or campus-area net-
works.
• wireless input and control devices, such as wireless
mice, remote controls, wireless game controllers, and
remote electronic keys.
B. Link Type
Another important way to characterize a wireless
infrared communication system is by the “link type”,
which means the typical or required arrangement of
receiver and transmitter. Figure 2 depicts the two
most common configurations: the point-to-point sys-
tem and the diffuse system.
The simplest link type is the point-to-point sys-
tem. There, the transmitter and receiver must be
pointed at each other to establish a link. The line-of-
sight (LOS) path from the transmitter to the receiver
must be clear of obstructions, and most of the trans-
mitted light is directed toward the receiver. Hence,
point-to-point systems are also called directed LOS
systems. The links can be temporarily created for a
data exchange session between two users, or estab-
lished more permanently by aiming a mobile unit at
a base station unit in the LAN replacement applica-
tion.
In diffuse systems, the link is always maintained
between any transmitter and any receiver in the same
vicinity by reflecting or “bouncing” the transmitted
information-bearing light off reflecting surfaces such
as ceilings, walls, and furniture. Here, the trans-
mitter and receiver are non-directed; the transmitter
employs a wide transmit beam and the receiver has
a wide field-of-view. Also, the LOS path is not re-
quired. Hence, diffuse systems are also called non-
directed non-LOS systems. These systems are well
suited to the wireless LAN application, freeing the
user from knowing and aligning with the locations of
the other communicating devices.
C. Fundamentals and Outline
Most wireless infrared communications systems
can be modeled as having an output signal Y (t) and
an input signal X(t) which are related by
Y (t) = X(t) ⊗ c(t) + N(t) (1)
2 WILEY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 2002 (PREPRINT)
where ⊗ denotes convolution, c(t) is the impulse re-
sponse of the channel and N(t) is additive noise.
This article is organized around answering key ques-
tions concerning the system as represented by this
model.
In Section 2, we consider questions of optical de-
sign. What range of wireless infrared communica-
tions systems does this model apply to? How does
c(t) depend on the electrical and optical properties of
the receiver and transmitter? How does c(t) depend
on the location, size, and orientation of the receiver
and transmitter? How do X(t) and Y (t) relate to op-
tical processes? What wavelength is used for X(t)?
What devices produce X(t) and Y (t)? What is the
source of N(t)? Are there any safety considerations?
In Section 3, we consider questions of communica-
tions design. How should a data symbol sequence be
modulated onto the input signal X(t)? What detec-
tion mechanism is best for extracting the information
about the data from the received signal Y (t)? How
can one measure and improve the performance of the
system? In Section 4, we consider the design choices
made by existing standards such as IrDA and 802.11.
Finally, in Section 5, we consider how these systems
can be improved in the future.
II. Optical Design
A. Modulation and demodulation
What characteristic of the transmitted wave will
be modulated to carry information from the trans-
mitter to the receiver? Most communication systems
are based on phase, amplitude, or frequency mod-
ulation, or some combination of these techniques.
However, it is difficult to detect such a signal fol-
lowing nondirected propagation, and more expensive
narrow-linewidth sources are required(2). An effec-
tive solution is to use intensity modulation, where
the transmitted signal’s intensity or power is pro-
portional to the modulating signal.
At the demodulator (usually referred to as a de-
tector in optical systems) the modulation can be ex-
tracted by mixing the received signal with a carrier
light wave. This coherent detection technique is best
when the signal phase can be maintained. However,
this can be difficult to implement and additionally, in
nondirected propagation, it is difficult to achieve the
required mixing efficiency. Instead, one can use direct
detection using a photodetector. The photodetector
current is proportional to the received optical signal
intensity, which for intensity modulation, is also the
original modulating signal. Hence, most systems use
intensity modulation with direct detection (IM/DD)
to achieve optical modulation and demodulation.
In a free-space optical communication system, the
detector is illuminated by sources of light energy
other than the source. These can include ambient
lighting sources, such as natural sunlight, fluores-
cent lamp light, and incandescent lamp light. These
sources cause variation in the received photocurrent
that is unrelated to the transmitted signal, resulting
in an additive noise component at the receiver.
We can write the photocurrent at the receiver as
Y (t) = X(t) ⊗ Rh(t) + N(t)
where R is the responsivity of the receiving photodi-
ode (A/W). Note that the electrical impulse response
c(t) is simply R times the optical impulse response
h(t). Depending on the situation, some authors use
c(t) and some use h(t) as the impulse response.
B. Receivers and Transmitters
A transmitter or source converts an electrical sig-
nal to an optical signal. The two most appropriate
types of device are the light-emitting diode (LED)
and semiconductor laser diode (LD). LEDs have
a naturally wide transmission pattern, and so are
suited to nondirected links. Eye safety is much sim-
pler to achieve for an LED than for a laser diode,
which usually have very narrow transmit beams.
The principal advantages of laser diodes are their
high energy-conversion efficiency, their high modu-
lation bandwidth, and their relatively narrow spec-
tral width. Although laser diodes offer several ad-
vantages over LEDs that could be exploited, most
short-range commercial systems currently use LEDs.
A receiver or detector converts optical power into
electrical current by detecting the photon flux inci-
dent on the detector surface. Silicon p-i-n photodi-
odes are ideal for wireless infrared communications as
they have good quantum efficiency in this band and
are inexpensive(4). Avalanche photodiodes are not
used here since the dominant noise source is back-
ground light-induced shot noise rather than thermal
circuit noise.
CARRUTHERS: WIRELESS INFRARED COMMUNICATIONS 3
C. Transmission Wavelength and Noise
The most important factor to consider when
choosing a transmission wavelength is the availabil-
ity of effective, low-cost sources and detectors. The
availability of LEDs and silicon photodiodes operat-
ing in the 800 nm to 1000 nm range is the primary
reason for the use of this band. Another important
consideration is the spectral distribution of the dom-
inant noise source: background lighting.
The noise N(t) can be broken into four compo-
nents: photon noise or shot noise, gain noise, re-
ceiver circuit or thermal noise, and periodic noise.
Gain noise is only present in avalanche-type devices,
so we will not consider it here.
Photon noise is the result of the discreteness of
photon arrivals. It is due to background light
sources, such as sun light, fluorescent lamp light,
and incandescent lamp light, as well as the signal-
dependent source X(t)⊗ c(t). Since the background
light striking the photodetector is normally much
stronger than the signal light, we can neglect the de-
pendency of N(t) on X(t) and consider the photon
noise to be additive white Gaussian noise with two-
sided power spectral density S(f) = qRPn where q
is the electron charge, R is the responsivity, and Pn
is the optical power of the noise (background light).
Receiver noise is due to thermal effects in the re-
ceiver circuitry, and is particularly dependent on the
type of preamplifier used. With careful circuit de-
sign, it can be made insignificant relative to the pho-
ton noise(5).
Periodic noise is the result of the variation of flu-
orescent lighting due to the method of driving the
lamp using the ballast. This generates an extrane-
ous periodic signal with a fundamental frequency of
44 kHz with significant harmonics to several MHz.
Mitigating the effect of periodic noise can be done
using high-pass filtering in combination with baseline
restoration(6), or by careful selection of the modula-
tion type, as discussed in Section 3.1.
D. Safety
There are two safety concerns when dealing with
infrared communication systems. Eye safety is a con-
cern because of a combination of two effects: the
cornea is transparent from the near violet to the near
IR. Hence, the retina is sensitive to damage from
light sources transmitting in these bands. However,
the near IR is outside the visible range of light, and
so the eye does not protect itself from damage by
closing the iris or closing the eyelid. Eye safety can
be ensured by restricting the transmit beam strength
according to IEC or ANSI standards(7,8).
Skin safety is also a possible concern. Possible
short-term effects such as heating of the skin are ac-
counted for by eye safety regulations (since the eye
requires lower power levels than the skin). Long-term
exposure to IR light is not a concern, as the ambient
light sources are constantly submitting our bodies to
much higher radiation levels than these communica-
tion systems do.
III. Communications Design
Equally important for achieving the design goals of
wireless infrared systems are communications issues.
In particular, the modulation signal format together
with appropriate error control coding is critical to
achieving power efficiency. Channel characterization
is also important for understanding performance lim-
its.
A. Modulation Techniques
To understand modulation in IM/DD systems, we
must look again at the channel model
Y (t) = X(t) ⊗ c(t) + N(t)
and consider its particular characteristics. First,
since we are using intensity modulation, the chan-
nel input X(t) is optical intensity and we have the
constraint X(t) ≥ 0. The average transmitted opti-
cal power PT is the time average of X(t). Our goal
is to minimize the transmitted power required to at-
tain a certain probability of bit error Pe, also known
as a bit error rate (BER).
It is useful to define the signal-to-noise ratio SNR
as
SNR =
R2H2(0)P 2t
RbN0
where H(0) is the d.c. gain of the channel, i.e. it
is the Fourier transform of h(t) evaluated at zero
frequency, so
H(0) =
∫ ∞
−∞
h(t) dt.
4 WILEY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 2002 (PREPRINT)
The transmitted signal can be represented as
X(t) =
∞
∑
n=−∞
san(t − nTs).
The sequence {an} represents the digital information
being transmitted, where an is one of L possible data
symbols from 0 to L−1. The function si(t) represents
one of L pulse shapes with duration Ts, the symbol
time. The data rate (or bit rate) Rb, bit time T ,
symbol rate Rs, and symbol time Ts are related as
follows: Rb = 1/T , Rs = 1/Ts, and Ts = log2(L)T .
There are three commonly used types of modula-
tion schemes: on-off keying (OOK) with non-return-
to-zero pulses, OOK with return-to-zero pulses of
normalized width δ (RZ-δ) and pulse position mod-
ulation with L pulses (L-PPM). OOK and RZ-δ are
simpler to implement at both the transmitter and re-
ceiver than L-PPM. The pulse shapes for these mod-
ulation techniques are shown in Figure 3. Represen-
tative examples of the resulting transmitted signal
X(t) for a short data sequence are shown in Figure
4.
We compare modulation schemes in Table 1 by
looking at measures of power efficiency and band-
width efficiency. Bandwidth efficiency is measured
by dividing the zero-crossing bandwidth by the data
rate. Bandwidth efficient schemes have several
advantages– the receiver and transmitter electronics
are cheaper, and the modulation scheme is less likely
to be affected by multipath distortion. Power effi-
ciency is measured by comparing the required trans-
mit power to achieve a target probability of error Pe
for different modulation techniques. Both RZ-δ and
PPM are more power efficient than OOK, but at the
cost of reduced bandwidth efficiency. However, for a
given bandwidth efficiency, PPM is more power ef-
ficient than RZ-δ, and so PPM is most commonly
used. OOK is most useful at very high data rates,
say 100 Mb/s or greater. Then, the effect of mul-
tipath distortion is the most significant effect and
bandwidth efficiency becomes of paramount impor-
tance(9).
B. Error Control Coding
Error control coding is an important technique for
improving the quality of any digital communication
system. We concentrate here on forward error cor-
rection channel coding, as this specifically relates to
wireless infrared communications; source coding and
ARQ coding are not considered here.
Trellis-coded PPM has been found to be an effec-
tive scheme for multipath infrared channels(10,11).
The key technique is to recognize that although on
a distortion-free channel, all symbols are orthogo-
nal and equidistant in signal space, this is not true
on a distorting channel. Hence, trellis-coding using
set partitioning designed to separate the pulse po-
sitions of neighboring symbols is an effective coding
method. Coding gains of 5.0 dB electrical have been
reported for rate 2/3-coded 8-PPM over uncoded 16-
PPM, which has the same bandwidth(11).
C. Channel impulse response characterization
Impulse response characterization refers to the
problem of understanding how the impulse response
c(t) in Equation (1) depends on the location, size,
and orientation of the receiver and transmitter.
There are basically three classes of techniques for
accomplishing this: measurement, simulation, and
modeling. Channel measurements have been de-
scribed in several studies(9,12,2), and these form
the fundamental basis for understanding the chan-
nel properties. A particular study might generate a
collection of hundreds or thousands of example im-
pulse responses ci(t) for configuration i. The col-
lection of measured impulse responses ci(t) can then
be studied by looking at scatter plots of path loss
versus distance, scatter plots of delay spread versus
distance, the effect of transmitter and receiver orien-
tations, robustness to shadowing, and so on.
Simulation methods have been used to allow direct
calculation of a particular impulse response based on
a site-specific characterization of the propagation en-
vironment(13,14). The transmitter, receiver, and the
reflecting surfaces are described and used to generate
an impulse response. The basic assumption is that
most interior surfaces reflect light diffusely in a Lam-
bertian pattern, i.e. all incident light, regardless of
incident angle, is reflected in all directions with an
intensity proportional to the cosine of the angle of
the reflection with the surface normal. The difficulty
with existing methods is that accurate modeling re-
quires extensive computation.
A third technique attempts to extract knowl-
edge gained from experimental and simulation-based
channel estimations into a simple-to-use model. In
CARRUTHERS: WIRELESS INFRARED COMMUNICATIONS 5
(15), for example, a model using two parameters (one
for path loss, one for delay spread) is used to provide
a general characterization of all diffuse IR channels.
Methods for relating the parameters of the model
to particular room characteristics are given, so that
system designers can quickly estimate the channel
characteristics in a wide range of situations.
IV. Standards and Systems
We examine the details of the two dominant wire-
less infrared technologies, IrDA and IEEE 802.11,
and other commercial applications.
A. Infrared Data Association Standards (IrDA)
The Infrared Data Association(16), an association
of about one hundred member companies, has stan-
dardized low-cost optical data links. The IrDA link
transceivers or “ports”, appear on many portable de-
vices including notebook computers, personal digi-
tal assistants, and also computer peripherals such as
printers.
The series of IrDA transmission standards are de-
scribed in Table 2. The current version of the phys-
ical layer standards is IrPHY 1.3. Data rates from
2.4 kb/s to 4 Mb/s are supported. The link speed is
negotiated by starting at 9.6 kb/s.
Most of the transmission standards are for short-
range, directed links which an operating range from
0 m to 1 m. The transmitter half angle must be
between 15 and 30 degrees, and the receiver field-
of-view half angle must be at least 15 degrees. The
transmitter must have a peak-power wavelength be-
tween 850 nm and 900 nm.
B. IEEE 802.11 and wireless LANs
The IEEE has published a set of standards for
wireless LANs, IEEE 802.11 (17). The IEEE 802.11
standard is designed to fit into the structure of
the suite of 802 LAN standards. Hence, it deter-
mines the physical layer (PHY) and medium-access
control layer (MAC) leaving the logical-link control
(LLC) to 802.2. The MAC layer uses a form of
carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance
(CSMA/CA).
The original standard supports both radio and op-
tical physical layers with a maximum data rate of 2
Mb/s. The 802.11b standard adds a 2.4 GHz radio
physical layer at up to 11 Mb/s and 802.11a stan-
dard adds a 5.4 GHz radio physical layer at up to 54
Mb/s.
The two supported data rates for infrared 802.11
LANs are 1 Mb/s and 2 Mb/s. Both systems use
PPM but share a common chip rate of 4 Mchips/s,
as explained below. Each frame begins with a pream-
ble encoded using 4 Mb/s OOK. In the preamble, a
three-bit field indicates the transmission type, either
1 Mb/s or 2 Mb/s (the six other types are reserved
for future use). The data is then transmitted at 1
Mb/s using 16-PPM or 2 Mb/s using 4-PPM. 16-
PPM carries log2(16)/16=1/4 bits/chip, and 4-PPM
carries log2(4)/4 = 1/2 bits/chip, resulting in the
same chip time for both types.
The transmitter must have a peak-power wave-
length between 850 nm and 950 nm. The required
transmitter and receiver characteristics are intended
to allow for reliable operation at link lengths up to
10 m.
C. Building-to-building systems
Long range (greater than 10 m) infrared links must
be directed LOS systems in order to ensure a rea-
sonable path loss. The emerging products for long-
range links are typically designed to be placed on
rooftops(18,19), as this provides the best chance for
establishing line-of-sight paths from one location to
another in an urban environment. These high data
rate connections can then be used for enterprise net-
work access or metropolitan- or campus-area net-
works.
There are several design issues specific to these sys-
tems that are unique to these long-range systems(3).
The first is atmospheric path loss, which is a combi-
nation of clean-air absorption from the air and ab-
sorption and scattering from particles in the air, such
as rain, fog, and pollutants. Secondly, an effect called
scintillation, which is caused by temperature varia-
tions along the LOS path, causes rapid fluctuations
in the channel quality. Finally, building sway can
affect alignment and result in signal loss unless the
transceivers are mechanically isolated or active align-
ment compensation is used.
D. Other Applications
Wireless infrared communication has found sev-
eral markets in and around the home, car, and office
6 WILEY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 2002 (PREPRINT)
which fall outside the traditional telecommunications
markets of voice and data networking. These can
either be classified as wireless input devices, or as
wireless control devices, depending on one’s perspec-
tive. Examples include wireless computer mice and
keyboards, remote controls for entertainment equip-
ment, wireless video-game controllers, and wireless
door keys for home or vehicle access. All such devices
use infrared communication systems due to the at-
tractive combination of low cost, reliability, and light
weight in a transmitter/receiver pair that achieves
the required range, data rate, and data integrity re-
quired.
V. Technology Outlook
In this section, we discuss how competition from
radio and developments in research will impact the
future uses of wireless infrared communication sys-
tems.
A. Comparison to radio
Wireless infrared communication systems enjoy
significant advantages over radio systems in certain
environments. First, there is an abundance of unreg-
ulated optical spectrum available. This advantage is
shrinking somewhat as the spectrum available for li-
censed and unlicensed radio systems increases due to
modernization of spectrum allocation policies.
Radio systems must make great efforts to over-
come or avoid the effects of multipath fading, typi-
cally through the use of diversity. Infrared systems
do not suffer from time-varying fades due to the in-
herent diversity in the receiver. This simplifies design
and increases operational reliability.
Infrared systems provide a natural resistance to
eavesdropping, as the signals are confined within the
walls of the room. This also reduces the potential
for neighboring wireless communication systems to
interfere with each other, which is a significant issue
for radio-based communication systems.
Inband interference is a significant problem for
both types of systems. A variety of electronic and
electrical equipment radiates in transmission bands
of current radio systems; microwave ovens are a good
example. For infrared systems, ambient light, either
man-made or natural, is a dominant source of noise.
The primary limiting factor of infrared systems
is their limited range, particularly when no good
optical path can be made available. For example,
wireless communication between conventional rooms
with opaque walls and doors cannot be accomplished;
one must resort to using either a radio-based or a
wireline network to bypass the obstruction.
B. Research Challenges
A variety of techniques have been considered to
improve upon the performance of wireless infrared
communication systems.
At the transmitter, the radiation pattern can be
optimized to improve performance characteristics
such as range. Some optical techniques for achieving
this are diffusing screens, multiple-beam transmit-
ters, and computer-generated holographic images.
At the receiver, performance is ultimately deter-
mined by signal collection (limited by the size of the
photodetector) and by ambient noise filtering. Op-
tical interference filters can be used to reduce the
impact of background noise; the primary difficulty is
in achieving a wide-field-of-view. This can be done
using non-planar filters or multiple narrow FOV re-
ceiving elements.
Some recent developments and research programs
are described in (20), and an on-line resource guide
is maintained in (21).
VI. Conclusions
Wireless infrared communication systems provide
a useful complement to radio-based systems, partic-
ularly for systems requiring low cost, light weight,
moderate data rates, and only requiring short ranges.
When LOS paths can be assured, range can be dra-
matically improved to provide longer links.
Short-range wireless networks are poised for
tremendous market growth in the next decade, and
wireless infrared communications systems will com-
pete in a number of arenas. Infrared systems have al-
ready proven their effectiveness for short-range tem-
porary communications and in high data rate longer
range point-to-point systems. It remains an open
question whether infrared will successfully compete
in the market for general-purpose indoor wireless ac-
cess.
References
[1] F. R. Gfeller and U. H. Bapst, “Wireless in-house data
communication via diffuse infrared radiation,” Proceed-
CARRUTHERS: WIRELESS INFRARED COMMUNICATIONS 7
ings of the IEEE, vol. 67, pp. 1474–1486, Nov. 1979.
[2] J. M. Kahn and J. R. Barry, “Wireless infrared commu-
nications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 85, pp. 265–98,
Feb. 1997.
[3] D. Heatley, D. Wisely, I. Neild, and P. Cochrane, “Op-
tical wireless: The story so far,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, pp. 72–82, Dec. 1998.
[4] J. R. Barry, Wireless Infrared Communications. Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.
[5] J. R. Barry and J. M. Kahn, “Link design for non-
directed wireless infrared communications,” Applied Op-
tics, vol. 34, pp. 3764–3776, July 1995.
[6] R. Narasimhan, M. D. Audeh, and J. M. Kahn, “Effect
of electronic-ballast fluorescent lighting on wireless in-
frared links,” IEE Proceedings-Optoelectronics, vol. 143,
pp. 347–354, Dec. 1996.
[7] International Electrotechnical Commission, CEI/IEC
825-1: Safety of Laser Products, 1993.
[8] ANSI-Z136-1, American National Standard for the Safe
Use of Lasers, 1993.
[9] J. M. Kahn, W. J. Krause, and J. B. Carruthers, “Ex-
perimental characterization of non-directed indoor in-
frared channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communica-
tions, vol. 43, pp. 1613–1623, February-March-April 1995.
[10] D. Lee and J. Kahn, “Coding and equalization for PPM
on wireless infrared channels,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, pp. 255–260, Feb. 1999.
[11] D. Lee, J. Kahn, and M. Audeh, “Trellis-coded pulse-
position modulation for indoor wireless infrared com-
munications,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
pp. 1080–1087, Sept. 1997.
[12] H. Hashemi, G. Yun, M. Kavehrad, F. Behbahani, and
P. Galko, “Indoor propagation measurements at infrared
frequencies for wireless local area networks applications,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 43,
pp. 562–576, Aug. 1994.
[13] J. R. Barry, J. M. Kahn, W. J. Krause, E. A. Lee,
and D. G. Messerschmitt, “Simulation of multipath im-
pulse response for indoor wireless optical channels,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 11,
pp. 367–379, Apr. 1993.
[14] M. Abtahi and H. Hashemi, “Simulation of indoor prop-
agation channel at infrared frequencies in furnished office
environments,” in PIMRC, pp. 306–310, 1995.
[15] J. B. Carruthers and J. M. Kahn, “Modeling of nondi-
rected wireless infrared channels,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, pp. 1260–1268, Oct. 1997.
[16] http://www.irda.gov.
[17] IEEE Std 802.11-1999 Wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications.
[18] http://www.canobeam.com.
[19] http://www.terabeam.com.
[20] Special issue of IEEE Communications Magagine on ’Op-
tical Wireless Systems and Networks’, Dec. 1998.
[21] http://www.bu.edu/wireless/irguide.
Cross-references
Wireless Optical Communications. See Wireless
Infrared Communications.
Optical Wireless Communications. See Wireless
Infrared Communications.
Infrared Wireless Communications. See Wireless
Infrared Communications.
IrDA. See Wireless Infrared Communications.
8 WILEY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 2002 (PREPRINT)
TABLES
Modulation Type Pe ZC-Bandwidth
On-Off Keying Q(SNR1/2) Rb
OOK RZ-δ Q(δ−1/2SNR1/2) 1δ Rb
L-PPM Q
(
(0.5L ∗ log2(L))
1/2SNR1/2
)
L
log2 L
Rb
TABLE I
Comparison of Modulation Schemes on Ideal Channels.
Version Link Type Link Range Data Rate Modulation
1.3 Point-to-Point 1 m 2.4 – 115.2 kb/s RZ-3/16
1.3 Point-to-Point 1 m 576 kb/s RZ-1/4
1152 kb/s RZ-1/4
1.3 Point-to-Point 1 m 4 Mb/s 4-PPM
VFIR/1.4 Point-to-Point 1 m 16 Mb/s OOK
AIR/proposed Network 4 m 4 Mb/s
8 m 250 kb/s
TABLE II
IrDA data transmission standards.
CARRUTHERS: WIRELESS INFRARED COMMUNICATIONS 9
FIGURES
T
R T
R
Fig. 1. A typical wireless infrared communication system
FOVBeam
FOV
Beam
Point−to−Point System Diffuse System
Fig. 2. Common types of infrared communication systems.
10 WILEY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 2002 (PREPRINT)
 0  T
0
1
s
0
(t) for OOK NRZ
 0  T
0
1
s
1
(t) for OOK NRZ
 0  T
0
1
s
0
(t) for OOK RZ−1/4
 0 T/4  T 
0
1
s
1
(t) for OOK RZ−1/4
  0  T/2   T 3T/2  2T 
0
1
s
00
(t) for 4−PPM
  0  T/2   T 3T/2  2T 
0
1
s
01
(t) for 4−PPM
  0  T/2   T 3T/2  2T 
0
1
s
10
(t) for 4−PPM
  0  T/2   T 3T/2  2T 
0
1
s
11
(t) for 4−PPM
Fig. 3. The pulse shapes for OOK, RZ-0.25, and 4-PPM.
 0  T 2T 3T 4T 5T 6T
0
1
OOK NRZ
 T 2T 3T 4T 5T 6T
0
1
OOK RZ−1/4
 0  T 2T 3T 4T 5T 6T
0
1
4−PPM
Fig. 4. The transmitted signal for the sequence 010011 for OOK, RZ-0.25, and 4-PPM.

