JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 30, NUMBER 2 (2011)86
world in technology development. From the perspective 
of communications and networking technologies, as 
well as associated algorithms, protocols, and controls, 
APL’s efforts include providing the following:
•	 Maximum wireless communication capability out of 
limited spectrum, especially in challenging commu-
nication environments, including intermittent and 
unpredictable link availability because of terrain, 
obstacles, weather, jamming, etc.; large delays in 
satellite-based communication and very large delays 
in interplanetary communication; and underwater 
acoustic communication
•	 Reliable communication among highly mobile users 
with minimal infrastructure support
•	 Very high data rates without the benefit of fixed 
optical infrastructure (e.g., between airborne plat-
forms and between an airborne platform and a 
ground station)
For several decades, researchers at APL have devel-
oped and applied expertise in communications technol-
ogies for the benefit of their government sponsors. Early 
focus was on satellite communication (SATCOM) and 
end-to-end network solutions for specialized combat sys-
tems. However, as wireless and optical communication 
and Internet Protocol (IP)-based networking stormed 
the commercial world during the last two decades, APL’s 
sponsors began exploring ways to exploit advances in 
commercial communication and networking technolo-
gies to multiply force effectiveness. The concepts of 
network-centric warfare and the Global Information 
Grid were born. APL initiated a broad-based effort to 
help its sponsors address critical challenges in realizing 
the vision created by these concepts. Special focus has 
been on sponsors’ needs that were not addressed ade-
quately by the commercial technologies and on situa-
tions in which APL’s sponsors must lead the commercial 
Communications and Networking 
Technologies: Guest Editors’ Introduction
Bharat T. Doshi and Qinqing Zhang
his issue of the Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest highlights some of 
the recent work by researchers at APL in the areas of communications and 
networking. Included in the issue are eight articles on diverse topics 
such as satellite communication, networking and communication in deep space, and 
improving communication efficiency and robustness in the challenging RF environment. 
These articles represent work supported by both APL’s external sponsors and internal 
research and development funding. Other work being done at APL covers a spectrum 
of communications and networking research beyond the scope of the articles in this 
issue of the Digest; however, the articles in this issue provide an impressive sample of 
the Laboratory’s expertise and work in these areas. 
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 30, NUMBER 2 (2011) 87 
more familiar terrestrial cellular networks, each MUOS 
satellite corresponds to a cell tower, and each radio access 
facility corresponds to a base station. However, the “cell 
towers” are 23,000 miles high and the “cells” are more 
than 600 miles in diameter. This article describes the 
MUOS architecture as well as APL’s contributions to 
system performance analysis, testing and evaluation of 
the ground hardware and software, network manage-
ment, information assurance, and key management.
The article by Weerackody and Cuevas describes 
APL’s contribution to the SATCOM on-the-move termi-
nals as an essential component in the WIN-T program. 
WIN-T is the Army’s on-the-move, high-speed, high-
capacity backbone communications network, linking 
warfighters in tactical ground units with commanders 
and the backbone of the Global Information Grid, the 
DoD’s worldwide network-centric information system. 
WIN-T uses true satellite on-the-move capabilities, net-
work management, and advanced radio communication 
systems to keep the tactical forces in communication 
and connected with high-data-rate services. SATCOM 
on-the-move terminals often use very small antennas 
and thus exhibit large beam width, which affects the 
effective transmission power from the terminal. Further-
more, terminals in motion introduce potential antenna-
pointing errors that may cause interference to adjacent 
satellites. The authors describe the technical and opera-
tional challenges of meeting the conflicting demands 
of maintaining sufficient transmission power to provide 
high-data-rate communication while limiting interfer-
ence caused to adjacent SATCOM links. This article 
discusses the orbit and spectrum considerations and 
presents performance analysis of the SATCOM on-the-
move terminal design, considering antenna-pointing 
errors, rain fading, and interference impacts.
Communication and networking in deep space—
among nodes across long distances and with large delays 
and intermittent links—is a challenging problem. The 
fourth article, by Krupiarz et al., addresses this challenge. 
As the number of simultaneously active space explora-
tion missions in the solar system increases, it is becoming 
increasingly important to move from point-to-point links 
between each spacecraft and Earth station (also, between 
orbiting spacecraft and landers) to an Internet-type net-
work of nodes on planets, in orbits, and on Earth. This 
network introduces many new challenges caused by very 
long propagation delays, predictable and unpredictable 
link disruptions, and the lack of an end-to-end route 
at any given time instance. APL researchers have been 
working with many NASA centers to develop the delay/
disruption-tolerant networking technologies in the areas 
of network management, onboard storage, and robotic 
telepresence. This article discusses the networking chal-
lenges and solutions and APL’s contributions in design-
ing and verifying these solutions.
The next two articles are aimed at techniques for 
improving communication efficiency and robustness in 
the challenging RF environment.
•	 Communication among nodes in distributed sensor 
networks and between a sensor network and its 
“collectors”
•	 Communication over a highly heterogeneous set of 
networks spanning underwater, ground, sea surface, 
air, space, and deep space with varying degrees of 
link bandwidth, delay, mobility, and obstacles
•	 Secure communication and ability to trade off con-
nectivity and security
This issue provides a sample of recent work by 
researchers at APL in the areas of communication and 
networking: Eight articles on diverse topics are included. 
These articles represent work supported by both APL’s 
external sponsors and internal research and development 
funding. Other representative work has been presented 
in earlier issues of the Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest 
(e.g., volume 25, issue 4, 2004; volume 26, issue 4, pp. 
383–393, 2005; and volume 27, issue 1, pp. 32–40, 2006), 
at a variety of conferences [e.g., IEEE Military Commu-
nications Conference (MILCOM), IEEE Global Com-
munications Conference (GLOBECOM), various SPIE 
conferences, etc.], and in journals (e.g., IEEE Transac-
tions on Wireless Communications, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, etc.). 
SATCOM has been critical to military users. The 
first three articles in this issue discuss APL’s recent con-
tributions to three key SATCOM programs: Internet 
Routing in Space (IRIS), Mobile User Objective System 
(MUOS), and SATCOM on the Move for Warfighter 
Information Network-Tactical (WIN-T). 
The first article, by Cuevas et al., describes IRIS, which 
was developed by an industry group as a Joint Capabil-
ity Technology Demonstration sponsored by the DoD. 
The primary goal of IRIS was to assess the network capa-
bility and operational utility of an IP router in space, a 
paradigm shift from the traditional transponded (“bent-
pipe”) SATCOM. After a series of technical and opera-
tional demonstrations using simulated and prototype 
surrogates, the capstone demonstrations using on-orbit 
IRIS capability onboard a commercial satellite (Intelsat 
14) were completed in March/April 2010. This article 
describes the IRIS network capabilities and presents the 
highlights of the on-orbit demonstrations along with key 
results and findings, focusing on technology maturity in 
key aspects and also the challenges to be addressed.
The second article, by Oetting and Jen, describes 
MUOS, the DoD’s next-generation UHF SATCOM 
system. MUOS’s design is groundbreaking because it uses 
the radio access network architecture and technology 
derived from the commercial cellular Third Generation 
Partnership Project (3GPP) standards systems. Spectrally 
Adaptive Wideband Code Division Multiple Access (SA-
WCDMA), along with Rake receivers, advanced turbo 
coding, and state-of-the-art interference mitigation tech-
niques, provide high spectral efficiency for both uplink 
and downlink. The heart of the MUOS system consists of 
the four active satellites in geosynchronous orbit and the 
four radio access facilities on the ground. In terms of the 
B. T. DOSHI AND Q. ZHANG
JOHNS HOPKINS APL TECHNICAL DIGEST, VOLUME 30, NUMBER 2 (2011)88
are especially suited for mobile ad hoc networks using 
free-space optics or directed RF links. These networks 
are characterized by high data rates but unpredictable 
and intermittent connectivity and partial control of 
physical topology to create new and better links dynami-
cally. The authors describe a novel topology optimiza-
tion algorithm and schemes for topology transition. 
They also evaluate realistic theater data and show that 
the link dynamics are significantly slower than the time 
for topology optimization and transition, thus making 
dynamic topology optimization effective.
The last article, by Benmohamed, Cole, and Doshi, 
discusses a crisis in the scalability of routing in the Inter-
net and in large intranets such as the Global Informa-
tion Grid and proposes a novel architectural solution to 
eliminate this crisis. The scalability crisis arises because 
of the fact that the current protocol uses the IP address 
to denote identifier, address, and forwarding hierarchy. 
Mobility, desire to multihome for diversity, and desire 
to use multiple paths for routing destroy the hierarchi-
cal advertising and routing, resulting in an unaccept-
able growth in the number of entries in routing tables 
and the rate at which changes need to be communi-
cated. The solution proposed by the authors separates 
the identifier and the address into two distinct entities, 
thus maintaining the hierarchy in addresses and allow-
ing scalability even in the presence of mobility, multi-
homing, and multipath routing. The authors also define 
a hierarchical set of databases to allow scalable mapping 
from the identifier to the address of an entity.
This is a small sample of recent research at APL in 
the areas of communication and networking. Other work 
at APL covers a spectrum of research beyond the scope 
of the articles in this issue of the Digest—for instance, 
sensor networking, photonic communication, free-space-
optics-based communication, and network security. 
However, the range and depth of APL coverage should be 
evident from the articles in this issue. Finally, we thank 
all authors who submitted their recent work to this issue 
and the reviewers who provided timely, valuable reviews.
Hampton et al. describe multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) channel measurements for use in urban 
military applications. Many years of research have shown 
that the MIMO communication techniques can enhance 
quality and efficiency of wireless communication in 
environments with heavy scattering. The magnitude 
of the efficiency enhancement depends on the specific 
channel propagation environment. Communication 
in urban environments has become very important 
to the DoD and Department of Homeland Security. 
The measurements in such environments are thus of 
critical importance. This article presents results from a 
measurement campaign to characterize the propagation 
features of a low-rise urban MIMO channel in the 
military UHF band. The results show that the MIMO 
techniques are very promising in this setting. The results 
also indicate best spacing and suggest a channel model 
suitable for system design.
The sixth article, on cooperative communication and 
networking, is by Zhang, Liu, and Leung. Cooperative 
communication promises significantly higher spectral effi-
ciency and reliability in multihop wireless communication 
(as required in mobile ad hoc networks) by using cooper-
ative diversity, a MIMO-like technique applied in a net-
work setting. To achieve the full potential of this network 
MIMO, several important objectives need to be bal-
anced: spectral efficiency and reuse, reliability, and fair-
ness. The authors discuss the design and evaluation of 
a clique-based utility maximization algorithm that also 
incorporates the fairness requirements. They use math-
ematical analysis to evaluate the overall throughput and 
fairness. They also analyze and discuss the impact of non-
cooperative (selfish) nodes mixed with cooperative nodes 
and identify nodal density required for full connectivity.
The seventh article, by Dwivedi et al., also deals with 
enhancing physical layer capacity effectiveness. How-
ever, the focus in this article is on optimizing the physi-
cal and link layer topologies dynamically and then using 
effective routing over optimized topology. Although the 
underlying techniques can be applied more broadly, they 
Bharat T. Doshi is the Director of the Milton S. Eisenhower Research Center. He manages 
a staff of more than 150 researchers with expertise in secure computing/communication and 
networking; knowledge extraction and management; sensor systems and intelligence, surveil-
lance, and reconnaissance; identification/tagging, tracking, and locating; complex autonomous 
systems; advanced materials, nanotechnology; and human dynamics. Qinqing Zhang is a Prin-
cipal Professional Staff member in the Milton S. Eisenhower Research Center. She is also a 
research faculty member in the Department of Computer Science at The Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity. She leads research projects in wireless communications and networking in challenging 
environments, distributed mobile computing and information processing using smart mobile devices, and underwater acoustic communica-
tion networks. For further information on the work reported here, contact Bharat T. Doshi. His e-mail address is bharat.doshi@jhuapl.edu.
The Authors
Qinqing ZhangBharat T. Doshi
The Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest can be accessed electronically at www.jhuapl.edu/techdigest.

