International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
 
DOI:10.5121/ijcsit.2014.6203                                                                                                                        41 
 
Cloud Web-Based Operating System  
(Cloud Web Os) 
 
Hesham Abusaimeh 
 
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology, Applied Science 
University, Amman, 11931 Jordan. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The cloud computing is the most efficient technology that reduces the time, cost and resources which are 
used by IT companies of any size from small to large companies. There are many cloud approaches existing 
nowadays related to store the data files and synchronize file versions. However, few of these cloud models 
let the user open or configure the file on cloud. Therefore, our new cloud model proposed in this paper 
concentrate to let the user open, execute, configure, edit, delete, and update his files online, on the cloud. It 
gives the user all the operating systems features and virtual desktop icons on the cloud. In addition, the 
proposed cloud operating system offers variety of selected applications that allow the users to write 
documents, draw graphs, and compile classes and programs. 
 
KEYWORDS 
 
Cloud OS, Cloud Computing, Web OS, Cloud Kernel. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
This document describes, and is written to conform to, author guidelines for the journals of 
AIRCC series.  It is prepared in Microsoft Word as a .doc document.  Although other means of 
preparation are acceptable, final, camera-ready versions must conform to this layout.  Microsoft 
Word terminology is used where appropriate in this document.  Although formatting instructions 
may often appear daunting, the simplest approach is to use this template and insert headings and 
text into it as appropriate. 
 
Nowadays, Cloud computing is being the number one concept in IT industry where all large IT 
companies such as Microsoft, Redhat and Apple are migrating their services to be delivered via 
the cloud, and through this high competition on cloud-driven services the user is distracted by 
many different services of different providers which means many different GUIs. A cloud are 
groups of nodes or machines whose sizes may be different from small machines to datacenters. 
These machines may be located in different physical places and connected via the internet. The 
cloud computing is designed to reduce the time, cost and resources that are used by companies of 
any size from small to large companies [1]. 
 
A cloud operating system is a new type of software that is designed to host many types of 
software that are executed over a collection of hardware distributed over the cloud. While the 
traditional operating system is a software that manages the hardware devices, exist in a single 
machine [2]. 
The cloud has three forms of models: Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), 
and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). In SaaS, the user uses the collections of application running 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
42 
in the cloud. While in PaaS the user use the tools provided by the platform from classes libraries 
and other language supports. However, the user has control over the operating system and the 
application deployed in the IaaS with changing the Infrastructure components and configurations 
[3].  
 
In this paper, we will use the SaaS model since we are deploying a software to act as a virtual 
operating system of the cloud user. The SaaS model can also be accessed by any web-browser 
and cross-platform without any third party required at the users PCs. 
 
Our cloud web based operating system (Web OS) can be used together with any operating 
system. The cloud web OS will act as a separate operating system after reaching it by any web 
browser. Therefore, the web OS can be accessed from PCs, Laptops, Smartphones, and any 
device includes a web browser. A variety of web and non-web applications can be accessed in the 
web OS without the need to download or install them locally. In other hand, the Cloud Web OS 
model is not a set of distributed processors that form an OS on the Cloud but it is the software 
that give the user the OS functionality on the cloud. 
 
The objectives of designed the Web OS can be summarized in these points: 
 
 Prepare a webOS that is integrated with social media services such as (Facebook, Twitter, 
Flickr, etc). 
 Customize the GUI to fit the social media applications needed by simplifying their 
appearance. 
 Make manageable system that can give services, and permissions per users and groups. 
 Implement compilers and editors for C++ and Java language over the web OS to let the 
IT people compile their programs without installing tools for them. 
 Offer all of the Microsoft offices applications and utilities for the system users. 
 Provide VOIP service for our cloud users. 
 
The Rest of this paper is organized as the following: in Section II, related work about cloud OS is 
mentioned. Section III describes our Web OS Model. In section IV, a comparison with other 
cloud solutions is studied. Finally, section V concludes the whole paper. 
 
2. RELATED WORK 
 
The following formatting rules must be followed strictly.  This (.doc) document may be used as a 
template for papers prepared using Microsoft Word.  Papers not conforming to these requirements 
may not be published in the conference proceedings. 
 
There are many products, which can be described to be as Cloud Web OS. Open web OS is one of 
the web application that is describes as OS for the developer community and give them different 
developing environments, while Open Web OS does not really offer a full OS services [4]. 
Another web OS is called eyeOS which is very similar to our model in term of offering file 
management and applications tools, however eyeOS cannot really customized and doesn’t also 
offer interaction with social media applications such in our model [5]. The cloud web desktop 
(CloudMe) is also a WebOS provided from the cloud top company that offers a virtual desktop 
for its clients, however it cannot be offered through the web browsers such as our cloud web OS 
[6]. 
 
In addition, there are other famous products in the cloud-computing world. Even though, these 
products are not considered as operating systems in the cloud, they offer many applications 
services that made many users use it. One of these products is the dropbox cloud solution, which 
links any file on the user PC be saving them in a folder to be synchronized with the dropbox 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
43 
servers [7]. Apple also has another cloud solution called Icloud. Icloud is not a full OS for the 
apple user however, it allow the users to synchronize their files and photos with the apple server 
and with the other apple devices. It also pack-up most of the users files and setting to the Apple 
cloud server [8]. Google has also a cloud solution called google chrome, which also allow the 
users to synchronize their file with google server and can access them everywhere anytime [9]. 
There are similar products like JuliCloud from openSource and Ubuntu one from Canonical Inc 
[10,11]. 
 
3. PROPOSED CLOUD WEB OS MODEL 
 
Our focus in this model is to develop new evolving model of cloud computing which is called 
webOS or webtop, when the term and the model is extremely new in the era of cloud computing 
there are a controversy about its definition because of the controversy on what is the limit of its 
functionalities. Nevertheless, we can define it by: It is a virtual OS desktop running in a web 
browser. Where the applications, data, files, configuration, settings, and access privileges reside 
remotely over the network or the internet. Most of the computing operations take place remotely 
at the server side. The browser is primarily used for displaying file and setting and used for input 
purposes. After we have made an in-depth research about the web 2.0, cloud computing and 
social media, we have found that there are many services on the cloud that are scattered here and 
there which makes it difficult on the user to manage them in one solution. Therefore, we decided 
to unify these services in one desktop by making a social webOS, which can interact with the 
existing social communities such as Facebook, Twitter and Flickr in addition to the various 
application services that it can support. 
 
While, all the scenes now are toward a new cloud service, which simplifies the usage of cloud 
services. In addition to the cloud basically meant to give the end user the utmost amount of 
functionalities with the minimal technical knowledge which give us the opportunity to invent a 
new model of desktops that are delivered via the web browser that unifies the user’s interaction 
with the web by merging it with other cloud services such as emails, social media and blogging 
avoiding the distraction of multiple many tabs and windows. 
 
There are many cloud services that serves a wide range of uses which varies from business use to 
social use and from learning purposes to news and media purposes, but the problem with these 
services that they are scattered which makes the user distracted by many pages and many GUIs in 
a way that is not time efficient for hardcore web users.  
 
In this case, the user will still stuck to the traditional way of using desktop applications and 
carrying his storage with him in the laptop, and this way have many problems such as 
applications installation issues and license issues etc. 
 
There were some cloud providers that tried to solve these issues but they ended up with a high 
cost and complicated systems that do not suit individual and non-savvy web users. 
 
Since the cloud services are delivered through web browsers then the best way to interact with 
them is in the same method, using a web OS to integrate all services in one window with an SSO 
approach, and finally attract customers by free services and charge them for extra services. 
 
As we mention before the SaaS (software as a service) is the scope of our model. At the stages of 
developing our model, the final product will provide the following functions for users: 
 
The Root user, which is an administrator who can manage all users and assign permissions and 
roles to the other client users. 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
44 
The Client Users are the normal Users who can access their desktop icons and use all the 
authenticated services and applications assigned by the administrator root user. 
 
The Cloud OS has a Web Desktop, which is a nice GUI that is capable to contain multiple 
windows and allow users to make their normal cloud activities with friendly interfaces. The 
following context diagram of figure 1 shows the briefs of the users’ roles on the cloud server. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Our cloud OS Model Context diagram 
 
Both users should use their usernames and passwords to login to the cloud OS System throw any 
web browser on a pc, mac, or even smart phones. A user-friendly desktop will then appears to the 
user with all the services and applications allowed to him based on his role. This desktop is very 
similar to the Ubuntu, Windows and Mac operating systems’ desktops. 
 
The users can then change the desktop view like wallpaper, themes and icons styles. In addition, 
he can also save his social web sites account on this cloud OS in order to let him easily access and 
update his profile there from the cloud web OS. The user can do that also throw the web browser 
which is also exist in our cloud web OS model, so there is no need to close that and get back to 
the regular OS. 
 
 
Figure 2 Cloud Web OS VOIP client 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
45 
 
 
Figure 3 Cloud OS Data Flow Diagram 
 
Furthermore, the users can configure their e-mail accounts and get them available in the email 
application at our cloud desktop. Saving contacts info also available at our cloud web OS, which 
let the users to call each other via VOIP softphones client application, showed in Figure 2. In 
addition, the users can compile and run and Java and C++ classes and programs. As shown in 
Figure 3, the administrator root user can enjoy all other users’ features plus some extra features 
that nobody have them such as the following: 
 
 The administrator main role is to add, delete. Disable, and enable user accounts on the 
cloud web OS. 
 The administrator can also define, and delete groups with adding or removing users 
account from the groups. 
 The administrator can assign permissions, applications and services of the client users. 
 The administrator can specify the users’ storage in MB. 
 
Another feature of the system is the secured system: The cloud web OS system has a strong 
security measures to prevent unauthorized access to the system and protecting it from outside 
attackers using the latest encryption algorithms and security techniques. It is also Flexible system: 
The system will be flexible and easy to maintain and capable for future development and 
additional services and applications, plus have the ability to backup and restore itself.  
 
A fully monitored system: The system is easily monitored by saving the logs of the users and 
saving the ins and outs of the system plus providing a dashboard for the administrator. 
 
Reliable system: The system code is designed to have the least number of errors and if occurred 
to prevent data loss with the least damages.  
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
46 
In addition to cloud services that our system offer it can also be used as a network router such as 
in the following Figure 4. The OS server came with built-in script to act as a virtual cisco routers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 OS Server can Act as a virtual router between the networks. 
 
Figure 5 shows the structure levels of the cloud web OS and the actors of the system, which they 
are the Root and the normal user. The Root which refers to the admin as in unix, linux world, and 
the normal user which have certain permissions that is specified by the Root, and he can access 
his own desktop and launch his favorite applications.   
 
Both client users and root users can access the cloud web OS after they logged in from any web 
browser. When the root is logged-in he can get reports about users and monitor their action via 
browsing log files and assign permissions to the client users. 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
47 
 
 
Figure 5 Our Model Sub Functions structure model 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Our Model Layout showing folder and files accessability 
 
As shown in Figure 6 the cloud web OS desktop has a very friendly layout with icons and folders 
services, which make it easy to use and configure. 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
48 
4. COMPARED WITH OTHER CLOUD SOLUTIONS 
 
Some difference make our cloud OS has better achievement in term of use than the other cloud 
OS and applications. These differences can be summarized in the following points: 
 
1. The cloud web OS has a virtual desktop that let the users access their files and photos in 
folders and icons such as most of the regular OS desktops, while, most of the other cloud 
applications don’t have virtual desktop. 
2. The cloud web OS can be accessed from any web browser on PC, Mac, and Linux and 
also can be accessed from any Mobile device has a web browser. Therefore it can be 
easily accessed from anywhere at any time. 
3. It is easy to develop and add any feature in future to our system. Therefore, any service or 
application needs to be added in future, should be developed alone then can be added to 
our cloud web OS 
4. As mentioned before there are a variety of application supported in our cloud server such 
as applications similar to the Microsoft office applications in order to write, or read 
documents and sheets. Therefore, using the cloud web OS, there is no need to pay license 
for any product since it’s available or we have similar applications in cloud server. 
5. The cloud server can also act as router in the internal network via the built in virtual cisco 
router implemented inside the server. This will save much money by not paying for a 
very expensive such a router. 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Our cloud web OS Desktop with the Facebook plugins 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
49 
 
 
Apple Icloud Layout [8] 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
There are many cloud applications and web OS that become used in various fields recently. Most 
of these applications are used to synchronies files and photos on different device using a third 
party device which is the cloud server. Our proposed cloud model is a complete OS web based 
application that enables the users not only to synchronize their file but also they can manage them 
at the cloud server side. This cloud web OS can be also used by developer to compile and run 
Java and C++ applications. It can be also used to edit and update documents, sheets and office 
applications files. Social web account can be defined on the cloud web OS to simplify the access 
of the social media web sites. E-mail accounts can be also added on the e-mail software with 
allowing to make voice call via the VOIP tools implanted inside our cloud system. All of that and 
more can be added to let the user access the cloud web OS and keep use it, basically, it gives the 
user all the traditional OS gives to the user. In addition, it can be accessed from any web browser 
on any device. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
Hesham Abusaimeh is grateful to the Applied Science Private University, Amman, Jordan, for the 
full financial support granted to this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Jonathan Spair, “Power in the cloud building information systems at the  edge of Chaos”,  Meghan-
Kiffer Press,2009. 
[2] Sanil C. Savale, “Trends in Cloud Operating System”, IJCA Proceedings on International Conference 
on Recent Trends in Information Technology and Computer Science (ICRTITCS-2011), 2012 by 
IJCA Journal, 2012. 
[3] Rackspace Support, “Understanding the cloud computing stack Saas, Paas, Iaas”, by Diverity Limited 
available online at http://broadcast.rackspace.com/ , last update October 2013. 
[4] Open Web OS, “Open Web Architecture” , http://www.openwebosproject.org/, retreived on October 
2013. 
[5] EyeOS, Eye OS Professional Edition, http://www.eyeos.com/, October 2013. 
[6] Cloudme, https://www.cloudme.com/en/introduction, retreived October 2013. 
[7] Dropbox, https://www.dropbox.com/, retreived October 2013. 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT) Vol 6, No 2, April 2014 
 
50 
[8] I cloud, Apple cloud service, https://www.icloud.com/, retreived October 2013. 
[9] Google Chrome, Google Coorporation,  
https://www.google.com/intl/en/chrome/webstore/features.html retreived October 2013.  
[10] JuliCloud, http://www.jolicloud.com/, retreived October 2013 
[11] Ubuntu One,   https://one.ubuntu.com/ , retreived October 2013 
 
Authors  
 
Dr. Hesham Abusaimeh is currently associate professor at the computer science 
department of the faculty of information technology at the applied science university. Dr. 
Hesham received his B.Sc. degree from Applied Science University, Amman, Jordan in 
2003, and M.Sc. degree from New York Institute of Technology in 2004, both in 
computer His Ph.D. degree in computer science in the field of wireless sensor networks 
communication and routing protocols from Loughborough University, UK in 2009. His 
research interests include Network and Controls, Routing Protocols, Network Lifetime 
and Consumption Energy, wireless sensor networks, and web applications security. 
 
 

