Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Future Generation Computer Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fgcs
Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions
Jayavardhana Gubbi a, Rajkumar Buyya b,∗, Slaven Marusic a, Marimuthu Palaniswami a
a Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Vic - 3010, Australia
b Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Vic - 3010, Australia
h i g h l i g h t s
• Presents vision and motivations for Internet of Things (IoT).
• Application domains in the IoT with a new approach in defining them.
• Cloud-centric IoT realization and challenges.
• Open challenges and future trends in Cloud Centric Internet of Things.
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 8 July 2012
Received in revised form
22 December 2012
Accepted 30 January 2013
Available online 24 February 2013
Keywords:
Internet of Things
Ubiquitous sensing
Cloud computing
Wireless sensor networks
RFID
Smart environments
a b s t r a c t
Ubiquitous sensing enabled by Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) technologies cuts across many areas of
modern day living. This offers the ability tomeasure, infer and understand environmental indicators, from
delicate ecologies and natural resources to urban environments. The proliferation of these devices in a
communicating–actuating network creates the Internet of Things (IoT), wherein sensors and actuators
blend seamlesslywith the environment around us, and the information is shared across platforms in order
to develop a common operating picture (COP). Fueled by the recent adaptation of a variety of enabling
wireless technologies such as RFID tags and embedded sensor and actuator nodes, the IoT has stepped out
of its infancy and is the next revolutionary technology in transforming the Internet into a fully integrated
Future Internet. As we move from www (static pages web) to web2 (social networking web) to web3
(ubiquitous computingweb), the need for data-on-demandusing sophisticated intuitive queries increases
significantly. This paper presents a Cloud centric vision for worldwide implementation of Internet of
Things. The key enabling technologies and application domains that are likely to drive IoT research in the
near future are discussed. A Cloud implementation using Aneka, which is based on interaction of private
and public Clouds is presented. We conclude our IoT vision by expanding on the need for convergence of
WSN, the Internet and distributed computing directed at technological research community.
© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.1. Introduction
The next wave in the era of computingwill be outside the realm
of the traditional desktop. In the Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm,
many of the objects that surround us will be on the network in one
form or another. Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) and sensor
network technologieswill rise tomeet this newchallenge, inwhich
information and communication systems are invisibly embedded
in the environment around us. This results in the generation of
enormous amounts of data which have to be stored, processed
and presented in a seamless, efficient, and easily interpretable
form. This model will consist of services that are commodities and
delivered in a manner similar to traditional commodities. Cloud
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 3 83441344; fax: +61 3 93481184.
E-mail addresses: rbuyya@unimelb.edu.au, raj@cs.mu.oz.au (R. Buyya).
URL: http://www.buyya.com (R. Buyya).
0167-739X/$ – see front matter© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010computing can provide the virtual infrastructure for such utility
computing which integrates monitoring devices, storage devices,
analytics tools, visualization platforms and client delivery. The cost
based model that Cloud computing offers will enable end-to-end
service provisioning for businesses and users to access applications
on demand from anywhere.
Smart connectivity with existing networks and context-aware
computation using network resources is an indispensable part of
IoT. With the growing presence ofWiFi and 4G-LTEwireless Inter-
net access, the evolution towards ubiquitous information and com-
munication networks is already evident. However, for the Internet
of Things vision to successfully emerge, the computing paradigm
will need to go beyond traditional mobile computing scenarios
that use smart phones and portables, and evolve into connect-
ing everyday existing objects and embedding intelligence into our
environment. For technology to disappear from the conscious-
ness of the user, the Internet of Things demands: (1) a shared
understanding of the situation of its users and their appliances,
1646 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660(2) software architectures and pervasive communication networks
to process and convey the contextual information towhere it is rel-
evant, and (3) the analytics tools in the Internet of Things that aim
for autonomous and smart behavior.With these three fundamental
grounds in place, smart connectivity and context-aware computa-
tion can be accomplished.
The term Internet of Things was first coined by Kevin Ashton
in 1999 in the context of supply chain management [1]. However,
in the past decade, the definition has been more inclusive cover-
ing wide range of applications like healthcare, utilities, transport,
etc. [2]. Although the definition of ‘Things’ has changed as tech-
nology evolved, the main goal of making a computer sense infor-
mation without the aid of human intervention remains the same.
A radical evolution of the current Internet into a Network of in-
terconnected objects that not only harvests information from the
environment (sensing) and interactswith the physicalworld (actu-
ation/command/control), but also uses existing Internet standards
to provide services for information transfer, analytics, applications,
and communications. Fueled by the prevalence of devices enabled
by open wireless technology such as Bluetooth, radio frequency
identification (RFID), Wi-Fi, and telephonic data services as well as
embedded sensor and actuator nodes, IoT has stepped out of its in-
fancy and is on the verge of transforming the current static Internet
into a fully integrated Future Internet [3]. The Internet revolution
led to the interconnection between people at an unprecedented
scale and pace. The next revolution will be the interconnection be-
tween objects to create a smart environment. Only in 2011 did the
number of interconnected devices on the planet overtake the ac-
tual number of people. Currently there are 9 billion interconnected
devices and it is expected to reach 24 billion devices by 2020.
According to the GSMA, this amounts to $1.3 trillion revenue op-
portunities for mobile network operators alone spanning vertical
segments such as health, automotive, utilities and consumer elec-
tronics. A schematic of the interconnection of objects is depicted in
Fig. 1, where the application domains are chosen based on the scale
of the impact of the data generated. The users span from individual
to national level organizations addressing wide ranging issues.
This paper presents the current trends in IoT research
propelled by applications and the need for convergence in several
interdisciplinary technologies. Specifically, in Section 2,wepresent
the overall IoT vision and the technologies that will achieve it
followed by some common definitions in the area along with
some trends and taxonomy of IoT in Section 3. We discuss several
application domains in IoT with a new approach in defining them
in Section 4 and Section 5 provides our Cloud centric IoT vision.
A case study of data analytics on the Aneka/Azure cloud platform
is given in Section 6 and we conclude with discussions on open
challenges and future trends in Section 7.
2. Ubiquitous computing in the next decade
The effort by researchers to create a human-to-human inter-
face through technology in the late 1980s resulted in the creation
of the ubiquitous computing discipline, whose objective is to em-
bed technology into the background of everyday life. Currently, we
are in the post-PC era where smart phones and other handheld de-
vices are changing our environment by making it more interactive
as well as informative. Mark Weiser, the forefather of Ubiquitous
Computing (ubicomp), defined a smart environment [4] as ‘‘the
physical world that is richly and invisibly interwovenwith sensors,
actuators, displays, and computational elements, embedded seam-
lessly in the everyday objects of our lives, and connected through
a continuous network’’.
The creation of the Internet has marked a foremost milestone
towards achieving ubicomp’s vision which enables individual
devices to communicate with any other device in the world. Theinter-networking reveals the potential of a seemingly endless
amount of distributed computing resources and storage owned by
various owners.
In contrast to Weiser’s Calm computing approach, Rogers
proposes a human centric ubicomp which makes use of human
creativity in exploiting the environment and extending their capa-
bilities [5]. He proposes a domain specific ubicomp solution when
he says—‘‘In terms of who should benefit, it is useful to think of
how ubicomp technologies can be developed not for the Sal’s of
the world, but for particular domains that can be set up and cus-
tomized by an individual firm or organization, such as for agricul-
tural production, environmental restoration or retailing’’.
Caceres and Friday [6] discuss the progress, opportunities
and challenges during the 20 year anniversary of ubicomp. They
discuss the building blocks of ubicomp and the characteristics of
the system to adapt to the changing world. More importantly,
they identify two critical technologies for growing the ubicomp
infrastructure—Cloud Computing and the Internet of Things.
The advancements and convergence of micro-electro-mechan-
ical systems (MEMS) technology, wireless communications, and
digital electronics has resulted in the development of miniature
devices having the ability to sense, compute, and communicate
wirelessly in short distances. Theseminiature devices called nodes
interconnect to form a wireless sensor networks (WSN) and find
wide ranging applications in environmental monitoring, infras-
tructure monitoring, traffic monitoring, retail, etc. [7]. This has the
ability to provide a ubiquitous sensing capability which is critical
in realizing the overall vision of ubicomp as outlined byWeiser [4].
For the realization of a complete IoT vision, efficient, secure, scal-
able and market oriented computing and storage resourcing is es-
sential. Cloud computing [6] is themost recent paradigm to emerge
which promises reliable services delivered through next genera-
tion data centers that are based on virtualized storage technolo-
gies. This platform acts as a receiver of data from the ubiquitous
sensors; as a computer to analyze and interpret the data; as well
as providing the user with easy to understand web based visual-
ization. The ubiquitous sensing and processing works in the back-
ground, hidden from the user.
This novel integrated Sensor–Actuator–Internet framework
shall form the core technology around which a smart environment
will be shaped: information generated will be shared across di-
verse platforms and applications, to develop a common operating
picture (COP) of an environment, where control of certain unre-
stricted ‘Things’ is made possible. As we move from www (static
pages web) to web2 (social networking web) to web3 (ubiquitous
computingweb), the need for data-on-demand using sophisticated
intuitive queries increases. To take full advantage of the available
Internet technology, there is a need to deploy large-scale, platform-
independent, wireless sensor network infrastructure that includes
data management and processing, actuation and analytics. Cloud
computing promises high reliability, scalability and autonomy to
provide ubiquitous access, dynamic resource discovery and com-
posability required for the next generation Internet of Things ap-
plications. Consumers will be able to choose the service level by
changing the Quality of Service parameters.
3. Definitions, trends and elements
3.1. Definitions
As identified by Atzori et al. [8], Internet of Things can be re-
alized in three paradigms—internet-oriented (middleware), things
oriented (sensors) and semantic-oriented (knowledge). Although
this type of delineation is required due to the interdisciplinary na-
ture of the subject, the usefulness of IoT can be unleashed only in
an application domain where the three paradigms intersect.
The RFID group defines the Internet of Things as –
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1647Fig. 1. Internet of Things schematic showing the end users and application areas based on data.• The worldwide network of interconnected objects uniquely
addressable based on standard communication protocols.
According to Cluster of European research projects on the Internet
of Things [2] –
• ‘Things’ are active participants in business, information and
social processes where they are enabled to interact and com-
municate among themselves and with the environment by ex-
changing data and information sensed about the environment,
while reacting autonomously to the real/physical world events
and influencing it by running processes that trigger actions and
create services with or without direct human intervention.
According to Forrester [9], a smart environment –
• Uses information and communications technologies to make
the critical infrastructure components and services of a
city’s administration, education, healthcare, public safety, real
estate, transportation and utilities more aware, interactive and
efficient.
In our definition, we make the definition more user centric and do
not restrict it to any standard communication protocol. This will
allow long-lasting applications to bedeveloped anddeployedusing
the available state-of-the-art protocols at any given point in time.
Our definition of the Internet of Things for smart environments is
–
• Interconnection of sensing and actuating devices providing the
ability to share information across platforms through a uni-
fied framework, developing a common operating picture for
enabling innovative applications. This is achieved by seamless
ubiquitous sensing, data analytics and information representa-
tion with Cloud computing as the unifying framework.3.2. Trends
Internet of Things has been identified as one of the emerging
technologies in IT as noted in Gartner’s IT Hype Cycle (see Fig. 2).
A Hype Cycle [10] is a way to represent the emergence, adoption,
maturity, and impact on applications of specific technologies. It has
been forecasted that IoT will take 5–10 years for market adoption.
The popularity of different paradigms varieswith time. Theweb
search popularity, as measured by the Google search trends during
the last 10 years for the terms Internet of Things, Wireless Sensor
Networks and Ubiquitous Computing are shown in Fig. 3 [11]. As
it can be seen, since IoT has come into existence, search volume is
consistently increasing with the falling trend for Wireless Sensor
Networks. As perGoogle’s search forecast (dotted line in Fig. 3), this
trend is likely to continue as other enabling technologies converge
to form a genuine Internet of Things.
3.3. IoT elements
We present a taxonomy that will aid in defining the compo-
nents required for the Internet of Things from a high level per-
spective. Specific taxonomies of each component can be found
elsewhere [12–14]. There are three IoT components which enables
seamless ubicomp: (a) Hardware—made up of sensors, actuators
and embedded communication hardware (b) Middleware—on de-
mand storage and computing tools for data analytics and (c)
Presentation—novel easy to understand visualization and interpre-
tation tools which can be widely accessed on different platforms
and which can be designed for different applications. In this sec-
tion, we discuss a few enabling technologies in these categories
which will make up the three components stated above.
1648 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660Fig. 2. Gartner 2012 Hype Cycle of emerging technologies.
Source: Gartner Inc. [10].Fig. 3. Google search trends since 2004 for terms Internet of Things, Wireless Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous Computing.3.3.1. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
RFID technology is amajor breakthrough in the embedded com-
munication paradigmwhich enables design ofmicrochips forwire-
less data communication. They help in the automatic identification
of anything they are attached to acting as an electronic barcode
[15,16]. The passive RFID tags are not battery powered and they use
the power of the reader’s interrogation signal to communicate the
ID to the RFID reader. This has resulted in many applications par-
ticularly in retail and supply chain management. The applications
can be found in transportation (replacement of tickets, registra-
tion stickers) and access control applications as well. The passive
tags are currently being used inmany bank cards and road toll tags
which are among the first global deployments. Active RFID readers
have their own battery supply and can instantiate the communi-
cation. Of the several applications, the main application of active
RFID tags is in port containers [16] for monitoring cargo.
3.3.2. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)
Recent technological advances in low power integrated circuits
and wireless communications have made available efficient, lowcost, low power miniature devices for use in remote sensing ap-
plications. The combination of these factors has improved the vi-
ability of utilizing a sensor network consisting of a large number
of intelligent sensors, enabling the collection, processing, analysis
and dissemination of valuable information, gathered in a variety
of environments [7]. Active RFID is nearly the same as the lower
endWSNnodeswith limited processing capability and storage. The
scientific challenges that must be overcome in order to realize the
enormous potential of WSNs are substantial and multidisciplinary
in nature [7]. Sensor data are shared among sensor nodes and sent
to a distributed or centralized system for analytics. The compo-
nents that make up the WSN monitoring network include:
(a) WSN hardware—Typically a node (WSN core hardware) con-
tains sensor interfaces, processing units, transceiver units and
power supply. Almost always, they comprise of multiple A/D
converters for sensor interfacing and more modern sensor
nodes have the ability to communicate using one frequency
band making them more versatile [7].
(b) WSN communication stack—The nodes are expected to be de-
ployed in an ad-hoc manner for most applications. Designing
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1649an appropriate topology, routing and MAC layer is critical for
the scalability and longevity of the deployed network. Nodes
in aWSN need to communicate among themselves to transmit
data in single or multi-hop to a base station. Node drop outs,
and consequent degraded network lifetimes, are frequent. The
communication stack at the sink node should be able to inter-
actwith the outsideworld through the Internet to act as a gate-
way to the WSN subnet and the Internet [17].
(c) WSN Middleware—A mechanism to combine cyber infrastruc-
turewith a ServiceOrientedArchitecture (SOA) and sensor net-
works to provide access to heterogeneous sensor resources in
a deployment independent manner [17]. This is based on the
idea of isolating resources that can be used by several appli-
cations. A platform-independent middleware for developing
sensor applications is required, such as an Open Sensor Web
Architecture (OSWA) [18]. OSWA is built upon a uniform set of
operations and standard data representations as defined in the
SensorWebEnablementMethod (SWE) by theOpenGeospatial
Consortium (OGC).
(d) Secure Data aggregation—An efficient and secure data aggre-
gation method is required for extending the lifetime of the
network as well as ensuring reliable data collected from sen-
sors [18]. Node failures are a common characteristic of WSNs,
the network topology should have the capability to heal it-
self. Ensuring security is critical as the system is automatically
linked to actuators and protecting the systems from intruders
becomes very important.
3.3.3. Addressing schemes
The ability to uniquely identify ‘Things’ is critical for the success
of IoT. This will not only allow us to uniquely identify billions of
devices but also to control remote devices through the Internet.
The few most critical features of creating a unique address are:
uniqueness, reliability, persistence and scalability.
Every element that is already connected and those that are go-
ing to be connected, must be identified by their unique identifica-
tion, location and functionalities. The current IPv4 may support to
an extentwhere a group of cohabiting sensor devices can be identi-
fied geographically, but not individually. The Internet Mobility at-
tributes in the IPV6may alleviate some of the device identification
problems; however, the heterogeneous nature of wireless nodes,
variable data types, concurrent operations and confluence of data
from devices exacerbates the problem further [19].
Persistent network functioning to channel the data traffic
ubiquitously and relentlessly is another aspect of IoT. Although,
the TCP/IP takes care of this mechanism by routing in a more
reliable and efficient way, from source to destination, the IoT faces
a bottleneck at the interface between the gateway and wireless
sensor devices. Furthermore, the scalability of the device address of
the existing networkmust be sustainable. The addition of networks
and devices must not hamper the performance of the network,
the functioning of the devices, the reliability of the data over the
network or the effective use of the devices from the user interface.
To address these issues, the Uniform Resource Name (URN) sys-
tem is considered fundamental for the development of IoT. URN
creates replicas of the resources that can be accessed through the
URL. With large amounts of spatial data being gathered, it is of-
ten quite important to take advantage of the benefits of metadata
for transferring the information from a database to the user via
the Internet [20]. IPv6 also gives a very good option to access the
resources uniquely and remotely. Another critical development in
addressing is the development of a lightweight IPv6 that will en-
able addressing home appliances uniquely.
Wireless sensor networks (considering them as building blocks
of IoT), which run on a different stack compared to the Internet,
cannot possess IPv6 stack to address individually and hence asubnet with a gateway having a URN will be required. With this
in mind, we then need a layer for addressing sensor devices by
the relevant gateway. At the subnet level, the URN for the sensor
devices could be the unique IDs rather than human-friendly names
as in the www, and a lookup table at the gateway to address this
device. Further, at the node level each sensor will have a URN (as
numbers) for sensors to be addressed by the gateway. The entire
network now forms a web of connectivity from users (high-level)
to sensors (low-level) that is addressable (throughURN), accessible
(through URL) and controllable (through URC).
3.3.4. Data storage and analytics
One of the most important outcomes of this emerging field is
the creation of an unprecedented amount of data. Storage, owner-
ship and expiry of the data become critical issues. The internet con-
sumes up to 5% of the total energy generated today and with these
types of demands, it is sure to go up even further. Hence, data cen-
ters that run on harvested energy and are centralized will ensure
energy efficiency as well as reliability. The data have to be stored
and used intelligently for smart monitoring and actuation. It is im-
portant to develop artificial intelligence algorithmswhich could be
centralized or distributed based on the need. Novel fusion algo-
rithms need to be developed to make sense of the data collected.
State-of-the-art non-linear, temporal machine learning methods
based on evolutionary algorithms, genetic algorithms, neural net-
works, and other artificial intelligence techniques are necessary to
achieve automated decision making. These systems show charac-
teristics such as interoperability, integration and adaptive commu-
nications. They also have a modular architecture both in terms of
hardware system design as well as software development and are
usually very well-suited for IoT applications. More importantly, a
centralized infrastructure to support storage and analytics is re-
quired. This forms the IoT middleware layer and there are numer-
ous challenges involved which are discussed in future sections. As
of 2012, Cloud based storage solutions are becoming increasingly
popular and in the years ahead, Cloud based analytics and visual-
ization platforms are foreseen.
3.3.5. Visualization
Visualization is critical for an IoT application as this allows the
interaction of theuserwith the environment.With recent advances
in touch screen technologies, use of smart tablets and phones has
become very intuitive. For a lay person to fully benefit from the IoT
revolution, attractive and easy to understand visualization has to
be created. As we move from 2D to 3D screens, more information
can be provided in meaningful ways for consumers. This will also
enable policymakers to convert data into knowledge, which is crit-
ical in fast decision making. Extraction of meaningful information
from raw data is non-trivial. This encompasses both event detec-
tion and visualization of the associated rawandmodeled data,with
information represented according to the needs of the end-user.
4. Applications
There are several application domains which will be impacted
by the emerging Internet of Things. The applications can be classi-
fied based on the type of network availability, coverage, scale, het-
erogeneity, repeatability, user involvement and impact [21]. We
categorize the applications into four application domains: (1) Per-
sonal and Home; (2) Enterprize; (3) Utilities; and (4) Mobile. This
is depicted in Fig. 1, which represents Personal and Home IoT at
the scale of an individual or home, Enterprize IoT at the scale of
a community, Utility IoT at a national or regional scale and Mo-
bile IoT which is usually spread across other domains mainly due
to the nature of connectivity and scale. There is a huge crossover
1650 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660in applications and the use of data between domains. For instance,
the Personal and Home IoT produces electricity usage data in the
house and makes it available to the electricity (utility) company
which can in turn optimize the supply and demand in the Utility
IoT. The internet enables sharing of data between different service
providers in a seamless manner creating multiple business oppor-
tunities. A few typical applications in each domain are given.
4.1. Personal and home
The sensor information collected is used only by the individuals
who directly own the network. Usually WiFi is used as the back-
bone enabling higher bandwidth data (video) transfer as well as
higher sampling rates (Sound).
Ubiquitous healthcare [8] has been envisioned for the past two
decades. IoT gives a perfect platform to realize this vision using
body area sensors and IoT back end to upload the data to servers.
For instance, a Smartphone can be used for communication along
with several interfaces like Bluetooth for interfacing sensors mea-
suring physiological parameters. So far, there are several applica-
tions available for Apple iOS, Google Android and Windows Phone
operating systems thatmeasure various parameters. However, it is
yet to be centralized in the cloud for general physicians to access
the same.
An extension of the personal body area network is creating
a home monitoring system for elderly care, which allows the
doctor to monitor patients and the elderly in their homes thereby
reducing hospitalization costs through early intervention and
treatment [22,23].
Control of home equipment such as air conditioners, refriger-
ators, washing machines etc., will allow better home and energy
management. This will see consumers become involved in the IoT
revolution in the same manner as the Internet revolution itself
[24,25]. Social networking is set to undergo another transforma-
tion with billions of interconnected objects [26,27]. An interesting
development will be using a Twitter like concept where individual
‘Things’ in the house can periodically tweet the readingswhich can
be easily followed from anywhere creating a TweetOT. Although
this provides a common framework using cloud for information ac-
cess, a new security paradigm will be required for this to be fully
realized [28].
4.2. Enterprize
We refer to the ‘Network of Things’ within a work environment
as an enterprize based application. Information collected from
such networks are used only by the owners and the data may
be released selectively. Environmental monitoring is the first
common application which is implemented to keep track of the
number of occupants and manage the utilities within the building
(e.g., HVAC, lighting).
Sensors have always been an integral part of the factory setup
for security, automation, climate control, etc. This will eventually
be replaced by a wireless system giving the flexibility to make
changes to the setup whenever required. This is nothing but an IoT
subnet dedicated to factory maintenance.
One of the major IoT application areas that is already draw-
ing attention is Smart Environment IoT [21,28]. There are several
testbeds being implemented and many more planned in the com-
ing years. Smart environment includes subsystems as shown in Ta-
ble 1 and the characteristics from a technological perspective are
listed briefly. It should be noted that each of the sub domains cover
many focus groups and the data will be shared. The applications or
use-cases within the urban environment that can benefit from the
realization of a smart city WSN capability are shown in Table 2.
These applications are grouped according to their impact areas.This includes the effect on citizens considering health and well be-
ing issues; transport in light of its impact on mobility, productiv-
ity, pollution; and services in terms of critical community services
managed and provided by local government to city inhabitants.
4.3. Utilities
The information from the networks in this application domain
is usually for service optimization rather than consumer consump-
tion. It is already being used by utility companies (smart meter by
electricity supply companies) for resourcemanagement in order to
optimize cost vs. profit. These are made up of very extensive net-
works (usually laid out by large organization on a regional and na-
tional scale) for monitoring critical utilities and efficient resource
management. The backbone network used can vary between cel-
lular, WiFi and satellite communication.
Smart grid and smart metering is another potential IoT applica-
tion which is being implemented around the world [38]. Efficient
energy consumption can be achieved by continuously monitoring
every electricity point within a house and using this information
to modify the way electricity is consumed. This information at the
city scale is used for maintaining the load balance within the grid
ensuring high quality of service.
Video based IoT [39], which integrates image processing, com-
puter vision and networking frameworks, will help develop a new
challenging scientific research area at the intersection of video,
infrared, microphone and network technologies. Surveillance, the
most widely used camera network applications, helps track tar-
gets, identify suspicious activities, detect left luggage and monitor
unauthorized access. Automatic behavior analysis and event detec-
tion (as part of sophisticated video analytics) is in its infancy and
breakthroughs are expected in the next decade as pointed out in
the 2012 Gartner Chart (refer Fig. 2).
Water network monitoring and quality assurance of drinking
water is another critical application that is being addressed using
IoT. Sensors measuring critical water parameters are installed
at important locations in order to ensure high supply quality.
This avoids accidental contamination among storm water drains,
drinking water and sewage disposal. The same network can be
extended to monitor irrigation in agricultural land. The network
is also extended for monitoring soil parameters which allows
informed decision making concerning agriculture [40].
4.4. Mobile
Smart transportation and smart logistics are placed in a sepa-
rate domain due to the nature of data sharing and backbone im-
plementation required. Urban traffic is the main contributor to
traffic noise pollution and a major contributor to urban air qual-
ity degradation and greenhouse gas emissions. Traffic congestion
directly imposes significant costs on economic and social activities
in most cities. Supply chain efficiencies and productivity, includ-
ing just-in-time operations, are severely impacted by this conges-
tion causing freight delays and delivery schedule failures. Dynamic
traffic informationwill affect freightmovement, allow better plan-
ning and improved scheduling. The transport IoT will enable the
use of large scale WSNs for online monitoring of travel times, ori-
gin–destination (O–D) route choice behavior, queue lengths and
air pollutant and noise emissions. The IoT is likely to replace the
traffic information provided by the existing sensor networks of
inductive loop vehicle detectors employed at the intersections of
existing traffic control systems. They will also underpin the devel-
opment of scenario-based models for the planning and design of
mitigation and alleviation plans, as well as improved algorithms
for urban traffic control, includingmulti-objective control systems.
Combinedwith information gathered from theurban traffic control
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1651Table 1
Smart environment application domains.
Smart home/office Smart retail Smart city Smart agriculture/forest Smart water Smart transportation
Network size Small Small Medium Medium/large Large Large
Users Very few, fam-
ily members
Few, community
level
Many, policy makers,
general public
Few, landowners,
policy makers
Few, government Large, general public
Energy Rechargeable
battery
Rechargeable
battery
Rechargeable battery,
energy harvesting
Energy harvesting Energy harvesting Rechargeable battery,
Energy harvesting
Internet
connectivity
Wifi, 3G, 4G LTE
backbone
Wifi, 3G, 4G LTE
backbone
Wifi, 3G, 4G LTE
backbone
Wifi, satellite
communication
Satellite communication,
microwave links
Wifi, satellite
communication
Datamanagement Local server Local server Shared server Local server, shared server Shared server Shared server
IoT devices RFID, WSN RFID, WSN RFID, WSN WSN Single sensors RFID,WSN, single sensors
Bandwidth
requirement
Small Small Large Medium Medium Medium/large
Example
testbeds
Aware
home [29]
SAP future retail
center [30]
Smart Santander [31],
citySense [32]
SiSViA [33] GBROOS [34],
SEMAT [35]
A few trial
implementations [36,37]Table 2
Potential IoT applications identified by different focus groups of the city of Melbourne.
Citizens
Healthcare Triage, patient monitoring, personnel monitoring, disease spread modeling and containment—real-time health status and predictive
information to assist practitioners in the field, or policy decisions in pandemic scenarios
Emergency services,
defense
Remote personnel monitoring (health, location); resource management and distribution, response planning; sensors built into building
infrastructure to guide first responders in emergencies or disaster scenarios
Crowd monitoring Crowd flow monitoring for emergency management; efficient use of public and retail spaces; workflow in commercial environments
Transport
Traffic management Intelligent transportation through real-time traffic information and path optimization
Infrastructuremonitoring Sensors built into infrastructure to monitor structural fatigue and other maintenance; accident monitoring for incident management and
emergency response coordination
Services
Water Water quality, leakage, usage, distribution, waste management
Building management Temperature, humidity control, activity monitoring for energy usage management, D heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
Environment Air pollution, noise monitoring, waterways, industry monitoringsystem, valid and relevant information on traffic conditions can be
presented to travelers [41].
The prevalence of Bluetooth technology (BT) devices reflects the
current IoT penetration in a number of digital products such asmo-
bile phones, car hands-free sets, navigation systems, etc. BT devices
emit signals with a unique Media Access Identification (MAC-ID)
number that can be read by BT sensors within the coverage area.
Readers placed at different locations can be used to identify the
movement of the devices. Complemented by other data sources
such as traffic signals, or bus GPS, research problems that can be
addressed include vehicle travel time on motorways and arterial
streets, dynamic (time dependent) O–D matrices on the network,
identification of critical intersections, and accurate and reliable
real time transport network state information [37]. There aremany
privacy concerns by such usages and digital forgetting is an emerg-
ing domain of research in IoT where privacy is a concern [42].
Another important application inmobile IoT domain is efficient
logistics management [37]. This includes monitoring the items
being transported as well as efficient transportation planning. The
monitoring of items is carried out more locally, say, within a truck
replicating enterprize domain but transport planning is carried out
using a large scale IoT network.
5. Cloud centric Internet of Things
The vision of IoT can be seen from two perspectives—‘Internet’
centric and ‘Thing’ centric. The Internet centric architecture will
involve internet services being the main focus while data is
contributed by the objects. In the object centric architecture [43],
the smart objects take the center stage. In our work, we develop an
Internet centric approach. A conceptual framework integrating theubiquitous sensing devices and the applications is shown in Fig. 4.
In order to realize the full potential of cloud computing as well
as ubiquitous sensing, a combined framework with a cloud at the
center seems to be most viable. This not only gives the flexibility
of dividing associated costs in the most logical manner but is also
highly scalable. Sensing service providers can join the network
and offer their data using a storage cloud; analytic tool developers
can provide their software tools; artificial intelligence experts
can provide their data mining and machine learning tools useful
in converting information to knowledge and finally computer
graphics designers can offer a variety of visualization tools. Cloud
computing can offer these services as Infrastructures, Platforms
or Software where the full potential of human creativity can be
tapped using them as services. This in some sense agrees with
the ubicomp vision of Weiser as well as Rogers’ human centric
approach. The data generated, tools used and the visualization
created disappears into the background, tapping the full potential
of the Internet of Things in various application domains. As can
be seen from Fig. 4, the Cloud integrates all ends of ubicomp
by providing scalable storage, computation time and other tools
to build new businesses. In this section, we describe the cloud
platform using Manjrasoft Aneka and Microsoft Azure platforms
to demonstrate how cloud integrates storage, computation and
visualization paradigms. Furthermore, we introduce an important
realm of interaction between clouds which is useful for combining
public and private clouds using Aneka. This interaction is critical
for application developers in order to bring sensed information,
analytics algorithms and visualization under one single seamless
framework.
However, developing IoT applications using low-level Cloud
programming models and interfaces such as Thread and MapRe-
1652 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660Fig. 4. Conceptual IoT framework with Cloud Computing at the center.Fig. 5. A model of end-to-end interaction between various stakeholders in Cloud centric IoT framework.duce models is complex. To overcome this, we need a IoT applica-
tion specific framework for rapid creation of applications and their
deployment on Cloud infrastructures. This is achieved by mapping
the proposed framework to Cloud APIs offered by platforms such
as Aneka. Therefore, the new IoT application specific framework
should be able to provide support for (1) reading data streams ei-
ther from senors directly or fetch the data from databases, (2) easy
expression of data analysis logic as functions/operators that pro-
cess data streams in a transparent and scalable manner on Cloud
infrastructures, and (3) if any events of interest are detected, out-
comes should be passed to output streams, which are connected
to a visualization program. Using such a framework, the developerof IoT applications will able to harness the power of Cloud com-
puting without knowing low-level details of creating reliable and
scale applications. A model for the realization of such an environ-
ment for IoT applications is shown in Fig. 5, thus reducing the time
and cost involved in engineering IoT applications.
5.1. Aneka cloud computing platform
Aneka is a .NET-based application development Platform-as-a-
Service (PaaS), which can utilize storage and compute resources
of both public and private clouds [44]. It offers a runtime envi-
ronment and a set of APIs that enable developers to build cus-
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1653Fig. 6. Overview of Aneka within Internet of Things architecture.tomized applications by usingmultiple programmingmodels such
as Task Programming, Thread Programming and MapReduce Pro-
gramming. Aneka provides a number of services that allow users to
control, auto-scale, reserve,monitor and bill users for the resources
used by their applications. In the context of Smart Environment
application, Aneka PaaS has another important characteristic of
supporting the provisioning of resources on public clouds such as
Microsoft Azure, Amazon EC2, and GoGrid, while also harnessing
private cloud resources ranging from desktops and clusters, to vir-
tual data centers. An overview of Aneka PaaS is shown in Fig. 6 [45].
For the application developer, the cloud service as well as ubiq-
uitous sensor data is hidden and they are provided as services at
a cost by the Aneka provisioning tool. Automatic management of
clouds for hosting and delivering IoT services as SaaS (Software-
as-a-Service) applications will be the integrating platform of the
Future Internet. There is a need to create data and service sharing
infrastructure which can be used for addressing several applica-
tion scenarios. For example, anomaly detection in sensed data car-
ried out at the Application layer is a service which can be shared
between several applications. Existing/new applications deployed
as a hosted service and accessed over the Internet are referred
to as SaaS. To manage SaaS applications on a large scale, the
Platform as a Service (PaaS) layer needs to coordinate the cloud
(resource provisioning and application scheduling) without im-
pacting the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of any appli-
cation. The autonomic management components are to be put in
place to schedule and provision resources with a higher level of
accuracy to support IoT applications. This coordination requires
the PaaS layer to support autonomic management capabilities
required to handle the scheduling of applications and resource
provisioning such that the user QoS requirements are satisfied.
The autonomic management components are thus put in place to
schedule and provision resources with a higher level of accuracy tosupport IoT applications. The autonomic management system will
tightly integrate the following serviceswith the Aneka framework:
Accounting, Monitoring and Profiling, Scheduling, and Dynamic
Provisioning. Accounting, Monitoring, and Profiling will feed the
sensors of the autonomic manager, while the managers’ effectors
will control Scheduling and Dynamic Provisioning. From a logical
point of view the two components that will mostly take advantage
of the introduction of autonomic features in Aneka are the appli-
cation scheduler and the Dynamic Resource Provisioning.
5.2. Application scheduler and Dynamic Resource Provisioning in
Aneka for IoT applications
The Aneka scheduler is responsible for assigning each resource
to a task in an application for execution based on user QoS parame-
ters and the overall cost for the service provider. Depending on the
computation and data requirements of each Sensor Application, it
directs the dynamic resource provisioning component to instanti-
ate or terminate a specified number of computing, storage, andnet-
work resourceswhilemaintaining a queue of tasks to be scheduled.
This logic is embedded as multi-objective application scheduling
algorithms. The scheduler is able to mange resource failures by re-
allocating those tasks to other suitable Cloud resources.
The Dynamic Resource Provisioning component implements
the logic for provisioning and managing virtualized resources
in the private and public cloud computing environments based
on the resource requirements as directed by the application
scheduler. This is achieved by dynamically negotiating with the
Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) providers for the right kind
of resource for a certain time and cost by taking into account the
past execution history of applications and budget availability. This
decision is made at runtime, when SaaS applications continuously
send requests to the Aneka cloud platform [46].
1654 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660Table 3
Microsoft Azure components.
Microsoft Azure On demand compute services, storage services
SQL Azure Supports Transact-SQL and support for the synchronization of relational data across SQL Azure and on-premises SQL server
AppFabric Interconnecting cloud and on-premise applications; Accessed through the HTTP REST API
Azure Marketplace Online service for making transactions on apps and data6. IoT Sensor data analytics SaaS using Aneka and Microsoft
Azure
Microsoft Azure is a cloud platform, offered by Microsoft, in-
cludes four components as summarized in Table 3 [44]. There are
several advantages for integrating Azure and Aneka. Aneka can
launch any number of instances on the Azure cloud to run their
applications. Essentially, it provides the provisioning infrastruc-
ture. Similarly, Aneka provides advanced PaaS features as shown
in Fig. 6. It provides multiple programming models (Task, Thread,
MapReduce), runtime execution services, workload management
services, dynamic provisioning, QoS based scheduling and flexible
billing.
As discussed earlier, to realize the ubicomp vision, tools and
data need to be shared between application developers to create
new apps. There are twomajor hurdles in such an implementation.
Firstly, interaction between clouds becomes critical which is
addressed by Aneka in the InterCloud model. Aneka support for
the InterCloud model enables the creation of a hybrid Cloud
computing environment that combines the resources of private
and public Clouds. That is, whenever a private Cloud is unable to
meet application QoS requirements, Aneka leases extra capability
from a public Cloud to ensure that the application is able to execute
within a specified deadline in a seamless manner [45]. Secondly,
data analytics and artificial intelligence tools are computationally
demanding, which requires huge resources. For data analytics and
artificial intelligence tools, the Aneka task programming model
provides the ability of expressing applications as a collection of
independent tasks. Each task can perform different operations,
or the same operation on different data, and can be executed in
any order by the runtime environment. In order to demonstrate
this, we have used a scenario where there are multiple analytics
algorithms and multiple data sources. A schematic of the
interaction between Aneka and Azure is given in Fig. 7, where
Aneka Worker Containers are deployed as instances of Azure
Worker Role [44]. The Aneka Master Container will be deployed
in the on-premises private cloud, while Aneka Worker Containers
will be run as instances of Microsoft Azure Worker Role. As shown
in Fig. 7, there are two types of Microsoft Azure Worker Roles
used. These are the AnekaWorker Role andMessage Proxy Role. In
this case, one instance of the Message Proxy Role and at least one
instance of the Aneka Worker Role are deployed. The maximum
number of instances of theAnekaWorker Role that canbe launched
is limited by the subscription offer of Microsoft Azure Service
that a user selects. In this deployment scenario, when a user
submits an application to the Aneka Master, the job units will be
scheduled by the Aneka Master by leveraging on-premises Aneka
Workers, if they exist, and Aneka Worker instances on Microsoft
Azure simultaneously. When Aneka Workers finish the execution
of Aneka work units, they will send the results back to Aneka
Master, and then AnekaMasterwill send the result back to the user
application.
There are many interoperability issues when scaling across
multiple Clouds. Aneka overcomes this problem by providing a
framework, which enables the creation of adaptors for different
Cloud infrastructures, as there is currently no ‘‘interoperability’’
standard. These standards are currently under development by
many forums and when such standards become real, a new
adaptor for Aneka will be developed. This will ensure that theIoT applications making use of Aneka can seamlessly benefit from
either private, public or hybrid Clouds.
Another important feature required for a seamless indepen-
dent IoT working architecture is SaaS to be updated by the de-
velopers dynamically. In this example, analytics tools (usually in
the form of DLLs) have to be updated and used by several clients.
Due to administrative privileges provided by Azure, this becomes a
non-trivial task. Management Extensibility Framework (MEF) pro-
vides a simple solution to the problem. The MEF is a composition
layer for .NET that improves the flexibility, maintainability and
testability of large applications. MEF can be used for third-party
plugins, or it can bring the benefits of a loosely-coupled plugin-
like architecture for regular applications. It is a library for creating
lightweight, extensible applications. It allows application develop-
ers to discover and use extensions with no configuration required.
It also lets extension developers easily encapsulate code and avoid
fragile hard dependencies. MEF not only allows extensions to be
reused within applications, but across applications as well. MEF
provides a standard way for the host application to expose itself
and consume external extensions. Extensions, by their nature, can
be reused amongst different applications. However, an extension
could still be implemented in a way that is application specific.
The extensions themselves can depend on one another and MEF
will make sure they are wired together in the correct order. One
of the key design goals of an IoT web application is that it would
be extensible and MEF provides this solution. With MEF we can
use different algorithms (as andwhen it becomes available) for IoT
data analytics: e.g. drop an analytics assembly into a folder and it
instantly becomes available to the application. The system context
diagram of the developed data analytics is given in Fig. 8 [47].
7. Open challenges and future directions
The proposed Cloud centric vision comprises a flexible and open
architecture that is user centric and enables different players to
interact in the IoT framework. It allows interaction in a manner
suitable for their own requirements, rather than the IoT being
thrust upon them. In this way, the framework includes provisions
to meet different requirements for data ownership, security,
privacy, and sharing of information.
Some open challenges are discussed based on the IoT elements
presented earlier. The challenges include IoT specific challenges
such as privacy, participatory sensing, data analytics, GIS based
visualization and Cloud computing apart from the standard
WSN challenges including architecture, energy efficiency, security,
protocols, and Quality of Service. The end goal is to have Plug n’
Play smart objects which can be deployed in any environment
with an interoperable backbone allowing them to blend with
other smart objects around them. Standardization of frequency
bands and protocols plays a pivotal role in accomplishing this goal.
A roadmap of key developments in IoT research in the context
of pervasive applications is shown in Fig. 9, which includes the
technology drivers and key application outcomes expected in
the next decade [8]. The section ends with a few international
initiatives in the domainwhich could play a vital role in the success
of this rapidly emerging technology.
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1655Fig. 7. Schematic of Aneka/Azure Interaction for data analytics application.Fig. 8. System context diagram.7.1. Architecture
Overall architecture followed at the initial stages of IoT re-
search will have a severe bearing on the field itself and needs
to be investigated. Most of the works relating to IoT architecture
have been from the wireless sensor networks perspective [46].
European Union projects of SENSEI [48] and Internet of Things-
Architecture (IoT-A) [49] have been addressing the challenges par-
ticularly from the WSN perspective and have been very successful
in defining the architecture for different applications.We are refer-
ring architecture to overall IoT where the user is at the center and
will enable the use of data and infrastructure to develop new ap-
plications. An architecture based on cloud computing at the center
has been proposed in this paper. However, this may not be the best
option for every application domain particularly for defensewhere
human intelligence is relied upon. Although we see cloud centricarchitecture to be the best where cost based services are required,
other architectures should be investigated for different application
domains.
7.2. Energy efficient sensing
Efficient heterogeneous sensing of the urban environment
needs to simultaneously meet competing demands of multiple
sensing modalities. This has implications on network traffic, data
storage, and energy utilization. Importantly, this encompasses
both fixed andmobile sensing infrastructure [50] aswell as contin-
uous and random sampling. A generalized framework is required
for data collection and modeling that effectively exploits spatial
and temporal characteristics of the data, both in the sensing do-
main as well as the associated transform domains. For example,
urban noise mapping needs an uninterrupted collection of noise
1656 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660Fig. 9. Roadmap of key technological developments in the context of IoT application domains envisioned.levels using battery powered nodes using fixed infrastructure and
participatory sensing [50] as a key component for health and qual-
ity of life services for its inhabitants.
Compressive sensing enables reduced signal measurements
without impacting accurate reconstruction of the signal. A signal
sparse in one basis may be recovered from a small number of pro-
jections onto a second basis that is incoherent with the first [51].
The problem reduces to finding sparse solutions through smallest
l1-norm coefficient vector that agrees with the measurements. In
the ubiquitous sensing context, this has implications for data com-
pression, network traffic and the distribution of sensors. Compres-
sive wireless sensing (CWS) utilizes synchronous communication
to reduce the transmission power of each sensor [52]; transmitting
noisy projections of data samples to a central location for aggrega-
tion.
7.3. Secure reprogrammable networks and privacy
Security will be a major concern wherever networks are de-
ployed at large scale. There can be many ways the system could
be attacked—disabling the network availability; pushing erroneous
data into the network; accessing personal information; etc. The
three physical components of IoT—RFID, WSN and cloud are vul-
nerable to such attacks. Security is critical to any network [53,54]
and the first line of defense against data corruption is cryptogra-
phy.
Of the three, RFID (particularly passive) seems to be the most
vulnerable as it allows person tracking aswell as the objects and no
high level intelligence can be enabled on these devices [16]. These
complex problems however have solutions that can be providedusing cryptographic methods and deserve more research before
they are widely accepted.
Against outsider attackers, encryption ensures data confiden-
tiality, whereas message authentication codes ensure data in-
tegrity and authenticity [55]. Encryption, however, does not
protect against insider malicious attacks, to address which non-
cryptographic means are needed, particularly in WSNs. Also,
periodically, new sensor applications need to be installed, or
existing ones need to be updated. This is done by remote wire-
less reprogramming of all nodes in the network. Traditional
network reprogramming consists solely of a data dissemination
protocol that distributes code to all the nodes in the networkwith-
out authentication, which is a security threat. A secure reprogram-
ming protocol allows the nodes to authenticate every code update
and prevent malicious installation. Most such protocols (e.g., [53])
are based on the benchmark protocol Deluge [54]. We need cryp-
tographic add-ons to Deluge, which lays the foundation for more
sophisticated algorithms to be developed.
Security in the cloud is another important area of research
which will need more attention. Along with the presence of the
data and tools, cloud also handles economics of IoT which will
make it a bigger threat from attackers. Security and identity
protection becomes critical in hybrid clouds where private as well
as public clouds will be used by businesses [56].
Remembering forever in the context of IoT raises many privacy
issues as the data collected can be used in positive (for advertise-
ment services) and negative ways (for defamation). Digital forget-
ting could emerge as one of the key areas of research to address
the concerns and the development of an appropriate framework
to protect personal data [42].
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 16577.4. Quality of service
Heterogeneous networks are (by default)multi-service; provid-
ing more than one distinct application or service. This implies not
only multiple traffic types within the network, but also the ability
of a single network to support all applications without QoS com-
promise [57]. There are two application classes: throughput and
delay tolerant elastic traffic of (e.g. monitoring weather parame-
ters at low sampling rates), and the bandwidth and delay sensi-
tive inelastic (real-time) traffic (e.g. noise or traffic monitoring),
which can be further discriminated by data-related applications
(e.g. high-vs.-low resolution videos) with different QoS require-
ments. Therefore, a controlled, optimal approach to serve differ-
ent network traffics, each with its own application QoS needs is
required [58]. It is not easy to provide QoS guarantees in wireless
networks, as segments often constitute ‘gaps’ in resource guaran-
tee due to resource allocation and management ability constraints
in shared wireless media. Quality of Service in Cloud computing is
another major research area which will require more andmore at-
tention as the data and tools become available on clouds. Dynamic
scheduling and resource allocation algorithms based on particle
swarm optimization are being developed. For high capacity appli-
cations and as IoT grows, this could become a bottleneck.
7.5. New protocols
The protocols at the sensing end of IoT will play a key role in
complete realization. They form the backbone for the data tunnel
between sensors and the outer world. For the system to work effi-
ciently, an energy efficient MAC protocol and appropriate routing
protocol are critical. SeveralMAC protocols have been proposed for
various domains with TDMA (collision free), CSMA (low traffic ef-
ficiency) and FDMA (collision free but requires additional circuitry
in nodes) schemes available to the user [59]. None of them are ac-
cepted as a standard and with more ‘things’ available this scenario
is going to get more cluttered, which requires further research.
An individual sensor can drop out for a number of reasons,
so the network must be self-adapting and allow for multi-path
routing. Multi-hop routing protocols are used in mobile ad hoc
networks and terrestrial WSNs [60]. They are mainly divided into
three categories—data centric, location based and hierarchical,
again based on different application domains. Energy is the main
consideration for the existing routing protocols. In the case of
IoT, it should be noted that a backbone will be available and the
number of hops in themulti-hop scenario will be limited. In such a
scenario, the existing routing protocols should suffice in practical
implementation with minor modifications.
7.6. Participatory sensing
A number of projects have begun to address the development of
people centric (or participatory) sensing platforms [50,61–63]. As
noted earlier, people centric sensing offers the possibility of low
cost sensing of the environment localized to the user. It can there-
fore give the closest indication of environmental parameters ex-
perienced by the user. It has been noted that environmental data
collected by the user forms a social currency [64]. This results in
more timely data being generated compared to the data available
through a fixed infrastructure sensor network. Most importantly,
it is the opportunity for the user to provide feedback on their ex-
perience of a given environmental parameter that offers valuable
information in the form of context associated with a given event.
The limitations of people centric sensing place a new signifi-
cance on the reference data role provided by a fixed infrastruc-
ture IoT as a backbone. The problem of missing samples is a
fundamental limitation of people centric sensing. Relying on usersvolunteering data and on the inconsistent gathering of samples ob-
tained across varying times and varying locations (based on a user’s
desired participation and given location or travel path), limits the
ability to produce meaningful data for any applications and policy
decisions. Only in addressing issues and implications of data own-
ership, privacy and appropriate participation incentives, can such
a platform achieve genuine end-user engagement. Further sensing
modalities can be obtained through the addition of sensormodules
attached to the phone for application specific sensing, such as air
quality sensors [65] or biometric sensors. In such scenarios, smart
phones become critical IoT nodeswhich are connected to the cloud
on one end and several sensors at the other end.
7.7. Data mining
Extracting useful information from a complex sensing environ-
ment at different spatial and temporal resolutions is a challenging
research problem in artificial intelligence. Current state-of-the-art
methods use shallow learning methods where pre-defined events
and data anomalies are extracted using supervised and unsuper-
vised learning [66]. The next level of learning involves inferring
local activities by using temporal information of events extracted
from shallow learning. The ultimate vision will be to detect com-
plex events based on larger spatial and longer temporal scales
based on the two levels before. The fundamental research problem
that arises in complex sensing environments of this nature is how
to simultaneously learn representations of events and activities at
multiple levels of complexity (i.e., events, local activities and com-
plex activities). An emerging focus in machine learning research
has been the field of deep learning [67], which aims to learn mul-
tiple layers of abstraction that can be used to interpret given data.
Furthermore, the resource constraints in sensor networks create
novel challenges for deep learning in terms of the need for adap-
tive, distributed and incremental learning techniques.
7.8. GIS based visualization
As new display technologies emerge, creative visualization will
be enabled. The evolution from CRT to Plasma, LCD, LED, and
AMOLED displays has given rise to highly efficient data representa-
tion (using touch interface)with the user being able to navigate the
data better than ever before. With emerging 3D displays, this area
is certain to have more research and development opportunities.
However, the data that comes out of ubiquitous computing is not
always ready for direct consumption using visualization platforms
and requires further processing. The scenario becomes very com-
plex for heterogeneous spatio-temporal data [68]. New visualiza-
tion schemes for the representation of heterogeneous sensors in a
3D landscape that varies temporally have to be developed [69]. An-
other challenge of visualizing data collected within IoT is that they
are geo-related and are sparsely distributed. To cope with such a
challenge, a framework based on Internet GIS is required.
7.9. Cloud computing
Integrated IoT and Cloud computing applications enabling the
creation of smart environments such as Smart Cities need to be
able to (a) combine services offered by multiple stakeholders and
(b) scale to support a large number of users in a reliable and
decentralized manner. They need to be able operate in both wired
and wireless network environments and deal with constraints
such as access devices or data sources with limited power and
unreliable connectivity. The Cloud application platforms need to
be enhanced to support (a) the rapid creation of applications by
providing domain specific programming tools and environments
and (b) seamless execution of applications harnessing capabilities
1658 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660of multiple dynamic and heterogeneous resources to meet quality
of service requirements of diverse users.
The Cloud resourcemanagement and scheduling system should
be able to dynamically prioritize requests and provision resources
such that critical requests are served in real time. To deliver results
in a reliable manner, the scheduler needs to be augmented with
task duplication algorithms for failure management. Specifically,
the Cloud application scheduling algorithms need to exhibit the
following capability:
1. Multi-objective optimization: The scheduling algorithms
should be able to deal with QoS parameters such as response
time, cost of service usage, maximum number of resources
available per unit price, and penalties for service degradation.
2. Task duplication based fault tolerance: Critical tasks of an
application will be transparently replicated and executed on
different resources so that if one resource fails to complete the
task, the replicated version can be used. This logic is crucial in
real-time tasks that need to be processed to deliver services in
a timely manner.
7.10. International activities
Internet of Things activities are gathering momentum around
the world, with numerous initiatives underway across industry,
academia and various levels of government, as key stakeholders
seek to map a way forward for the coordinated realization of this
technological evolution. In Europe, substantial effort is underway
to consolidate the cross-domain activities of research groups and
organizations, spanning M2M, WSN and RFID into a unified IoT
framework. Supported by the European Commission 7th Frame-
work program (EU-FP7), this includes the Internet of Things Euro-
pean Research Cluster (IERC). Encompassing a number of EU FP7
projects, its objectives are: to establish a cooperation platform and
research vision for IoT activities in Europe and become a contact
point for IoT research around theworld. It includes projects such as
CASAGRAS2, a consortium of international partners from Europe,
the USA, China, Japan and Korea exploring issues surrounding RFID
and its role in realizing the Internet of Things. Also, IERC includes
the Internet of Things Architecture (IoT-A) project established to
determine an architectural referencemodel for the interoperability
of Internet-of-Things systems and key building blocks to achieve
this. At the same time, the IoT Initiative (IoT-i) is a coordinated ac-
tion established to support the development of the European IoT
community. The IoT-i project brings together a consortium of part-
ners to create a joint strategic and technical vision for the IoT in Eu-
rope that encompasses the currently fragmented sectors of the IoT
domain holistically. Simultaneously, the Smart Santander project
is developing a city scale IoT testbed for research and service pro-
vision deployed across the city of Santander, Spain, as well as sites
located in the UK, Germany, Serbia and Australia.
At the same time large scale initiatives are underway in Japan,
Korea, the USA and Australia, where industry, associated organi-
zations and government departments are collaborating on vari-
ous programs, advancing related capabilities towards an IoT. This
includes smart city initiatives, smart grid programs incorporating
smart metering technologies and roll-out of high speed broadband
infrastructure. A continuing development of RFID related technolo-
gies by industry and consortiums such as the Auto-ID lab (founded
at MIT and now with satellite labs at leading universities in South
Korea, China, Japan, United Kingdom, Australia and Switzerland)
dedicated to creating the Internet of Things using RFID and Wire-
less Sensor Networks are being pursued. Significantly, the need for
consensus around IoT technical issues has seen the establishment
of the Internet Protocol for Smart Objects (IPSO) Alliance, nowwithmore than 60 member companies from leading technology, com-
munications and energy companies, working with standards bod-
ies, such as IETF, IEEE and ITU to specify new IP-based technologies
and promote industry consensus for assembling the parts for the
Internet of Things. Substantial IoT development activity is also un-
derway in China, with its 12th Five Year Plan (2011–2015), specify-
ing IoT investment and development to be focused on: smart grid;
intelligent transportation; smart logistics; smart home; environ-
ment and safety testing; industrial control and automation; health
care; fine agriculture; finance and service; military defense. This is
being aided by the establishment of an Internet of Things center in
Shanghai (with a total investment over US $100 million) to study
technologies and industrial standards. An industry fund for the In-
ternet of Things, and an Internet of Things Union ‘Sensing China’
has been founded in Wuxi, initiated by more than 60 telecom op-
erators, institutes and companies who are the primary drivers of
the industry.
8. Summary and conclusions
The proliferation of devices with communicating–actuating
capabilities is bringing closer the vision of an Internet of Things,
where the sensing and actuation functions seamlessly blend into
the background and new capabilities are made possible through
access of rich new information sources. The evolution of the next
generationmobile systemwill depend on the creativity of the users
in designing new applications. IoT is an ideal emerging technology
to influence this domain by providing new evolving data and the
required computational resources for creating revolutionary apps.
Presented here is a user-centric cloud based model for ap-
proaching this goal through the interaction of private and public
clouds. In this manner, the needs of the end-user are brought to
the fore. Allowing for the necessary flexibility to meet the diverse
and sometimes competing needs of different sectors, we propose
a framework enabled by a scalable cloud to provide the capacity
to utilize the IoT. The framework allows networking, computation,
storage and visualization themes separate thereby allowing inde-
pendent growth in every sector but complementing each other in
a shared environment. The standardization which is underway in
each of these themes will not be adversely affected with Cloud at
its center. In proposing the new framework associated challenges
have beenhighlighted ranging fromappropriate interpretation and
visualization of the vast amounts of data, through to the privacy,
security and data management issues that must underpin such a
platform in order for it to be genuinely viable. The consolidation
of international initiatives is quite clearly accelerating progress to-
wards an IoT, providing an overarching view for the integration and
functional elements that can deliver an operational IoT.
Acknowledgments
There have been many contributors for this to take shape
and the authors are thankful to each of them. We specifically
would like to thank Mr. Kumaraswamy Krishnakumar, Mr. Mo-
hammed Alrokayan, Dr. Jiong Jin, Dr. Yee Wei Law, Prof. Mike Tay-
lor, Prof. D. Nandagopal, Mr. Aravinda Rao and Prof. Chris Leckie.
The work is partially supported by Australian Research Council’s
LIEF (LE120100129), Linkage grants (LP120100529) and Research
Network on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor networks and Informa-
tion Processing (ISSNIP). The authors are participants in European
7th Framework projects on Smart Santander and the Internet of
Things-Initiative and are thankful for their support.
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1659References
[1] K. Ashton, That ‘‘Internet of Things’’ thing, RFiD Journal (2009).
[2] H. Sundmaeker, P. Guillemin, P. Friess, S. Woelfflé, Vision and challenges for
realising the Internet of Things, Cluster of European Research Projects on the
Internet of Things—CERP IoT, 2010.
[3] J. Buckley (Ed.), The Internet of Things: From RFID to the Next-Generation
Pervasive Networked Systems, Auerbach Publications, New York, 2006.
[4] M. Weiser, R. Gold, The origins of ubiquitous computing research at PARC in
the late 1980s, IBM Systems Journal (1999).
[5] Y. Rogers, Moving on from Weiser’s vision of calm computing: engaging
ubicomp experiences, in: UbiComp 2006: Ubiquitous Computing, 2006.
[6] R. Caceres, A. Friday, Ubicomp systems at 20: progress, opportunities, and
challenges, IEEE Pervasive Computing 11 (2012) 14–21.
[7] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cayirci, Wireless sensor
networks: a survey, Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422.
[8] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, The Internet of Things: a survey, Computer
Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805.
[9] J. Belissent, Getting clever about smart cities: new opportunities require new
business models, Forrester Research, 2010.
[10] Gartner’s hype cycle special report for 2011, Gartner Inc., 2012.
http://www.gartner.com/technology/research/hype-cycles/.
[11] Google Trends, Google (n.d.). http://www.google.com/trends.
[12] R. Buyya, C.S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, I. Brandic, Cloud computing and
emerging IT platforms: vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as
the 5th utility, Future Generation Computer Systems 25 (2009) 599–616.
[13] S. Tilak, N. Abu-Ghazaleh, W. Heinzelman, A taxonomy of wireless micro-
sensor networkmodels, ACMMobile Computing and Communications Review
6 (2002) 28–36.
[14] M. Tory, T. Moller, Rethinking visualization: a high-level taxonomy, in: IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, 2004, INFOVIS 2004, 2004, pp.
151–158.
[15] E. Welbourne, L. Battle, G. Cole, K. Gould, K. Rector, S. Raymer, et al., Building
the Internet of Things using RFID TheRFID ecosystemexperience, IEEE Internet
Computing 13 (2009) 48–55.
[16] A. Juels, RFID security and privacy: a research survey, IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications 24 (2006) 381–394.
[17] A. Ghosh, S.K. Das, Coverage and connectivity issues in wireless sensor
networks: a survey, Pervasive and Mobile Computing 4 (2008) 303–334.
[18] Y. Sang, H. Shen, Y. Inoguchi, Y. Tan, N. Xiong, Secure Data Aggregation in
Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey, 2006, pp. 315–320.
[19] M. Zorzi, A. Gluhak, S. Lange, A. Bassi, From today’s Intranet of Things to a
future Internet of Things: a wireless- andmobility-related view, IEEEWireless
Communications 17 (2010) 43–51.
[20] N. Honle, U.P. Kappeler, D. Nicklas, T. Schwarz, M. Grossmann, Benefits of
integrating meta data into a context model, 2005, pp. 25–29.
[21] A. Gluhak, S. Krco, M. Nati, D. Pfisterer, N. Mitton, T. Razafindralambo,
A survey on facilities for experimental Internet of Things research, IEEE
Communications Magazine 49 (2011) 58–67.
[22] L. Haiyan, C. Song, W. Dalei, N. Stergiou, S. Ka-Chun, A remote markerless
human gait tracking for e-healthcare based on content-aware wireless
multimedia communications, IEEE Wireless Communications 17 (2010)
44–50.
[23] G. Nussbaum, People with disabilities: assistive homes and environments,
in: Computers Helping People with Special Needs, 2006.
[24] A. Alkar, U. Buhur, An Internet based wireless home automation system for
multifunctional devices, IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 51 (2005)
1169–1174.
[25] M. Darianian, M.P. Michael, Smart home mobile RFID-based Internet-of-
Things systems and services, in: 2008 International Conference on Advanced
Computer Theory and Engineering, 2008, pp. 116–120.
[26] H.S. Ning, Z.O. Wang, Future Internet of Things architecture: like mankind
neural system or social organization framework? IEEE Communications
Letters 15 (2011) 461–463.
[27] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, SIoT: giving a social structure to the Internet of
Things, IEEE Communications Letters 15 (2011) 1193–1195.
[28] X. Li, R.X. Lu, X.H. Liang, X.M. Shen, J.M. Chen, X.D. Lin, Smart community:
an Internet of Things application, IEEE Communications Magazine 49 (2011)
68–75.
[29] C. Kidd, R. Orr, G. Abowd, C. Atkeson, I. Essa, B. MacIntyre, et al., The Aware
Home: a living laboratory for ubiquitous computing research, in: LectureNotes
in Computer Science, 1999, pp. 191–198.
[30] S.R.L. Labs, Future Retail Center, SAP Research Living Labs (n.d.). http://
www.sap.com/corporate-en/our-company/innovation/research/livinglabs/
futureretail/index.epx.
[31] J. Hernández-Muñoz, J. Vercher, L. Muñoz, J. Galache, M. Presser, L. Gómez,
J. Pettersson, Smart cities at the forefront of the future Internet,
in: J. Domingue, A. Galis, A. Gavras, T. Zahariadis, D. Lambert (Eds.), The
Future Internet, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 447–462.
[32] R.N. Murty, G. Mainland, I. Rose, A.R. Chowdhury, A. Gosain, J. Bers, et al.,
CitySense: an urban-scale wireless sensor network and testbed, 2008, pp.
583–588.
[33] System of monitoring and environmental surveillance, 2011.
http://www.dimap.es/enviromental-agriculture-services.html.
[34] S. Bainbridge, C. Steinberg, M. Furnas, GBROOS—an ocean observing system
for the Great Barrier Reef, in: International Coral Reef Symposium, 2010, pp.
529–533.[35] R. Johnstone, D. Caputo, U. Cella, A. Gandelli, C. Alippi, F. Grimaccia, et
al., Smart environmental measurement & analysis technologies (SEMAT):
wireless sensor networks in the marine environment, Stockholm, 2008.
[36] M. Zhang, T. Yu, G.F. Zhai, Smart transport system based on ‘‘The Internet of
Things’’, Applied Mechanics and Materials 48–49 (2011) 1073–1076.
[37] H. Lin, R. Zito, M. Taylor, A review of travel-time prediction in transport and
logistics, Proceedings of the Eastern Asia Society for Transportation Studies 5
(2005) 1433–1448.
[38] M. Yun, B. Yuxin, Research on the architecture and key technology of Internet
of Things (IoT) applied on smart grid, in: Advances in Energy Engineering,
ICAEE, 2010, pp. 69–72.
[39] I.F. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, K.R. Chowdhury, A survey on wireless multimedia
sensor networks, Computer Networks 51 (2007) 921–960.
[40] H. Jun-Wei, Y. Shouyi, L. Leibo, Z. Zhen, W. Shaojun, A crop monitoring system
based onwireless sensor network, Procedia Environmental Sciences 11 (2011)
558–565.
[41] P. Kumar, S. Ranganath, W. Huang, K. Sengupta, Framework for real-time
behavior interpretation from traffic video, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 6 (2005) 43–53.
[42] V. Mayer-Schönberger, Failing to forget the ‘‘Drunken Pirate’’, in: Delete: the
Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital Age (New in Paper), first ed., Princeton
University Press, 2011, pp. 3–15.
[43] T.S. Lopez, D.C. Ranasinghe, M. Harrison, D. McFarlane, Adding sense to the
Internet of Things an architecture framework for smart objective systems,
Pervasive Ubiquitous Computing 16 (2012) 291–308.
[44] Y. Wei, K. Sukumar, C. Vecchiola, D. Karunamoorthy, R. Buyya, Aneka cloud
application platform and its integration with windows Azure, in: R. Ranjan,
J. Chen, B. Benatallah, L. Wang (Eds.), Cloud Computing: Methodology,
Systems, and Applications, first ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2011, p. 30.
[45] C. Vecchiola, R.N. Calheiros, D. Karunamoorthy, R. Buyya, Deadline-driven
provisioning of resources for scientific applications in hybrid clouds with
Aneka, Future Generation Computer Systems (2012) 58–65.
[46] A.P. Castellani, N. Bui, P. Casari, M. Rossi, Z. Shelby, M. Zorzi, Architecture and
protocols for the Internet of Things: a case study, 2010, pp. 678–683.
[47] J. Gubbi, K. Krishnakumar, R. Buyya, M. Palaniswami, A cloud computing
framework for data analytics in smart city applications, Technical Report No.
CLOUDS-TR-2012-2A, Cloud Computing and Distributed Systems Laboratory,
The University of Melbourne, 2012.
[48] SENSEI, Integrated EU project—7th framework (n.d.).
http://www.ict-sensei.org/index.php.
[49] European lighthouse integrated project—7th framework, Internet of Things—
Architecture, 2012. http://www.iot-a.eu/.
[50] R.K. Rana, C.T. Chou, S.S. Kanhere, N. Bulusu, W. Hu, Ear-phone: an end-to-
end participatory urban noise mapping system, in: ACM Request Permissions,
2010.
[51] D. Donoho, Compressed sensing, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 52
(2006) 1289–1306.
[52] W. Bajwa, J. Haupt, A. Sayeed, R. Nowak, Compressive wireless sensing, in:
ACM, 2006.
[53] M. Navajo, I. Ballesteros, S. D’Elia, A. Sassen, M. Goyet, J. Santaella, et al., Draft
report of the task force on interdisciplinary research activities applicable to
the Future Internet, European Union Task Force Report, 2010.
[54] D. Tang, Event detection in sensor networks, School of Engineering andApplied
Sciences, The George Washington University, 2009.
[55] D.B. Neill, Fast Bayesian scan statistics for multivariate event detection and
visualization, Statistics in Medicine 30 (2011) 455–469.
[56] L.M. Kaufman, Data security in the world of cloud computing, IEEE Security
and Privacy Magazine 7 (2009) 61–64.
[57] E. Vera, L. Mancera, S.D. Babacan, R. Molina, A.K. Katsaggelos, Bayesian
compressive sensing of wavelet coefficients using multiscale Laplacian priors,
in: Statistical Signal Processing, 2009, SSP’09, IEEE/SP 15th Workshop on.,
2009, pp. 229–232.
[58] H. El-Sayed, A. Mellouk, L. George, S. Zeadally, Quality of service models for
heterogeneous networks: overview and challenges, Annals of Telecommuni-
cations 63 (2008) 639–668.
[59] I. Demirkol, C. Ersoy, F. Alagoz, MAC protocols for wireless sensor networks: a
survey, IEEE Communications Magazine 44 (2006) 115–121.
[60] J. Al-Karaki, A. Kamal, Routing techniques in wireless sensor networks: a
survey, IEEE Wireless Communications 11 (2004) 6–28.
[61] A.T. Campbell, S.B. Eisenman, N.D. Lane, E. Miluzzo, R.A. Peterson, People-
centric urban sensing, ACM, 2006.
[62] E. Kanjo, NoiseSPY: a real-time mobile phone platform for urban noise
monitoring and mapping, Mobile Networks and Applications 15 (2009)
562–574.
[63] S. Santini, B. Ostermaier, A. Vitaletti, First experiences using wireless sensor
networks for noise pollution monitoring, ACM, Glasgow, Scotland, 2008.
[64] S. Kuznetsov, E. Paulos, Participatory sensing in public spaces: activating urban
surfaces with sensor probes, in: ACM Request Permissions, 2010.
[65] R. Honicky, E.A. Brewer, E. Paulos, R. White, N-smarts: networked suite of
mobile atmospheric real-time sensors, ACM, 2008, pp. 25–29.
[66] R.V. Kulkarni, A. Förster, G.K. Venayagamoorthy, Computational intelligence in
wireless sensor networks: a survey, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
13 (2011) 68–96.
[67] Y. Bengio, Learning Deep Architectures for AI, first ed., Now Publishers Inc.,
2009.
[68] G.P. Bonneau, G.M. Nielson, F. Post (Eds.), Data Visualization: The State of the
Art, Kluwer Academic, London, 2003.
[69] L. Ren, F. Tian, X. Zhang, L. Zhang, DaisyViz: a model-based user interface
toolkit for interactive information visualization systems, Journal of Visual
Languages and Computing 21 (2010) 209–229.
1660 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660Jayavardhana Gubbi received the Bachelor of Engineer-
ing degree from Bangalore University, Bengaluru, India, in
2000, the Ph.D. degree from the University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Vic., Australia, in 2007. For three years, he
was a Research Assistant at the Indian Institute of Science,
where he was engaged in speech technology for Indian
languages. Dr. Gubbi is a Research Fellow in the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering at the Uni-
versity of Melbourne. Currently, from 2010 to 2014, he is
an ARC Australian Postdoctoral Fellow - Industry (APDI)
working on an industry linkage grant in video process-
ing. His current research interests include Video Processing, Internet of Things and
ubiquitous healthcare devices. He has coauthored more than 40 papers in peer re-
viewed journals, conferences, and book chapters over the last ten years. Dr. Gubbi
has served as Conference Secretary and Publications Chair in several international
conferences in the area of wireless sensor networks, signal processing and pattern
recognition.
Rajkumar Buyya is Professor of Computer Science and
Software Engineering; and Director of the Cloud Comput-
ing and Distributed Systems (CLOUDS) Laboratory at the
University of Melbourne, Australia. He is the founding CEO
of Manjrasoft, a spin-off company of the university, com-
mercializing its innovations in Cloud Computing. He has
authored over 430publications and four textbooks. He also
edited several books including ‘‘Cloud Computing: Prin-
ciples and Paradigms’’ (Wiley Press, USA, Feb 2011). He
is one of the highly cited authors in computer science
and software engineering worldwide (h-index = 66 and
21300+ citations).
Software technologies for Grid and Cloud computing developed under Dr.
Buyya’s leadership have gained rapid acceptance and are in use at several academic
institutions and commercial enterprizes in 40 countries around theworld. Dr. Buyya
has led the establishment and development of key community activities, including
serving as foundation Chair of the IEEE Technical Committee on Scalable Computing
and five IEEE/ACM conferences. These contributions and the international research
leadership of Dr. Buyya are recognized through the award of the ‘‘2009 IEEE Medal
for Excellence in Scalable Computing’’. Manjrasoft’s Aneka Cloud technology devel-
oped under his leadership has received the ‘‘2010 Asia Pacific Frost & Sullivan New
Product InnovationAward’’ and ‘‘2011 Telstra InnovationChallenge, People’s Choice
Award’’. He is currently serving as the first Editor-in-Chief (EiC) of IEEE Transactions
on Cloud Computing. For further information on Dr. Buyya, please visit his cyber-
home: www.buyya.com.Slaven Marusic is a Senior Research Fellow in Sensor
Networks at the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, at the University of Melbourne. Completing
his Ph.D. at La Trobe University specializing in signal and
image processing, before taking a Senior Lecturer role at
the University of New South Wales, Dr Marusic returned
to Melbourne also taking up the Role of ProgramManager
for the ARC Research Network on Intelligent Sensors,
Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP). In
this capacity he has facilitated numerous international
research collaborations across academia and industry. He
was the General Co-Chair of the 6th International Conference on ISSNIP, Brisbane
2010, and has served on numerous organizing and technical program committees.
His research work has encompassed multidisciplinary contributions in the areas
of image and video processing, sensor networks and biomedical signal processing,
applied variously to environmental monitoring, healthcare, smart grids and more
recently, urban living.
M. Palaniswami received his B.E. (Hons) from the Uni-
versity of Madras, M.E. from the Indian Institute of
Science, India, and Ph.D. from the University of Newcas-
tle, Australia before joining the University of Melbourne,
where he is a Professor of Electrical Engineering and
Director/Convener of a large ARC Research Network on
Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Pro-
cessing (ISSNIP) with about 200 researchers and interdis-
ciplinary themes as the focus for the center. Previously,
he was a Co-Director of the Center of Expertise on Net-
worked Decision & Sensor Systems. He served on various
international boards and advisory committees including being a panel member for
the National Science Foundation (NSF). He has published more than 340 refereed
journal and conference papers, including a number of books, edited volumes and
book chapters. He was given a Foreign Specialist Award by the Ministry of Educa-
tion, Japan in recognition of his contributions to the field of Machine Learning. He
received the University of Melbourne Knowledge Transfer Excellence Award and
Commendation Awards. He served as an Associate Editor for journals/transactions
including IEEE Transactions onNeural Networks and Computational Intelligence for
Finance. He is the Subject Editor for the International Journal on Distributed Sen-
sor Networks. Through his research, he supported various local and international
companies. As an international investigator, he is involved in FP6 and FP7 initia-
tives in the areas of Smart City and Internet of Things (IoT). In order to develop a
new research capacity, he founded the international conference series on sensors,
sensor networks and information processing. His research interests include smart
sensors and sensor networks, machine learning, neural networks, support vector
machines, signal processing, biomedical engineering and control. He is a Fellow of
the IEEE.

