Energy-Efficient Computing for Wildlife Tracking: 
Design Tradeoffs and Early Experiences with ZebraNet 
Philo Juang, Hidekazu Oki, Yong Wang t, 
Margaret Martonosi,Li-Shiuan Peh, and Daniel Rubenstein~ 
Depts. of Electrical Engineering, tComputer Science, and ~Ecology and Evol. Biology 
Princeton University 
ABSTRACT 
Over the past decade, mobile computing and wire- 
less communication have become increasingly important 
drivers of many new computing applications. The field 
of wireless sensor networks particularly focuses on appli- 
cations involving autonomous use of compute, sensing, 
and wireless communication devices for both scientific 
and commercial purposes. This paper examines the re- 
search decisions and design tradeoffs that  arise when 
applying wireless peer-to-peer networking techniques in 
a mobile sensor network designed to support wildlife 
tracking for biology research. 
The ZebraNet system includes custom tracking collars 
(nodes) carried by animals under study across a large, 
wild area; the collars operate as a peer-to-peer network 
to deliver logged data back to researchers. The collars 
include global positioning system (GPS), Flash mem- 
ory, wireless transceivers, and a small CPU; essentially 
each node is a small, wireless computing device. Since 
there is no cellular service or broadcast communication 
covering the region where animals are studied, ad hoc, 
peer-to-peer routing is needed. Although numerous ad 
hoc protocols exist, additional challenges arise because 
the researchers themselves are mobile and thus there is 
no fixed base station towards which to aim data. Over- 
all, our goal is to use the least energy, storage, and other 
resources necessary to maintain a reliable system with 
a very high 'data homing' success rate. We plan to de- 
ploy a 30-node ZebraNet system at the Mpala Research 
Centre in central Kenya. More broadly, we believe that 
the domain-centric protocols and energy tradeoffs pre- 
sented here for ZebraNet will have general applicability 
in other wireless azld sensor applications. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Mobile computing and wireless communication are 
high-growth areas in the computer/communications 
arena. An increasing wealth of compute capability is 
available in handheld systems, and improved support 
for wireless communication helps interconnect these mo- 
bile platforms with each other, as well as with tethered 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, tO post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ASPLOS X, 10/02, San Jose, CA, USA. 
Copyright 2002 ACM ISBN 1-58113-574-2-O2/OO10 .,.$5.O0 
desktop computers or servers. The main focus, of mo- 
bile computing has been on systems such as PDAs and 
telephones intended for direct human use. Research 
attention is increasingly focused, however, on systems 
with more limited human intervention; wireless sensor 
networks are a key example. This paper examines the 
research decisions and implementation choices inherent 
in designing mobile compute/communication nodes for 
ZebraNet, a wireless sensor network aimed at wildlife 
tracking. 
In general, s e n s o r  n e t w o r k s  a r e  systems in which nu- 
merous compute and sensing devices are distributed 
within an environment to be studied. Sensor networks 
have been proposed for a range of engineering, scientific 
and defense applications. While some sensor networks 
have static sensor positions, we focus here on issues re- 
lated to dynamic sensor networks with mobile nodes 
and wireless communication between them. In fact, in 
our system, the sensor nodes are tracking collars carried 
by the animals under study; wireless ad hoc network- 
ing techniques allow them to swap and store data in a 
peer-to-peer manner  and to percolate it towards a mo- 
bile base station that  sporadically traverses the area to 
upload data. 
An increasing focus of biology and biocomplexity re- 
search has been on gathering data and observations on 
a range of species, with a goal of understanding their 
interactions and influences on each other. For example, 
it is important  to know how human development into 
wilderness areas affects indigenous species there. It is 
also important to understand the migration patterns of 
wild animals and how they may be affected by changes 
in weather patterns or plant life, by ifftroduction of non- 
native species, and by other influences. Learning such 
details about animals requires both detailed long-term 
position logs as well as other biometric data such as 
heart rate, body temperature, and frequency of feeding. 
Despite the importance of detailed data on animal 
movements and their relationship to weather, human 
development and other pattern~, insufficient data cur- 
rently exists. Furthermore, data collection technology 
m also qmte hmlted. For the mo§t part, current; wildlife 
tracking studies rely on fairly simple technology. For ex- 
ample, many studies rely on collaring a sample subset of 
animals with simple VHF transmitters [10]. Researchers 
periodically drive through (or fly over) an area with a 
receiver antenna,  and listen for pings from previously- 
collared animals. Once an animal is found, researchers 
can observe its behavior and log its observed position. 
The limits to such studies should, however, be fairly 
apparent. First, data collection is infrequent and may 
miss many "interesting events". Second, data collection 
is often limited to daylight hours, but animal behavior 
96 
and movements in nighttime hours can be quite differ- 
ent. Third and finally, da ta  collection is impossible or 
severely l imited for reclusive species tha t  avoid human 
contact. 
Because of the l imitations on simple VHF-aided visual 
observations, more sophisticated trackers are slowly be- 
coming available. The most sophist icated trackers cur- 
rently commercially-available use global positioning sys- 
tems (GPS) to track position and use satellite uploads 
to transfer da ta  to a base station [4, 19, 27]. These sys- 
tems, however, also suffer from significant limitations. 
The most sophisticated tracker currently available only 
keeps a log of 3000 position samples and no biometric 
da ta  [19]. Because satellite uploads are slow and power- 
hungry, they can only be done infrequently. This lim- 
its how often position samples can be gathered without 
overflowing the 3000-entry log storage. --Furthermore, 
downloads of da ta  from the satellite to the researchers 
are both slow and expensive (researchers are charged by 
the bit),  constraining the amount  of da t a  collected. Fi- 
nally, these systems operate on batteries without solar 
recharge, so when power is drained, the system is useless 
unless it is retrieved, recharged, and re-deployed. 
Framing wildlife tracking as a sensor networks prob- 
lem, the  ZebraNet project is building tracking nodes 
tha t  include a low-power miniature GPS system with a 
user-programmable CPU, non-volatile storage for da ta  
logs, and radio transceivers for communicating either 
with other nodes or with a base station. One of the key 
tenets of ZebraNet is tha t  the system should work in ar- 
bi t rary wilderness locations; we do not assume the pres- 
ence of fixed antenna towers or cellular telephone ser- 
vice. The system therefore uses peer-to-peer da ta  swaps 
to move the da ta  around; periodic researcher drive-bys 
(or fly-overs) can then collect logged da ta  from many an- 
imals despite encountering relatively few within range. 
While ad hoc sensor networks have been widely studied 
in the abstract ,  much less has been published about the 
characteristics of mobile sensor networks with mobile 
base stations and relatively few studies focus on build- 
ing real systems. In particular,  this paper  offers several 
unique contributions: 
• First ,  we believe we are the first to s tudy protocols 
for mobile sensor networks in which the "base" 
stat ion is also mobile. In our case, we presume 
tha t  researchers will upload da ta  while driving or 
flying by the region. And in fact, the base station 
is available only sporadically, when researchers are 
out driving a data-collection loop. 
• Second, zebra-tracking is a domain in which the 
node mobility models are largely unknown, and in 
fact are ul t imately the research goal. Understand- 
ing how, why, and when zebras undertake long- 
term migrations is the most pressing biological 
question for this work. In essence, we "bootstrap" 
mobili ty models by using current, less well-refined 
biology da ta  to design our early protocols, which 
can then be refined and adapted  as the initial de- 
ployed system helps us learn about  zebra move- 
ments, especially long-term migrations, in more 
detail. 
• Like other sensor networks, ZebraNet 's  da ta  col- 
lection has stylized communication pat terns  in 
which da ta  can be cooperatively funneled towards 
a base station. We optimize our protocols for this 
"data-gathering" communication pat tern  and for 
the  high degree of latency tolerance in this appli- 
cation domain. 
• Finally, we examine energy tradeoffs in detail,  us- 
ing real system energy measurements for ZebraNet 
prototype  hardware in operation. 
In considering ZebraNet, a number of interesting re- 
search questions arise. How to make the communica- 
tions protocol both  effective and power-efficient? To 
what extent can we rely on ad hoc, peer-to-peer trans- 
fers in a sparsely-connected spatially-huge sensor net- 
work? And finally, how can we provide comprehensive 
tracking of a collection of animals, even if some of the  
animals axe reclusive and rarely are close enough to hu- 
mans to have their  da ta  logs uploaded directly? This 
paper  gives quanti tat ive explorations of. the design de- 
cisions behind some of these questions. In addition, 
we give initial systems experiences and power measure- 
ments for our ZebraNet prototype.  More broadly, by 
summarizing early experiences with ZebraNet, we feel 
tha t  this paper  offers protocol ideas that  should be rel- 
evant to a wide selection of researchers in the wireless 
and ad hoc networking domain. 
The remainder of this paper  is s tructured as follows. 
Section 2 describes the problem domain and metrics of 
interest in more detail.  While ul t imately biologists wish 
to place ZebrmNet-style nodes on a range of species in 
an ecosystem, our first goal is to develop a collar de- 
sign and protocol that  works well with zebras. For 
this reason, Section 3 discusses the social s tructures and 
movement pa t te rns  for zebras that  we use when design- 
ing protocols and reasoning about well-suited mobil i ty 
models for our application. Following this, Section 4 
gives an overview of the ZebraNet tracking node and 
collar design, Section 5 discusses ZebraNet protocols, 
and Section 6 reports  their  effectiveness and energy ef- 
ficiency. Section 7 relates our work to other projects 
in sensor networks, energy-efficient mobile system de- 
sign and other domains. Finally, Section 8 summarizes 
our results, discusses our future plans, and offers con- 
clusions. 
2. ZEBRANET DESIGN GOALS 
The ZebraNet project  is a direct and ongoing collab- 
oration between researchers in experimental computer  
systems and in wildlife biology. The wildlife biologists 
have ar t iculated the  tracker 's  overall design goals as: 
• GPS position samples taken every three minutes. 
• Detailed activity logs taken for 3 minutes every 
hour 
• 1 year of operation without direct human interven- 
tion. (That  is, we should not count on tranquiliz- 
ing and re-collaring an animal more than once per 
year.) 
• Operat ion over a wide range (hundreds or thou- 
sands of square kilometers) of open lands. We 
plan to deploy our system at the Mpala Research 
Centre in central Kenya [25]. 
• No fixed base stations, antennas, or cellular ser- 
vice. (Any unguarded equipment, large or small, 
is too likely to a t t rac t  at tention and unfortunately, 
vandalism.) 
• While latency is not critical, a high success ra te  for 
eventually delivering all logged da ta  is important .  
• For a zebra collar, a weight limit of 3-5 lbs is rec- 
ommended.  Smaller animals may need even lower 
weight limits. 
97 
The three-minute duration between position sam- 
ples is mot ivated by biological research tha t  shows 
tha t  the interval is long enough to record statistically- 
independent behavior and yet frequent enough to log 
sufficient da t a  points over t ime [1]. In addition, once 
per hour, the  unit will log detailed information for a 
durat ion of 3 full minutes. Ultimately, this detailed 
information might include several position estimates,  
tempera ture  information, weather data,  environmental 
data,  and body movements that  will serve as signatures 
of behavior; in our initial system here, however, we focus 
solely on position data.  
Overall, the  key goal is to deliver back to the  re- 
searchers a very high fraction of the da ta  collected over 
the  months or years tha t  the system is in operation. As 
a result, ZebraNet must be quite power-efficient, must  
be designed with adequate da ta  log storage, and must 
be rugged to ensure reliability under tough conditions. 
2.1 ZebraNet Problem Statement 
Having s ta ted  above the biologists' design goals, we 
next turn to the  implications of those goals on the en- 
gineer's task at hand. 
The pr imary  figure of merit  for our designs is tha t  
the  success rate  at  delivering position da ta  to the 
researcher - -a  metric which we refer to as the  data hom- 
ing r a t e - -  should approach 100%. The engineering re- 
search problems arise from several issues. 
For example, as shown in Section 4, weight l imits on 
each node t ranslate  almost directly to computat ional  
energy limits. This is because the weight of the bat-  
tery and solar panel dominates the  total  weight of a 
ZebraNet node. As a result, our collar and protocol de- 
sign decisions must manage the number and size of da t a  
transmissions required. We must also make system de- 
sign choices that  l imit the range of transmissions, since 
the  required t ransmit ter  energy increases dramatical ly  
with the distance t ransmit ted.  Finally, we must  limit 
the amount  of storage needed to hold position logs. At 
roughly 6KB per day, a single animal 's  position da ta  
uses relatively litt le storage. But if many redundant  
copies axe stored and swapped, the storage requirements 
can scale as O(N2).  Although the energy cost of stor- 
age is small compared to that  of transmissions, it still 
behooves us to develop a storage-efficient design. 
Because of l imited transceiver coverage and a base 
station only sporadically-available, ZebraNet must  for- 
ward da ta  through other nodes in a peer- to-peer  man- 
ner and store redundant  copies of position logs in other 
tracking nodes. Section 5 discusses our protocol exper- 
hnents for operat ing in a system with mobile sensors 
and base station,  as well as bandwidth and storage con- 
straints. 
Some of the key challenges in ZebraNet come from the 
spatial  and temporal  scale of the system. In terms of 
temporal  scale, keeping a system running autonomously 
for months at  a t ime is challenging; it requires signifi- 
cant design-time attention to both hardware and soft- 
ware reliability. We also plan work (not discussed here) 
to implement on-the-fly software updates  which will fa- 
cili tate bug fixes and parameter  tuning after the col- 
lars are deployed. In terms of spatial  scale, ZebraNet 
is also aggressive; it is the specific intent of our sys- 
tem to operate  over an area of hundreds or thousands 
of square kilometers. Because of the large distances in- 
volved and sparse sensor coverage, energy/connect ivi ty 
tradeoffs become key. 
The challenges and issues outlined here come together 
in a system design that  tackles several open problems. 
Namely, ZebraNet 's  protocol promises good communi- 
cation behavior on mobile sensors percolating da ta  to- 
wards a mobile base station. Second, ZebraNet ex- 
plores design issues for sensors tha t  are more coarse- 
grained than many prior sensor proposals. The larger 
weight limits and storage budgets allow us to consider 
different protocols with improved leverage for sparsely- 
connected, physically-widespread sensors. 
3. A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A ZEBRA 
Mobility models are at the core of design decisions 
for many mobile networks. Mobility models help to 
abstract  how fast and how often users (and therefore, 
wireless nodes) move, in what  direction, and with what  
forces of a t t ract ion or repulsion. Likewise, to design 
ZebraNet, we also need to unders tand how the nodes 
will move, as this critically affects hardware, protocol 
and overall system design. Ultimately,  we wish to de- 
ploy sets of ZebraNet collars on a range of species tha t  
share the same ecosystem: zebras, lions, wild dogs, and 
even large mammals  such as elephants. This allows bi- 
ologists to gather fundamental  inter-species da ta  tha t  is 
currently woefully lacking. For this paper,  however, we 
focus on zebras. We include this section to give specifics 
about  zebra motion and social s t ructure that  impact  our 
system design choices. 
3.1 Social Structure and Collaring 
Approximate ly  35,000 zebras range widely over the 
40,000 square kilometers tha t  comprise the Laikipia 
ecosystem of central Kenya. Understanding how they 
use the landscape requires collaring representative indi- 
viduals and characterizing their fine-grained movements 
and behaviors over large scales. Fortunately,  the social 
s tructure of some zebra species enables us to collar only 
males and yet still gather  information on the ranging 
behavior of large subsets of the population. 
Two species of zebras inhabit  the Laikipia ecosys- 
tem. One, the  Grevy 's  zebra (Equus grevyi) forms large 
loosely-bonded herds. The other, more common, Plains 
zebra (E. burchelli) forms t ight-knit  uni-male, multi-  
female breeding groups. These so-called "harems" are 
characterized by 4-5 females and their young offspring 
living in close association with a stallion for long peri- 
ods of time, often many years. Females typically init iate 
movements but  the male often adjusts the direction and 
speed of movement of the group [34]. Thus by collar- 
ing only the  male we can effectively track the movement 
of 10-12 individuals, vastly reducing the number of col- 
lars required as we t ry  to characterize the movements 
of entire plains zebra populations.  
Although plains zebras live in t ight-knit  breeding 
groups, these groups often coalesce and form moder- 
ately stable long-term herds. Typically harem groups 
coalesce into herds at watering points before embark- 
ing on movements to new grazing grounds. En route, 
harems sometimes join or leave these herds depending 
on the structure of the habi tat ,  the quality of the vege- 
tat ion and the composition of individual harem groups 
[2]. Clearly, herds are more amorphous than the smaller 
harem groups, but  they last longer than a mere tempo- 
raxy aggregation. Such dynamics present a challeng- 
ing problem to ecologists t rying to unravel their causes, 
but  will actually assist ZebraNet in propagating posi- 
tion logs across the  landscape towards a mobile base 
station. 
3.2 Movement Patterns 
Zebra movement can be chaxacterized in terms of 
three main states:  grazing, graze-walking, and fast- 
moving. Zebras spend most of their t ime grazing, both  
98 
G R A Z I N G  G R A Z E - W A L K I N G  F A S T  M O V I N G  
F i g u r e  1: T h r e e - t i e r e d  m o b i l i t y  m o d e l .  
18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  -'3 
~,2. i 
~ 0 .  ~ 
S. _ t 
2.  i 
o . . . . . . . . . .  =. . . . . . .  [ I .  . . . .  ni 
3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 67 36 41 43 45 47 49 
net distance treveled (meters) 
F i g u r e  2: D i s t r i b u t i o n  o f  z e b r a  m o v e m e n t s  o b -  
s e r v e d  b y  f ie ld  b i o l o g i s t s .  
day and night. Zebras prefer to graze in areas of short 
but  rapidly-growing grasses. These areas offer high en- 
ergetic gains and low risks of predation. While graz- 
ing on short grass swards, zebras typically exhibit low 
movement rates and high turning angles. 
At other times, zebras walk deliberately, with heads 
lowered, clipping vegetation as they move. These la t ter  
movements are referred to as "graze walking" and are 
characterized by higher step rates and smaller turning 
angles than those for focused bouts  of grazing. 
Finally, either due to predators  or because an area's 
vegetation has been exhausted, zebras will occasionally 
move much more quickly, for longer distances, with their 
heads raised because they are not grazing. We catego- 
rize this as the fast-moving state. 
Figure 1 illustrates these three modes of zebra move- 
ment abstractly, with transit ion probabilit ies between 
them. The speed distr ibutions in each mode and the 
probabilities of transit ioning between each state are de- 
rived through feedback from biologists as described be- 
low. 
D i s t a n c e  M o v e d .  Figure 2 shows zebra move- 
ment da ta  collected by field biologists [2]. The his- 
togram shows how often different net movements were 
observed. Each da ta  sample is net distance moved in a 
three-minute interval since the last observation. (The 
three-minute interval is chosen based on empirical bio- 
logical studies that  show its suitabili ty for statistically- 
valid sampling of animal movements [1].) We define net 
distance moved as the net distance from the beginning 
of the three-minute interval to the end. That  is, if a ze- 
bra moved ten meters from its original position and then 
came back again, all in three minutes, its net distance 
moved would be zero. 
Because the da ta  was collected by a s tat ionary ob- 
server, Figure 2's da t a  includes mostly grazing and graze 
walking observations. The two types of motion can be 
discerned by the bimodal  nature of the distribution. 
The first mode, grazing, has a histogram peak graphed 
at 2m and a mean net-distance of 3.1m. The second 
mode, graze-walking, ranges from 10-20m, has a peak 
graphed at approximately 14m, and has a mean value 
of 13.0m. The few outliers in the distribution indicate 
points where the zebra may have sensed danger and fled. 
Overall, it is clear that  zebras tend to move very 
slowly; as they spend most of their t ime simply grazing, 
~ ' i o  - - 
6 
4 
2 
o n II[  n 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 ~ 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 1(~0 105 110 115 120 
net angle turned (degrees) 
F i g u r e  3: D i s t r i b u t i o n  o f  z e b r a  t u r n i n g  a n g l e s  
o b s e r v e d  b y  f ie ld  b i o l o g i s t s .  
their net distance moved tends to be very small. This 
hints to us that  routing protocols which intelligently ex- 
ploit past  link history information may be fruitful. 
T u r n i n g  A n g l  e . Another  facet of movement is di- 
rection. Figure 3 gives field da ta  on net turning angle. 
Similar to net distance moved, the net turning angle 
is defined as the absolute value of the angle between 
the start  of the t ime interval and the end of the time 
interval. If  the zebra moved 360 degrees within three 
minutes, its net turning angle would be zero. The max- 
imum turning angle is therefore 180 degrees. We use 
these distance and direction histograms to guide mobil- 
i ty models for simulations in Section 6. 
W a t e r  S o u r c e s  a n d  D r i n k i n g .  Zebras are 
termed a water-dependent herbivore because they seek 
out water to drink on a daily basis. Again based on ob- 
servations, our mobili ty models assume that  zebras head 
for water sources about once per day. Once there, they 
drink relatively quickly. And once their  thirst  is sati- 
ated, their movement is again independent of the water 
source u n t i l t h e  next day. We assume in our models 
that  the sources of water are randomly distributed, and 
that  thirsty zebras can easily (but  not instantly) find 
their way to an adequate source. 
S l eep .  Zebras tend not to have long periods of 
motionless sleep. Unlike carnivores, which are equipped 
with significant defense mechanisms, zebras rely on 
keeping watch and fleeing from predators.  Therefore 
our models assume that  zebras maintain their mobility 
pat tern  24 hours a day. 
4. COLLAR DESIGN 
Figure 4 shows a photograph of the core of a Ze- 
braNet  prototype node: the evaluation board for the 
GPS-MSIE (containing a GPS, Flash RAM, and CPU), 
a short range radio, and a long range radio with its 
packet modem. (The photo does not show the packag- 
ing, batteries, solar array, and power management cir- 
cuits.) This section gives an overview of the tracking 
collar node design. The block diagram in Figure 5 illus- 
trates the different components and their interactions 
with one another. 
To minimize the part  count and overall size and 
weight of the system, we use a single-chip miniature 
GPS solution from pBlox: GPS-MS1E [5]. The GPS- 
MS1E is a 12-chaxmel GPS receiver capable of getting a 
position update  every second (though we get them less 
frequently). It has an integrated 20Mhz Hitachi SH1 
32-bit microprocessor as well as I / O  support .  We use 
the SH1 for da ta  capture and protocol control; it is the 
only programmable CPU in the  ZebraNet node. The 
GPS-MSIE also has a built  in 1MB Flash RAM mod- 
ule; 640KB is available for user da ta  while the rest is 
used to store the firmware. 
Using the GPS-MSIE 's  microprocessor, we periodi- 
cally obtain the position coordinates and store them in 
99 
1 
-Figure 5: B lock  d iagram of  Z e b r a N e t  n o d e  de- 
sign. 
its on-board flash RAM. GPS readings are accurate to 
within 5-10m; this is more than sufficient for our pur- 
poses. Assuming that  we store 30 coordinates per hour, 
each hour requires a little over 240 bytes of space. This 
implies that  640KB of storage is equivalent to approx- 
hnately 110 collar-days worth of data. Furthermore, 
we plan to compress the data by representing most 
of the coordinates as offsets from two reference points 
per hour. Assuming a compression rate of about 36~, 
640KB of Flash is then capable of storing 300 collar- 
days of data. 
The processor also coordinates the communications 
over the two radios. We chose to use two radios so we 
can have broad control over tradeoffs in energy vs. com- 
munication range. First, the Linx Technologies SC-PA 
series [18] is a data radio with a range of only 100 me- 
ters but  very low power consumption. Second, we use 
a slow but higher-power data radio and packet modem 
for longer-range (Skm) transfers. The short-range radio 
is power-efficient for peer transfers when zebras are con- 
gregating by water sources, while the longer-range radio 
is necessary for communicating to the base station over 
the large area studied with relatively few tracking col- 
lars. 
S h o r t  R a n g e  R a d i o  P r o t o c o l .  While the Pico- 
Packet packet modem handles error correction, collision 
detection, and packetization for data  sent on the long 
range Tekk data radio, the same for data transmission 
over the Linx radio must be performed by the ZebraNet 
firmware. Short range radio packets have a maximum 
size of 300 bytes and a 16 bit CRC provides error check- 
ing. The Linx radio also requires a MAC protocol since 
none is provided in the hardware. While malay stan- 
dard protocols such as Aloha, Slotted Aloha, CSMA, 
and MACA [16] are available, ZebraNet has require- 
ments and resources that  differ from typical wireless 
ad-hoc networks. When doing peer search, collars must 
avoid collisions by selecting designated senders one-at-a- 
time. Fortunately, we can implement a unique collision- 
avoidance protocol that takes advantage of the fact that  
GPS gives our networked system an extremely accurate 
and precise synchronized clock. (The system has net- 
worked timing with 30-50ns precision and 30ns RMS 
accuracy.) By broadcasting peer to peer search queries 
in non-overlapping predetermined time slots that  repeat 
every 10 seconds or so, we can eliminate collisions. The 
minimum length of the time slots is dictated by the 
availability of CPU time and the time needed to switch 
between receive and transmit  modes on the Linx radios. 
CPU availability is an issue since the GPS-MS1E CPU 
is also running time-critical tasks related to GPS track- 
ing. Because of this, we work with 100-200ms time slots 
in our initial devices. This gives us collision-free opera- 
tion for 50 or 100 collars, with 200ms and lOOms time 
slots respectively. 
W i r e l e s s  N e t w o r k i n g  A l t e r n a t i v e s .  Frequency 
range regulations affect the choice of radio for our 
prototyping purposes. For example, there are high- 
performance radios manufactured by MaxStreaan that  
operate in the 900Mhz and 2.4Ghz ISM bands that  are 
license-free in the US [22]. In Kenya, however, we would 
have to use the shorter-range (and only very recently 
available) 2.4Ghz unit,  the 24xstream. Nevertheless, it 
has a range of up to 4kin line of sight with low power 
consumption (1.2W transmitting, 0.3W receiving). Be- 
cause of its power advantages, we may switch in the near 
future to using this radio for long-range transraissions. 
Finally, we also considered using an OEM wireless 
Ethernet (802.11b) module [35] instead of the short- 
range radios. The potential advantages of 802.11b 
would be very high data throughput and the ability 
to abstract away details of wireless communication in- 
cluding collision detection and avoidance, error detec- 
tion, etc. There are disadvantages, however. The GPS- 
MS1E's serial ports only support speeds up to 33.8Kbps. 
This becomes such a severe bottleneck that unless we 
choose another I / O  method, we lose most of the speed 
gain of Ethernet.  Without  the speed gain, our power re- 
quirements would go up by 16-25X per unit  data trans- 
ferred [35]. We could solve the I /O bottleneck by adding 
a separate microcontroller and storage, instead of rely- 
ing on those provided by pBlox, but this would further 
increase the energy requirements of an Ethernet-based 
choice and also would increase per-node hardware costs, 
size, and complexity. 
E n e r g y  I s sues  a n d  P o w e r  Supply .  Table 1 gives 
current consumption of the ZebraNet node operating 
in different modes. All figures in the table are current 
drains on the 3.6V power supply. The current figures are 
based on actual lab measurements of the current con- 
sumption of individual devices, but  the aggregate cur- 
rent drains on the 3.6V supply for each mode were calcu- 
lated assuming the use of 70% efficient DC-DC yoltage 
converters with the appropriate output voltages power- 
ing devices that  run on voltages higher than 3.6V. (The 
collars require DC-DC voltage converters with regulated 
outputs, especially for the long-range radio whose am- 
perages are highly variable.) 
Current drains range from a low of less than l m A  
when the system is in stand-by mode (most of the time), 
to a high of 1.622A when the system is traammitting 
100 
C o l l a r  S t a t e  
Stand-by 
Position Sampling and Storage 
Peer Discovery/Transfer Only 
Base Discovery Only 
Simultaneous Peer and Base Search 
T r a n s m i t t i n g  D a t a  to  B a s e  
D e v i c e  a n d  M o d e  
All 
GPS-MSIE,  Active Antenna 
GPS-MS1E + Short-range 
GPS-MS1E + Long-range, 
GPS-MS1E + Short-range + Long-range 
GPS-MS1E +Long-range 
C u r r e n t  drain  
o f  3 . 6 V  s u p p l y  
< l m A  
177mA 
177mA 
432mA 
469mA 
1 6 2 2 m A  
Table  1: E n e r g y  m e a s u r e m e n t s  for a Z e b r a N e t  n o d e  in d i f ferent  s t a t e s  o f  o p e r a t i o n .  
I t e m  
pBlox GPS-MSIE Single-chip G P S / C P U  
Linx SC-PA Short-range Radio 
Long-range Radio and Packet Modem 
14 Sony Lithium-Ion Polymer Cells: (UP503759AH) 3.7v, 1AH cells 
Solar Array - Uniso[ar USF5 flexible 5 watt  
8 grams 
20 grams 
296 grams 
540 grams 
To ta l  1 ,151 g r a m s  (2 .54  lbs)  [ 
Tab le  2: W e i g h t  m e a s u r e m e n t s  for di f ferent  c o m p o n e n t s  o f  a Z e b r a N e t  n od e .  
using its packet modem and long-range radio. Our goal 
is to have a power supply system in which the bat tery  is 
recharged from a solar array, but  in which the bat tery  
can operate the system for 5 full days between recharges 
if needed. We conservatively assume that  in those 5 days 
we will do the following: 
• 30 position samples per hour, 24 hours every day. 
• 6 (total) hours per day of searching for peer nodes 
and transferring da ta  between them over low- 
power short-range radio. 
• 3 hours of searching for the mobile base station us- 
ing the long-range radio per day. To save energy, 
the 3 hours of base station search overlap in t ime 
with the 6 hours of peer search and peer trans- 
fer because in both modes, the relatively power 
hungry CPU must be on anyway. 
• 640 kilobytes t ransmi t ted  to mobile base station 
during 5 day period 
To operate with the above assumptions, we need a 
13.5 Ampere-hour bat tery  with a voltage greater than or 
equal to 3.6 volts. A readily-available, easy-to-use lead- 
acid bat tery with appropria te  capacity would weigh four 
pounds. Since this is too heavy, we are opting instead 
for Lithium-ion polymer cells, which have the highest 
energy density even among l i thium ion cells. As in- 
dicated in Table 2, the required energy capacity with 
this bat tery  technology will weigh about  287 grams or 
about  0.631bs. Table 2 summarizes the weights for all 
the key components in a ZebraNet node. At this point, 
the heaviest single component is the  flexible amorphous 
silicon solar cell array [37]. At  540 grams (1.181bs), it 
contributes about half of the total  collar weight. (Rigid 
solar cell arrays would be cheaper, lighter and have 
greater power generation efficiency, but  flexible amor- 
phous silicon arrays are be t te r  at withstanding rugged 
environments.) 
Current  S ta tus .  We have built two prototype 
copies of ZebraNet nodes, which are currently opera- 
tional in the lab. In particular,  they can now automat-  
ically sample GPS coordinates and store them in Flash 
RAM. In addition, they can use the short-range wire- 
less radio to search for peers, and to exchange da ta  with 
another collar. 
5. PROTOCOL DESIGN 
The goal in ZebraNet is to gather da ta  collected at 
each collar back to the  base station. Since not every col- 
lar is within range of the base station, da t a  cannot be 
sent directly. Instead, it has to hop its way towards the 
base station, using other collars as intermediate hops. 
In ZebraNet, all nodes except the base station are da ta  
sources, while the base station alone is a da ta  sink. This 
"data  gathering" t rai t  contrasts with the general end-to- 
end communication prevalent in many wired and wire- 
less networks, where every node can be a source and /o r  
sink. 
In addition, ZebraNet nodes are mobile. The nodes 
move around almost constantly (albeit slowly). The 
base station is also mobile, depending on the route taken 
by researchers in their vehicles. Furthermore, the base 
station is only active some of the  time, when researchers 
are driving around gathering data. In the duration that  
a base station is inactive, the network essentially has 
no known destination where da ta  should be sent. These 
characteristics, coupled with the high latency tolerance 
of ZebraNet, call for specialized protocols. 
5.1 Flooding Protocol 
A simple approach to move da ta  back to the base 
station is to flood da ta  to all neighbors whenever they 
are discovered. Figure 6 shows the pseudo-code for the 
flooding protocol. If the nodes move extensively and 
meet a fair number of other nodes, then given enough 
time, da t a  will eventually migrate back to the base. In 
this way, a high percentage of the da ta  eventually makes 
it back to base. 
The base station does not necessarily have to come 
into contact with all the nodes in the system; instead, 
coming into contact with just  a few nodes may be 
enough. Indeed, it can be inferred that  by identifying 
a few highly-interactive nodes, i .e. nodes that  meet a 
large number of other nodes, we can collect a substantial  
amount of da t a  readily. 
While flooding can potential ly return the  highest suc- 
cess rate in a peer-to-peer network, the large amount of 
da ta  flooded through the network can lead in some sit- 
uations to exorbitant  demands for network bandwidth,  
storage capacity, and energy. 
101 
i. At each scan for neighbors, 
2. if node is within range of the base station, 
3. send data to base station; 
4. delete this data, since it has successfully 
reached the base station; 
5. else 
6. send data to all neighbors; 
Figure 6: P s e u d o - c o d e  for t h e  f lood ing  p ro toco l .  
1. At each  s c a n  f o r  n e i g h b o r s ,  
2. i f  node i s  w i t h i n  r ange  of t he  base  s t a t i o n ,  
3. send d a t a  t o  b a s e  s t a t i o n ;  
4.  d e l e t e  t h i s  d a t a ,  s i n c e  i~  h a s  s u c c e s s f u l l y  
r e a c h e d  t h e  b a s e  s t a t i o n ;  
5.  i n c r e m e n t  h i e r a r c h y  l e v e l ;  
6.  e l s e  
7. check  h i e r a r c h y  l e v e l s  o f  n e i g h b o r s ;  
8.  send  d a t a  t o  n e i g h b o r  w i t h  h i g h e s t  l e v e l ,  
b r e a k i n g  t i e s  r andomly ;  
9.  decay  h i e r a r c h y  l e v e l  a f t e r  D s c a n s ;  
F i g u r e  7: P s e u d o - c o d e  for t h e  h i s t o r y - b a s e d  pro- 
tocol.  
5.2 History-based protocol 
Rather than flooding data  to all neighbors, we also 
consider a simple protocol that  intelligently selects 
nodes to send to based on prior communication pat- 
terns. Naturally, a good target node is one that will ul- 
timately relay the data  to the base station. Our history- 
based protocol encodes the likelihood of a node being 
in range with the base station by assigning each node 
a hierarchy level based on its past success at transfer- 
ring data to the base station. The higher the level, the 
higher the probability that  this node is within range of 
the base station. The intuit ion behind this is that nodes 
that  were previously within range of the base station 
will still be close by, so they will be able to relay the 
data back to the base station either directly (if they 
are still in range) or indirectly through minimal other 
nodes. This protocol thus biases the selection of a node 
based on history. 
Each node remembers its own current hierarchy level. 
Each time a node scans for neighbors, it requests the hi- 
erarchy level of all its neighbors. It then sends the data 
it has collected to the neighbor with the highest hier- 
archy level, with ties randomly broken. When a node 
comes within range of the base station, its hierarchy 
level gets increased. Conversely, when a node is out- 
of-range from the base station, its hierarchy level gets 
decayed over t ime at a rate of one level per every D 
scans. That  is, if D is 5, we decrement the hierarchy 
level by 1 every 5 consecutive scans where it is beyond 
the base station's range. At the start, all nodes start 
off at the same lowest hierarchy level of zero. The pseu- 
docode of the proposed protocol is shown in Figure 7. 
Clearly, the success of the history-based unicast rout- 
ing protocol depends on the mobility of the base station 
and nodes. If the network changes very dynamically, a 
node that was previously near the base station may no 
longer be the best communication target. Then, the 
proposed protocol may mis-direct traffic frequently and 
get a poor homing success rate. 
6. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section we will describe our simulation environ- 
ment and our protocol evaluation. We first present data 
on the ideal case; from here, we will constrain two major 
factors--storage and bandwid th - -and  then present en- 
ergy tradeoffs between different protocols. Finally, we 
simulate our proposed design and show the resul ts--  
success rate and energy consumption--of  our design. 
6.1 ZNetSim 
Armed with facts and field observations about zebra 
behavior and reasonable assumptions of the terrain and 
operating characteristics of the Mpala Research Cen- 
ter in Kenya, we constructed a zebra mobility model 
and simulation environment for Zebra_Net. Our simula- 
tor, ZNetSim, takes user-defined storage and bandwidth 
constraints, and returns two metrics: (i) success rate, 
which is the percentage of data that  gets back: to base, 
and (ii) energy consumption. We developed ZNetSim in 
C, and it currently stands at 5941 lines of code. 
M o b i l i t y  Mode l s .  At the start  of each simula- 
tion, we randomly place 50 zebras and 10 water sources 
across a 20kmX20km map. As this is savanna, there 
are no major mountains or canyons that  might hinder 
herd movements, animal interactions, or networking in- 
teractions, so we assume unobstructed communications. 
Once the zebras and water sources are placed, t:he map is 
set into motion. The zebra movements are based on the 
three-tier mobility model shown in Figure 2. Each ze- 
bra independently selects speed and turning angles such 
that  aggregate three-minute movements match the dis- 
tributions in Figures 2 and 3. Unless otherwise stated, 
the zebras move at a base speed of 0.017m/s when graz- 
ing, four times faster at 0.0723m/s when graze-walking, 
and nine times faster at 0.155m/s when fast-moving. 
Communication events are simulated on 30 second gran- 
ularity. 
Once per day at a random time, the simulated ze- 
bras become "thirsty." When thirsty, a zebra moves 
as if in "graze walking" mode---i.e, faster and more 
deliberately--towards the nearest watering hole. (We 
presume that they know the location of the nearest wa- 
tering hole from any point on the simulated grid.) Fi- 
nally, since field data indicates that  zebra movements 
tend to be similar 24 hours per day, our simulator treats 
nighttime the same as day t ime- -an  endless cycle of eat- 
ing and walking. While predators do range across the 
areas under study, the zebra mortality rates due to 
predators are low enough that  we ignore them for these 
simulations. 
We compared ZNetSim's mobility model with that  ob- 
served by biologists and found our distribution to match 
almost exactly with Figures 2 and 3, with the discrepan- 
cies being simply rounding error. The base station itself 
follows a rectangular route from (5kin, 5kin) to (15kin, 
15kin) in the 20kin by 20kin map. The base moves three 
hours per day, between 2 p.m. and 5 p.m., and moves 
at 8m/s, or roughly 30km/h. Once three hours are up, 
it goes off-line immediately, but  restarts the next day 
from this same location. 
S i m u l a t i o n  M e t h o d o l o g y .  Our simulations con- 
sist of four communication phases that  occur within 30 
minutes every two hours, i .e.  from 12:00-12:30, 2:00- 
2:30, 4:00-4:30, etc, over an entire month. This timeline 
is arrived at due to the power constraints discussed in 
Section 4, as collars are limited to six hours per day 
of searching for peers and transferring data. The four 
phases are: 
. Peer Discovery: All nodes first enter a mode where 
they use their short-range receivers to search for 
neighbors within range. 
a Base Discovery: Likewise, nodes with a separate 
long-range radio will query to see if they are within 
102 
range of the base station. Since the nodes do not 
know when the base station will be available, base 
discovery is done from noon till midnight every 
day. This is typically overlapped with Peer Dis- 
covery to save power. 
• Peer Transfer: Upon finding one or more nodes 
within range, one collar initiates data transfers. 
Once this node has finished its transfer, another 
node begins, till the end of the 30 minutes. The or- 
dering of these collar selections is random in our 
simulator, but future protocols may try to opti- 
mize this order. 
• Base Transfer: After successfully finding the base 
within range, collars upload all stored data to the 
base station. With our long range radio, we as- 
sume that total bandwidth can be shared, so all 
radios within range of the base can transfer at the 
same time, dividing the bandwidth equally. Once 
the data entries are transferred, they are deleted 
from the collar to free up storage. 
We assume peer and base discoveries take 30 seconds 
and peer and base transfers are dependent on the avail- 
able bandwidth and the amount of data to be trans- 
ferred. In all transfers, nodes send their own data first 
before forwarding other nodes' data. Once the 30 min- 
utes communication interval is up, all discoveries and 
transfers immediately cease. Unless otherwise men- 
tioned, we use a single radio in all simulations. This lets 
us more clearly illustrate the effect of radio range on net- 
work performance. Finally, we note that for simplicity 
we ignore the irregular and asymmetric characteristics 
of radio ranges as discussed in [9]. 
D e l e t i o n s  w i t h  l i m i t e d  s torage .  With limited 
storage, a node prioritizes its own data over that  col- 
lected from others. So, if a data point comes in and  
there is no free space to store it in memory, the node 
first deletes the oldest data point belonging to another 
node. If none are available, it will then delete its own 
oldest data point. In this way, the system prioritizes the 
most recent timestarnped points; the data points that  
have been around the system the longest--and thus had 
the highest probability of being already transferred to 
base---are the first to be evicted to make room for newer 
incoming points. Similarly, a node's own data is always 
last to be evicted, and in that case only for newer points 
of itself. 
Once a data point has beefi transmitted to base, it 
is added into a "delete list." The delete list is a data 
structure that indicates a particular point is now obso- 
lete and can be erased. Like regular data points, delete 
lists are also transferred between nodes. Unlike regular 
data points, delete lists do not contain full data points. 
In peer to peer transfer, upon receiving a data point, if 
it is already in the delete list, it is discarded. In addi- 
tion, once every hour, the nodes "scrub" their memories 
of data points in the delete list. 
6.2 Network connectivity 
As ZebraNet relies on animal movements to create 
an ad hoc network, how these zebras move and interact 
critically determines the topology and connectivity of 
the network, which influences the performance of rout- 
ing protocols. Hence, before we evaluate the protocols, 
we first characterize network connectivity. There are 
two measures of connectivity: 
• Direct connectivity: This counts neighbors en- 
countered directly by each node. That  is, given 
• 0 o  . . . . .  " 
. ' g  ~ 1 
• t 
, , 0 ~  i 
radio range (metere) 
F i g u r e  8: A v e r a g e  p e r c e n t a g e  of  d i s t i n c t  ne igh-  
bo r s  e n c o u n t e r e d  d i rec t ly .  
[-~,-o.os7m;s -,e- 0.1 ~ m , ,  "-~-0.2,S7m,',} 
i - 
= Jo ji. 
2C 
' ,0 
rncllo r a g e  (meters) 
F i g u r e  9: A v e r a g e  p e r c e n t a g e  of  dis t inc t  n o d e s  
e n c o u n t e r e d  ind irec t ly ,  t h r o u g h  p e e r - t o - p e e r  re- 
lay ing .  
a circular radio range of radius r, a collar i is a 
neighbor of collar j if collar i is within r meters of 
collar j .  This is a good indication of the mobility 
of nodes and their interactions with each other. 
Indirect connectivity: In addition to direct neigh- 
bors, indirect connectivity includes nodes that are 
reachable via multihop relay through neighbors 
and neighbors' neighbors. This is a good indica- 
tion of how peer-to-peer networking will work. 
In a mobile ad hoc network, radio range radius r and 
the mobility of the nodes significantly impact network 
connectivity. We thus simulate the mobility of zebras 
at varying r and movement speeds, over a month of 
simulated movement. Figures 8 and 9 plot the average 
percentage of distinct nodes zebras encountered directly 
and indirectly respectively, averaged over the total num- 
ber of collars. The figures show that as radio range and 
movement speed increase, direct and indirect network 
connectivity rise. This is intuitive, since a wider radius 
r increaseS the probability of other zebras falling within 
range. Likewise, a faster-moving animal covers more 
ground and thus increases the chance of meeting- other 
animals. Figure 8 shows that,  using direct neighbors 
only, 100% connectivity is attained at around 12km ra- 
dio range for the fastest (0.267m/s) movement speed. If 
ZebraNet protocols rely solely on direct connectivity to 
get data back to the base station, they require a very 
wide 12km radio range that practically covers the entire 
20km by 20km map. 
Since radi o energy consumption increases significantly 
with radio range (following a square-law or more) a 
power-efficient network should also tap indirect con- 
nectivity through peer-to-peer communication. For the 
103 
I'-'i -direct --I--hisl --i,--fll:cd i 
"'i i 
radio range (meters) 
Figure 10: Success r a t e  w i t h  i n f in i t e  s t o r a g e  a n d  
b a n d w i d t h .  
same movement speed of 0.267m/s, Figure 9 shows 
that  using indirect neighbor relationships, the network 
achieves 100% connectivity with radio ranges of less 
than 2,000 meters. Hence, peer-to-peer protocols axe 
able to exploit indirect connectivity to reduce radio 
ranges in sparsely-connected sensor networks, realizing 
a huge reduction in power consumption. These results 
support  the potent ial  benefits of a peer-to-peer protocol 
in ZebraNet. They also point to the likely radio ranges 
we will need to support .  The subsections that  follow 
evaluate protocol issues in more detail. 
6.3 Protocol  Evaluat ions  
To first establish a baseline, Figure 10 shows the suc- 
cess rate  of da t a  re turned to the base stat ion for an ideal 
network where there is infinite storage capacity and 
network bandwidth.  We compare three protocols. In 
addit ion to the two proposed peer-to-peer p ro toco ls - -  
flooding and his tory-based--we also plot success rate  
for a protocol tha t  supports  no peer-to-peer transfers 
and only allows direct transmission of a collar 's da t a  di- 
rectly to the  base. Both peer-to-peer protocols (flood- 
ing and history) perform bet ter  than direct transmis- 
sion, achieving 100% success rate at a radio range of 
about  6km as compared to l l k m  radio range needed for 
'direct ' .  This is because the peer-to-peer protocols are 
bet ter  able to percolate da ta  from reclusive nodes tha t  
do not meet the  base station directly. 
We also see tha t  for this unconstrained setup, flooding 
performs be t te r  than the more selective history-based 
protocol. Wi th  no constraints on storage and band- 
width, flooding will have the best performance of any 
peer-to-peer protocol, since it completely leverages the 
indirect connectivity of a network, by broadcast ing to 
every neighbor. 
6.4 Storage Constraints  
As storage capacity is a prominent constraint in the 
design of sensor nodes, we next investigate the impact  of 
limiting the  capacity of onboard memory. To i l lustrate 
the trends, we show an extreme case in which storage is 
l imited to 10 collar-days. 
As shown in Figure 11, even with storage severely 
constra ined,-both peer-to-peer protocols perform bet-  
ter than direct transmission to base. This is somewhat 
surprising since peer-to-peer requires tha t  the storage 
handle both the collar 's own data  as well as that  of its 
peers. The success of the peer-to-peer protocols comes 
largely due to our deletion strategy which prioritizes a 
collar's own da ta  over others. This helps ensure tha t  
I-e-direct --i--hisl ~flood ] 
ao i "  i 
| , o  - - - -  , ,  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  i 
i ,o 
o ~ ~ ~ ~ .~ ,~ .~ 
radio range (meters) 
F i g u r e  11: Suc c e s s  r a t e  w i t h  cons t r a ined[  storage 
and infinite bandwidth.  
I,-t-dirocl .=i--hist -'-~llcc<l I 
l l X l  - f  
Z ~ 
N 2o 
o . . . . . . . . . . .  
~ ~ ~ ~ .~ .~ .~ 
radio range (meters) 
F i g u r e  12: S u c c e s s  r a t e  w i t h  i n f i n i t e  storage and 
c o n s t r a i n e d  b a n d w i d t h .  
a protocol, at  worst, stores only its own data. Hence, 
the peer-to-peer protocols cannot have a poorer da ta  
homing rate than directly t ransmi t t ing  da ta  to base. 
Comparing the 'flood' and 'his t '  curves shows that  
storage contraints degrade flooding's success rate more 
than that  of the history-based protocol. This is fairly 
intuitive since flooding indiscriminately forwards da ta  
to all neighbors, resulting in large duplication of da ta  
around the network. 
6.5 B a n d w i d t h  Const ra in ts  
The second major  design constraint  in sensor net- 
works is bandwidth.  Figure 12 shows the success rate  
of both  protocols when the bandwidth  is throt t led at 
12kbps. (To separate the different constraint effects, 
storage here is once again infinite.) At short radio 
ranges, below about  4000m, network connectivity is 
low. As shown in Figure 8 each node sees relatively few 
neighbors and thus there is relatively litt le peer da ta  
to be t ransmit ted.  In this  realm, flooding :is not yet 
bandwidth-constrained,  so it returns more da ta  than 
the history-based protocol. 
A s radio range increases, however, network connectiv- 
i ty rises and the amount  of da ta  flooded across the net- 
work begins to sa turate  the  available bandwidth.  Flood- 
ing thus begins to be l imited by the 30-minute com- 
munications period available with the tight baxLdwidth- 
constraint; as a result, its success rate  suffers as it blasts 
redundant  da ta  much of the time. The history-based 
protocol, on the other hand,  uses more intelligent se- 
lection of which nodes to swap da ta  with, and thereby 
delivers more useful da t a  to base. 
104 
~:-~--~reet .-m-~st .-J..-nood j 
9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
a 
~3 
radio renge (meters) 
Figure 13: N o r m a l i z e d  energy consumpt ion  for 
the  non-resource-constrained case. The  e n e r g y  
consumed by direct transmission is Very close to 
that dissipated by the  history-based protocol.  
When running our simulations without prioritizing lo- 
caL! collar data over peers, flooding does even worse, as 
each collar wastes too much time transmit t ing another 
collar's likely-redundant data instead of its own data. 
6.6 Energy Tradeoffs 
Besides success rate, another metric of key interest 
in sensor networks is the energy consumption. Figure 
13 shows the energy consumption for the protocols run- 
ning on a non-resource-constrained network. The peer- 
to-peer protocols are shown as energy costs normalized 
to that  of direct transmission, which is plotted as al- 
ways equal to one. Flooding's energy consumption is 
more than 8X that of direct transmission at large radio 
ranges. In constrast, the relative energy of the history- 
based protocol grows very slowly from 1.0X at lkm ra- 
dio range to 1.04X at a radio range of 15kin. This is 
expected, since flooding sends messages to everyone in 
range, when only one copy is needed back at the base. 
Furthermore, flooding may perform many redundant 
swaps of data that has already been delivered to the 
base in cases when the delete-list percolates only very 
slowly back from the base station. History-based, on the 
other hand, sends its data to only one receiver. Thus, 
we see that while flooding typically gives the best per- 
formance in peer-to=peer networks with no constraints 
on storage and bandwidth, its real-life energy cost and 
bandwidth expectations are exorbitant for large radio 
ranges. While flooding makes sense at low-radio-range 
and low-connectivity points in the design space, it is a 
poor choice for the high-connectivity regime. 
6.7 Final Design Choices 
The trends summarized in this selection have helped 
guide the design choices in the ZebraNet prototype 
node, and in fact, led to our selection of two radios in 
ZebraNet. The first radio is a low-power, short-range 
(100m, 19.2Kbps) radio intended mainly for peer-to- 
peer communications. The second radio is higher-power 
and longer range (8km at 2.4Kbps) and is intended 
mainly for transmitt ing to base. With the uBlox chip 
providing 640KB of user-accessible flash memory, stor- 
age is essentially unconstrained. Simulating a flood- 
ing protocol for short range and a direct protocol for 
long range, our simulations show an 83% success rate, 
with an estimated 855kj (66 ampere-hours) energy con- 
sumption per month. We are currently experimenting 
with adaptive protocol variations that should increase 
the protocol success rate while holding energy roughly 
constant. 
7. RELATED WORK 
Sensor networks in general, and environmental sens- 
ing in particular, axe areas of considerable research in- 
terest. This section touches on some of the most salient 
related work for Zebra~Net, divided into sections on envi- 
ronmental applications and wildlife, sensor node design, 
and protocol studies for sensor networks. 
Environmental  and Wildlife Sensing Prior 
wildlife monitoring work for large mammals has almost 
exclusively been supported by relatively low-technology 
VHF transceivers that periodically send out a ping sig- 
nal [10]. More recent improvements have included GPS- 
based trackers, which have been used for tracking of 
various animals including birds [27] and sea turtles [4], 
but  these rely on high-power transmitters that trans- 
mit data up to a satellite, and they operate off a non- 
recharged battery supply. Sensor networks have also 
been proposed for intruder detection, temperature mon- 
itoring, and traffic control [7, 36]. Environmental mon- 
itoring using sensor nodes with embedded processors 
are also a focus of the habitat monitoring project [21]. 
There, they plant the sensors statically in a grid-like 
fashion across two wildlife habitats. These sensors iden- 
tify animals when they move through the multiple sen- 
sors, and report observed phenomena back to a base 
station through peer-to-peer transfers through the sen- 
sor network. While this has issues in common with Ze- 
braNet, the key difference lies in mobility. In habitat  
monitoring, sensor nodes are fixed, tracking a dynamic 
phenomena (moving animal), and reporting to a fixed- 
location base station. In ZebraNet, sensor nodes and the 
base station itself are all mobile and only intermittently 
available for communication. Routing choices thus be- 
come more acute for ZebraNet. 
Sensor N o d e  Des ign In the research arena, we 
bear some resemblance to the TinyOS and TinyNet- 
workedDevices project [13]. Key differences here are 
that the Smart Dust "motes" are much more fine- 
grained than ZebraNet nodes, which include GPS and 
a 20MHz processor. Thus, they are targeted at differ- 
ent points in the node design space. Ranghunathan et 
al. have also studied energy and other design issues in 
sensor networks, discussing different node alternatives 
[32]. 
More coarse-grained, the Hiker's Buddy work from 
Duke looked at power-aware computing issues for a mo- 
bile "platform" including a PDA and GPS [6]. This, on 
the other hand, is actually more coarse-grained in terms 
of software and energy consumption than what we wish 
for ZebraNet. It also is intended for direct human use 
and so did not consider peer-to-peer forwaxdlng of po- 
sition data to a base station archive. 
Protocol  Studies Moving more specifically to 
Zebra~Net's communication mechanisms, Zebra~Net is a 
mobile ad hoc network, a research area that  has seen in- 
creasing attention in recent years. The zebras (nodes) 
move dynamically and arbitrarily, so the wireless inter- 
connections between the nodes change continually. In 
a mobile ad-hoc network, the routing protocol has to 
deliver messages quickly, in the face of unpredictable 
topology changes. In addition, power efficiency is crit- 
ical. Numerous routing protocols have been proposed 
[33]. Some proactively search for routes to all other 
nodes [26, 29], while others only look for a path when a 
message needs to be delivered [30, 15]. In ZebraJNet, our 
destination (base station) is only sporadically available. 
Thus, caching routes (DSI% [15]) or significant link state 
105 
(AODV [30]) will be ineffective, because cached da ta  
may guide da ta  unnecessarily to the base station when 
it is down. Furthermore, frequent node movements may 
trigger wasteful cache flushes and route re-discovery. Of 
the many proposed ad hoc protocols, our ZebraNet pro- 
tocol most closely resembles epidemic routing [38]. 
General mobile ad hoc network protocols target  arbi- 
t rary  da ta  flow pat terns  between multiple sources and 
destinations. In ZebraNet, da ta  flows either from all 
the zebras (nodes) to a single destination (base station) 
i.e. da ta  gathering; or occasionally, from a single source 
to all the nodes, i.e. broadcast .  These da ta  flow pat-  
terns associate ZebraNet closely with the  sensor net- 
works subclass of mobile ad-hoc networks [7, 31, 8]. In 
sensor networks, da t a  is gathered from numerous dis- 
t r ibuted sensors to a base station,  so da t a  too aggregates 
from many nodes to a single destination. Similarly, the 
base station broadcasts  the information it is interested 
in to all sensors [14]. 
The unique communication characteristics of sensor 
networks have led researchers to s tudy specific rout- 
ing algorithms for them, since routing protocols pro- 
posed for general mobile ad-hoc networks do not work 
well [8]. However, the  routing algorithms proposed thus 
far [12, 17, 28] assume stat ic sensor networks, i.e., net- 
works where the sensors do not move once they are de- 
ployed. Algorithms also assume tha t  the base station 
stays at  a fixed location. Based on the taxonomy pro- 
posed in [36], however, ZebraNet is a dynamic sensor 
network; its nodes are mobile, and so is the base sta- 
tion. This sub-case has not previously been studied in 
detail. 
Another  interesting area of research is on connectiv- 
i ty and coverage problems in wireless ad hoc networks. 
While coverage issues in celluar networks have been well 
studied, issues of connectivity and "critical mass" for 
mobile ad hoc networks are still open topics in both the- 
ory and systems [11, 23, 24]. Thus fax, computat ional  
geometry or random graph theory techniques have been 
applied to global views of network topology. Our work 
in ZebraNet has focused on stochastic studies based on 
detailed mobili ty models. Finally, there  has also been 
work on high level da t a  processing and programming in 
sensor network to reduce bandwidth  or storage needs [3, 
14, 20]. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper  discusses the  design tradeoffs and early 
experiences in building a low-power wireless system for 
position tracking of wildlife. By using peer-to-peer net- 
working techniques, our system can forward da ta  to 
a researcher's mobile base stat ion without  assuming 
the presence of any cellular phone service or widely- 
avmlable telecommunications support .  
We present initial design ideas, measurements,  and 
weight estimates, and we discuss how bat te ry  and 
weight limits t ranslate  into energy and storage limits 
for our system and its protocols. 
Although our protocol development is still very much 
underway, we feel tha t  the early protocol da t a  the paper  
provides may be generally useful to the ad hoc network- 
ing and systems communities. I t  represents new steps 
in protocols for mobile sensor networks, and offers in- 
sights into how storage and energy limits may impact  
protocol design. We are currently making further proto- 
col improvements tha t  will include: (i) position-based, 
in addition to history-based routing, (ii) self-adaptive 
decisions on the number of nodes to forward to in the 
history-based approach, (iii) be t ter  support  for diverse 
mobili ty models. In particular,  by having protocols that  
well-support nodes of disparate speeds, we will be able 
to collar and s tudy diverse sets of species within the 
same ecosystem. Finally, we note that  our history-based 
approach currently is stateless (it transfers the  infor- 
mation as part  of the peer discovery process); we are 
considering s tate-based approaches that  might decrease 
peer discovery time. 
Overall, ad hoc networking is presently a very active 
research area. Our work on ZebraNet makes a signif- 
icant contribution to that  domain by offering detailed 
systems-level perspectives on how to build low-power 
peer- to-peer  systems tha t  operate effectively an(! axe op- 
t imized to the characteristics of a part icular  application 
domain. 
9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Chidozie Enyinna, Ting Lin, Kinari  Patel,  
Karen Tang, and Jeremy Wall for their contributions to 
the ZebraNet project and for their  comments on ideas 
related to this paper.  Julie Buechner's senior thesis 
project  provided the animal observation da t a  in Sec- 
tion 3. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their  
comments on the paper.  The ZebraNet project  is sup- 
por ted  in par t  by an NSF I T R  grant. Mpala Research 
Centre is administered by the Mpala Research Trust,  a 
collaboration of Princeton University, the  Smithsoniaa 
Inst i tut ion,  the National Museums of Kenya, the Kenya 
Wildlife Service, and the Mpala Wildlife Foundation.  
10. REFERENCES 
[1] J. Altmann.  Observational s tudy of behavior: 
sampling methods.  Behavior, 49:227-267, 1974. 
[2] J. Beuchner. Movement rules of african ungulates. 
Princeton University Senior Undergraduate  
Thesis. Dept.  of Ecology and Evolutionary 
Biology. Advised by Prof. Dan Rubenstein. ,  June 
2002. 
[3] P. Bonnet,  J. E. Gehrke, and P. Seshadxi. 
Towards Sensor Database  Systems. In Proc. 
Second International Conference on Mobile Data 
Management, Jan. 2001. 
[4] Carr ibean Conservation Corporation. 
h t tp : / /www.ccctur t le .org/satwelc .htm.  2002. 
[5] P. Eggenburger. GPS-MS1E Miniature GPS 
Receiver Module Data  Sheet. u-Blox AG. URL: 
h t tp : / /www.u-blox .ch/ ,  Oct. 2001. 
[6] C. Ellis. The Case for Higher-level Power 
Management.  In Proc. HotOS, Mar. 1999. 
[7] D. Estrin, D. Culler, K. Pister, and G. Sukhatme.  
Connecting the Physical World with Pervasive 
Networks. In Pervasive Computing, Jan. 2002. 
[8] D. Estrin,  R. Govindran, J. Heidemann, azld 
S. Kumar.  Next Century Challenges: Scalable 
Coordinat ion in Sensor Networks. In Proc. Fifth 
ACM/IEEE Int'l Conf. on Mobile Computing and 
Networking, Aug. 1999. 
[9] D. Ganesan, B. Krishnamurthy,  A. Woo, 
D. Culler, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker. An empirical 
s tudy of epidemic algorithms in large scale 
mult ihop wireless networks, under submission, 
2002. 
[10] Habit  Research. http://www.habitresearch.com/. 
2002. 
[11] Z. Hass. On the Relaying Capabil i ty  of the  
Reconfigurable Wireless Network. In Proc. IEEE 
7th Vehicular Technology Conference, Vol 2, pp. 
1148-1152, May 1997. 
106 
[12] W. Heinzelman, A. Chand_rakasan, and 
H. Balakrishnan. Energy-Efficient Communication 
Protocol for Wireless Microsensor Networks. In 
Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, Jan. 2000. 
[13] J. Hill, R. Szewczyk, A. Woo, S. Hollar, D. E. 
Culler, and K. S. J. Pister. System Architecture 
Directions for Networked Sensors. In Proc. 
Architectural Support for Programming Languages 
and Operating Systems, pages 93-104, 2000. 
[14] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindran, and D. Estrin. 
Directed Diffusion: A Scalable and Robust 
Communication Paradigm for Sensor Networks. In 
Proc. Sixth A CM/IEEE Int'l Conf. on Mobile 
Computing and Networking, Aug. 1999. 
[15] D. Johnson and D. Maltz. Dynamic Source 
Routing in Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks. In 
T. Imielinski and H. Korth, editors,. Mobile 
Computing, pages 153-181. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1996. 
[16] P. Karn. MACA - A New Channel Access Method 
for Packet Radio. In Proc. 9th Computer 
Networking Conference, 1990. 
[17] S. Lindsey, C. Raghavendra, and K. Sivalingam. 
Data Gathering in Sensor Networks using the 
Energy*Delay Metric. In Proc. Parallel and 
Distributed Processing Symposium, Apr. 2001. 
[18] LINX Technologies, Inc. Sc series transceiver 
module design guide. 
http://www.linxtechnologies.com/, Apr. 2001. 
[19] Lotek Corp. http://www.lotek.com. 2002. 
[20] S. Madden, R. Szewczyk, M. J. Franklin, and 
D. Culler. Supporting Aggregate Queries Over 
Ad-Hoc Wireless Sensor Networks. In Proc. 4th 
IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems 
and Applications, June 2002. 
[21] A. Mainwaring, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and 
D. Culler. Wireless Sensor Networks for Habitat 
Monitoring. In Intel Research, IRB- TR- 02- 006, 
June 2002. 
[22] Maxstream. 24xstream wireless modem datasheet. 
http://www.maxstream.net/,  July 2002. 
[23] S. Meguerdichian, F. Koushanfar, M. Potkonjak, 
and M. Srivastava. Coverage Problems in Wireless 
Ad-Hoc Sensor Networks. In Proc. IEEE Infocom 
2001, Vol 3, pp. 1380-1387, Apr. 2001. 
[24] S. Meguerdichian, F. Koushanfar, G. Qu, and 
M. Potkonjak. Exposure In Wireless Ad Hoc 
Sensor Networks. In Proc. MobiCom '01, pp. 
139-150, July 2001. 
[25] Mpala Research Centre. 
http://www.nasm.edu/ceps/mpala. 2002. 
[26] S. Murthy and J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves. An 
Efficient Routing Protocol for Wireless Networks. 
ACM Mobile Networks and Applications Journal, 
Special Issue on Routing in Mobile 
Communication Networks, Oct. 1996. 
[27] NASA Satelfite Tracking of Threatened Species. 
http://sdcd.gsfc.nasa.gov/ISTO/satellite_tracking/. 
2002. 
[28] C. Okino and M. Corr. Statistically Accurate 
Sensor Networking. In Proc. Wireless 
Communication and Networking Conference, Mar. 
2002. 
[29] C. Perkins and P. Bhagwat. Highly Dynamic 
Destination-Sequenced Distance-Vector Routing 
(DSDV) for Mobile Computers. Computer 
Communications Review, Oct. 1994. 
[30] C. Perkins and E. Royer. Ad Hoc On Demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) Routing. In Proc. IEEE 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications, Feb. 1999. 
[31] G. Pottie and W. Kaiser. Wireless Integrated 
Network Sensors. Communications of the A CM, 
May 2000. 
[32] Raghunathan et al. Energy-Aware Wireless 
Microsensor Networks. IEEE Signal Processing 
Magazine, Mar. 2002. 
[33] E. Royer and C.-K. Toh. A Review of Current 
Routing Protocols for Ad-Hoc Mobile Wireless 
Networks. IEEE Personal Comunications 
Magazine, Apr. 1999. 
[34] D. I. Rubenstein. The ecology of female social 
behavior in horses, zebras, and asses. In P. Jarman 
and A. Rossiter, editors, Animal Societies: 
Individuals, .Interactions and Organizations, pages 
13--28. Kyoto University Press, 1994. 
[35] Symbol Technologies Inc. $24 High Rate OEM 
Module Integration Guide. Revision A. 
http://www.symbol.com, Feb. 2002. 
[36] S. Tilak, N. Abu-Ghazaleh, and W. Heinzelman. 
A Taxonomy of Wireless Micro-Sensor Network 
Models. June 2002. 
[37] United Solar Systems Corp. Web page and 
technical specifications. 
http://ovonic .corn/unit edsolar/flexiblemodulespecs, html, 
2002. 
[38] A. Vahdat and D. Becker. Epidemic routing for 
partially connected ad hoc networks. Technical 
report, Apr. 2000. Technical Report CS-200006, 
Duke University. 
107 

