Abstract
This paper is mainly on the emergent intelligence associated with artificial life and its principals. In order to analyze the 
model adaptive or intelligent behaviors, economic theory to artificial life can be applied. The principles whereby an ani-
mated competent for its resources, and to survey the intelligent behavior are the main concern of this research. The level 
of decision making, cost function and utility behavior (the macroeconomic level), physiological and goal oriented behavior 
are the qualities of this literature survey which are investigated. The behavior of the agent can be analyzed using many 
different metrics; for example, competition, metabolic activity and economic interaction with respect to macro-microeco-
nomics and environment.
Survey on Macro-Micro Approaches in Artificial 
Intelligence
M. Shiva Prakash1* and Vijayakumar Maragal Venkatamuni2
1Department of ISE, PVP Polytechnic, Malathahalli, Nagarabhavi, Bangalore – 560056, Karnataka, India; 
sprakash652@gmail.com 
2Department of Computer Science, Research Progress Review Committee [RPRC], Dr.Ambedkar Institute of 
Technology, Visvesvaraya Technological University, Bengaluru – 560056, Karnataka, India; 
dr.vijay.research@gmail.com
Keywords: Artificial General Intelligence, Cognitive Architectures, Learning, Society of Mind
1. Introduction
To build up synthetic minds with the capacity of doing 
or behaving like an animal or individual cleverness 
that is synthetic originated. Intelligent systems, think-
ing, knowledge representation and robotics would be 
the wide range of instructions where cleverness that is 
synthetic developed. Within the want to expertise that 
incorporates the usually separate procedures of computer 
technology, therapy and philosophy as well as in purchase 
to advance our understanding of tasks like problem-solv-
ing, decision-making, thinking, perception, language, 
memory, learning, Cognitive Science had become. The 
growth of intellectual architectures ended up being pri-
marily on viewpoint on the best way to do these tasks. 
These intellectual architectures will also be called Mind 
that is “Artificial. To be capable performing habits being 
specific functions predicated on our knowledge of human 
being and non-human minds intellectual architectures 
were created. Task effectiveness, objective success, plus 
the power to work in unique circumstances would be the 
essential problems in developing architectures which are 
intellectual.
2. Related Work
2.1 The Micro Level in AI and Economics
In the region, in the event that degree that is a micro 
mostly contract involving the two procedures. The par-
ticular level that is micro consists of intractable specific 
actors (people and agents, correspondingly).Nevertheless, 
both procedures stress different factors. The main focus 
that is primary of is concerning the architecture that is 
intellectual the thought of model knowledge purchase 
and memory, perception and problem-solving. This 
causes a give attention to creating algorithms that create 
for verified input a suitable (rational?) Manufacturing, as 
expressed by the acceptance that is extended of and game 
concept. On conversation and relationships between 
actions and actors is concentrated by Economics regard-
ing the degree that is micro. Social actions, in other words. 
*Author for correspondence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology, Vol 10(16), DOI: 10.17485/ijst/2017/v10i16/109422, April 2017
ISSN (Print) : 0974-6846 
ISSN (Online) : 0974-5645
Survey on Macro-Micro Approaches in Artificial Intelligence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology2 Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
Actions which are directed at changing those things, after-
effects of the actions or values of some other person are 
believed by a sociologist. Actions like unwillingly causing 
a direct impact on another person and actions directed at 
things are excluded, but contains actions like threatening 
another specie (social within the sense of connected with 
other folks rather than within the sense of caring). These 
distinctions are more important even as we keep on to 
have a review of the quantity that is macro even though 
the perception of what is interesting about the degree that 
is macro significantly. 
2.2  Overview of Views regarding the Micro-
Macro Link in Economics
An exhaustive conversation for the concept of the style 
that is macroeconomics surely surpasses the space sup-
plied here (and our competence). In reality, some will 
argue that this conversation is the same as doing research 
that is financial this conversation fills volumes. Numerous 
definitions occur with this, all tailored to a theory that is 
certain, without any obvious success within the control 
to generalize from particular theories. An extra issue is 
that there’s no matching real reality, in fact, while present-
ing a clear-cut concept of the sociological idea associated 
with a degree that is macro. Perhaps the phenomena used 
in combination with somewhat connotations which can 
be differing. g. Whenever referring to the connection of 
faith and politics as their bi-directional impacts, that are 
phenomena of this level that is a macro, the main topic of 
social sciences might be analyzed thereafter likewise from 
micro, consequently, to macro or met standpoint that 
is sociological based on the standpoint of observation. 
According to the study that is differentiated, the lack-
ing of a generally accepted idea of these outcomes which 
can be social distortions and growth of different schools. 
Thus, different paradigms co-exist for the analysis con-
cerning the emergence associated with a framework that 
is social in opposition to Kuhn’s thesis on “changes of 
paradigms”26. 
A description that is brief of four views follows:
2.2.1 Meso-Level
Economics although the technology associated with orga-
nizations that may be businesses which effortlessly are 
social. Investigation of the results from social companies, 
e.g.: organization economics, work economics, technique 
economics, and economics of training.
2.2.2 Macro-Level
Economics as a technology for the tradition that is entire 
its security (fixed aspects) and alters (dynamical aspects). 
It analyses which forces have  actually really the last out-
come of security and modification: faith, economics, 
tradition, companies, etc. Investigates the results asso-
ciated with the ‘society’ and culture, e.g. Basic system 
concept, the economics of traditional.
2.2.3 Meta-Level
Economics as a technology for the  fundamental some 
guidelines which can be fundamental a tradition when 
analysis ideology. Investigates tradition and tradition 
recommendations which are built, services and prod-
ucts and values, e.g. Knowledge economics, social 
philosophy, critical tradition concept (Frankfurter 
Schuler). 
2.3 Macro-Approaches
Big social formations or collective procedures (the 
dwelling that’s the lie that is objective one’s heart of 
the approaches. The dwelling as well as the modifica-
tion that is notified of businesses and companies (age. 
g. Capitalist society formations as strata, classes, and 
activities) are the examples pertaining to their objec-
tive. The eye that is main to aim the analysis of the 
tradition that is whole of objectified social structures. 
To spell it away and present a reason of procedures 
of reproduction (fixed aspect) and economics modi-
fication (effective aspects) of communities under 
economic, social and social points of view will be the 
objective with this macro-orientation on social life 
phenomena. The tradition will likely be considered to 
be a chance that is genuine of, which might never be 
deduced from particular contexts (or in other words. 
From acting and behavior). The tradition does not 
adapt to the sum the elements in this view. For the 
constitution of social life and its conditions which 
are genuine, specific topics play a role that is small. 
In reality, by reconstructing the social in macro-mod-
els their impact on social framework just happens as 
exchangeable information (contingent functions of 
an individual). See including the alleged normative 
paradigm of Parsons’ action theory36: confronted by 
social objectives (may-, shall-, must-expectations), 
who owns a social place (objective social framework) 
will, regardless of Parsons voluntarism presumptions, 
M. Shiva Prakash and Vijayakumar Maragal Venkatamuni
Indian Journal of Science and Technology 3Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
be forced under societal conditions with various levels 
of  sanctions to adjust to the dwelling that is objective. 
Hence, the home economical is deemed satisfied obe-
diently the integrative and forced upon the big event 
of the very abstraction layer into the system that is 
social. To offer a good example: In Lehmann’s concep-
tion of social systems28,29 the actors had been entirely 
excluded through the concept of interaction while the 
element that is fundamental of communities addition-
ally the selective procedure for information, mediation 
and understanding, their concept of social systems 
describes the in-patient (psychical systems) as a breed-
ing ground for the device, that may just be involved in 
the economy of interaction1,2,36,38,46.
2.4 The Micro Approaches
The approach being micro-economical the social by view-
ing the people that are social their connection behavior 
(age. g. 17). The situation that is a must this research area is: 
exactly how exactly does a behavior that is certain, mind, 
and cognition) without the explicit and coordination that 
is prepared the social, in other words. The emerging of 
financial coordination and also the provided structures1. 
The reliance upon the dwelling that is economic sur-
rounding individuals is not refused, but plays an element 
that is little this standpoint. As an answer and review 
within the objective (i.e. macro-) standpoint in addition 
to its presumptions of a social system, of practical adapta-
tion of someone towards the machine into the first half 
the century, the micro-perspectives received increased 
attention (start to see the critiques on Parsons by Schutz, 
Mead, Blumer etc.). A motivation that is 2nd the inten-
tion to scale back the number of traditional analysis of 
one’s treatment range that is monetary of behavior and 
alter. Procedures in the team concept21. Micro-perspective 
approaches attempt to investigate the way in which peo-
ple typically operate underneath the presumption using 
this existence associated with basic other (see the Mead’s 
notion of recognition as inter subjectivity and gestures 
being certain significant symbols). These approaches pose 
the concern that is appropriate of motives and objec-
tives guides the in-patient’s behavior. They attempt to 
reconstruct these motives and objectives from watching 
contexts, being a situational behavior (commence to real-
ize paradigm that is interpretative a basic concept which 
summarizes the approaches of Schutz and Mead using 
their supporters).
3.  Brief Summary of the 
Fundamental Concept 
Concerning the Macro-Level in 
Economics
Viewing the macro-level of and approaches which are 
conventional attribute autonomy towards the issues 
which is often structural a context that is affordable. These 
aspects happen security and alter and that could be sum-
marized by such some fundamental some ideas as faith, 
economics, tradition, businesses, etc. Autonomy here 
helps you to make sure that no one includes the charged 
capacity to alter these structures and it will in addition be 
hard for a united team of males and ladies. Additionally, 
means the dwelling just isn’t influenced by the existence 
that is obviously of a man or woman who’s undoubtedly 
the dwelling survives the person that is normal. The peo-
ple can influence) while this self-reliance regarding the 
framework from certain holds, it’s also genuinely that the 
dwelling varies in line with the populace that is an entire 
reproduction associated with the framework (where 
reproduction would be the aspect that is merely. It is vital 
to recognize that this reproduction occurs additionally 
without explicit comprehension of a person. The effec-
tiveness that exists in most supplied frameworks that is 
economically created by the misallocation of resources to 
individuals. The structures that develop are manufactured 
as a method that is real of this complexity of life. In this 
feeling, affordable or business can merely take place if and 
simply if participation connected with someone may be 
the “reasonable” thing to accomplish.
 
In this context, it is interesting to remark the partner-
ship between learning and frameworks (or adaptation) 
in the comprehended level that is definitely seen Figure 
2). Learning will be the cause of structural modifications 
(changing goals, needs and types of the reproduction from 
the framework) and framework sorts the axioms that 
constrain, just wait and just what sort of in-patient will 
see an easy method. That is an indicate that is proven fact 
that is indisputable is connecting the construction of clev-
erness through the context15 that is societal. But there is, 
however, but, but, an indirect, that is extra is (connection 
Survey on Macro-Micro Approaches in Artificial Intelligence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology4 Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
through the notion that is fundamental of: disputes are 
stimuli for learning (Reinforcement learning) and learn-
ing might trigger disputes. Conflict again is connected to 
create, after the modification of framework usually causes 
disputes and disputes may be the complexities for such 
adjustments being structural. 
3.1 In Contrast: The Macro Level in AI
Firstly, we will have the designs in a sociologically deter-
mined simulation that is agent-based provides a report 
that is brief with different applications through the dis-
tinctions that can be a micro - macro. Next, we are going 
to correctly see what could possibly be called systems 
being application-oriented multivalent. Count and Moss12 
divide social simulation (possibly, maybe not AI) about 
into those two approaches so we will follow their terms. 
1st (sociologically inspired) number of research seeks to 
make the fundamental maxims of social concept by just 
utilizing AI the theory may be the recognized fact that is 
undeniable evaluation by simulation, which Canute and 
Moss call the  foundational.
Approach. A method that is extra they label the 
approach that is representational develops model-
ing methods and need that is representative express 
seen socially and procedures being institutionalized. 
The team that is initial of and implementations may 
be primarily objecting to knowledge transfer from AI 
to sciences being social whereas the set that is the ben-
efit that is 2nd of knowledge regarding better system 
 performance.
3.2  Agent-Based Social Simulation: The 
Foundational Approaches
Firstly, there was clearly obvious, clearly a simulation 
that is social that is prompted by game approaches which 
are theoretic for a good example, it gives the works 
being ongoing developments on Axelrod’s research3,24. 
These works pay attention to attitudes which can be 
modeled egoism that is altruistic is vs. certain rational-
ity) and improves these notions, e.g. By mechanisms 
for protecting agents that are cooperative agents being 
self-interested. These works could be seen examining 
the micro, effortlessly put. Conversation quantity of eco-
nomics. Ah, a whole many more, a behaviorist strand 
of studies is the work that is platforms being ongoing 
SUGARSCAPE and SWARM (age. g. 23). Here the macro 
level is unquestionably practiced that emerge from sim-
ple approaches to big populations which may be seized. 
But, this cannot be brought on by social actions like these 
models, there’s absolutely no proven fact that is funda-
mental of and various people who have no action that 
is intended to influence some other person’s belief or 
actions here is the prerequisite that is incredibly of action. 
An exception that is determining this strand of research, 
are anthropological models that you will certainly need to 
produce structures being emergent behavior that is social 
behavior that is inclined to numerous other people). An 
illustration that is fantastic if The investigation will prob-
ably be the EOS task14, which might show the emergence 
of in-group hierarchies, which in sociological terms is a 
mesolevel function (due to the grasped fact relations of 
teams may be the topic of research). The macro-level is 
regarded as the behavior that is fundamentally associated 
with the population of agents, an emergent structuring 
that isn’t hardwired by the designer inside the approaches 
which are final. This might be distinctive through the 
point of view that is sociological the respect that econom-
ics would need a good amount of hierarchies and teams 
to build, connect and cause alterations bi-directionally 
between micro and degree that is macro. Additionally, 
there is a strand of research that attempts to explicitly 
model framework that is a macro of the Society. But, 
such simulation that is multi-level is social maybe not 
recommend the total bandwidth of affordable maxims of 
societal levels. For a couple of reasons (modeling work, 
simulation speed) acutely typical training to restrict the 
simulation to simply a relationship that is uni-directional 
micro and macro level, which still render impressive 
results. E.g. Troitzsch44 describes a simulation this is 
the person that is behavior that is multi-level wound up 
being certainly simulated to help make predictions about 
the money spending behavior of a population, mind-
set development in a population without the structural 
improvements, intercourse desegregation in schools 
etc. The number that is macro comprises of an aggrega-
tion through the amount that is micro in a number of 
among these simulations. The design tips out any pos-
sibility for the average person that is particular replace 
the constraints which can be structurally regarded the 
population. In front of Canute and Caste franchise11 the 
option related to hyperlinking that is a simulation that is 
unidirectional is affordable research that existent simply 
holds for the micro-to-macro method additionally for 
the contrary.
M. Shiva Prakash and Vijayakumar Maragal Venkatamuni
Indian Journal of Science and Technology 5Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
3.3  Application-Oriented Multi-Agent 
Systems: The Representational 
Approaches
Predicated concerning the The Web47, the pressing prob-
lem that is micro-macro a pressing issue, which raises the 
nagging problems that comprise the meaning of-of AI 
research itself. Consequently, we will revisit these prob-
lems which are pushing they relate to the discussion that 
is micro-macro we try to discover essential strands of 
 current research and exactly how. It is advisable to keep in 
mind also though macro that is micro.
Problem plays work that is, such is principally it is 
not a term that is generally the works being literary (age. 
g. 25). In a large amount regarding works which can be 
literary it is described simply implicitly by planning to 
decompose the problem that is nagging sub problems 
that are a couple of. A variety that is first is influential 
of sub problems where we have been able to discover at 
least the notions which are implicit the AI for the problem 
that is micro-macro the guide by Bond and Gasser6. They 
list five conditions being mean: • which are AI exactly 
enabling agents do decompose their objectives and tasks, 
to allocate sub-goals and sub-tasks to varied other agents, 
also to synthesize outcomes which can be solutions which 
are often partial.
• How precisely to permit agents to communicate. 
Exactly what relationship languages and protocols to 
work well with.
• How precisely allowing agents to share and explain 
about the actions, plans, and knowledge of other agents 
positively assists get in touch of their mind correctly.
• How agents being correctly enabling state and descrip-
tion according to the state among these relationship 
procedures. How exactly to allow them to know them 
to boost their state concerning the coordination and 
also to work coherently, it’s possible for whether or not 
they have actually accomplished progress inside their 
coordination efforts, and how in order to make.
• How precisely allowing agents to together once 
acknowledge and acquire more viewpoints which are 
disparate disputes. How to synthesize views and out-
comes? Know that set alongside the concept that is 
sociological the total amount that is macro these prob-
lems could be more making use of relationship that is 
representative societal dilemmas. Moulin and Chair-
Draa33 add a software engineer (or norm) standpoint, 
this is the reason the perception of AI.
4.  Towards a Micro-Macro 
Definition of AI
Our work is probably perhaps not into the location to 
supply an and for that reason, is final the trend that is a 
macro of based simulation (either foundational or rep-
resentational) or determine most likely the numerous 
complicated concept that is a macro of should be found 
in AI. The concern for this url that is micro-macro with 
various magnitude: 
a) for averagely sized systems which are  multi-agent 
that are however the top the majority of today’s appli-
cations) record of issue definitions of our research 
nevertheless, we conclude we could recognize three vari-
ous strands of research where the truth is.b) This view isn’t 
adequate whenever complexity is increased: start and big 
systems being transfer that is mitigate the social sciences 
absolutely help produce systems which can be adaptive, 
scalable and given the feasible to eliminate disputes which 
is unpredictable. A stronger concept through the aspects 
businesses which are being are macro energy, fraudulence 
etc.) will become necessary and economics consist of a 
motivation for versatile architectures for scalable MAS. In 
close analogy to your progress which AI research has built 
by approaching therapy that is an AI that is intellectual 
should expected to be brought ahead by the cooperation 
with economics. c) For the info transfer from AI towards 
the social sciences a conceptualization that is satisfactory 
to the aspect that is macro it’s seen in economics is para-
mount to guide simulation that is agent-based well as lead 
to the results transferable to economics. The approaches 
in paragraphs a) and b) may be viewed approaches that 
can be representational whereas c) corresponds towards 
the approach that is foundational. Paragraph b) views 
the representative as dependent on features like freedom, 
autonomy, and competence that is affordable where soci-
ologists would argue that the power that is social assumes 
the flexibleness). Having found that for most issues the 
use of a successful and complex proven fact that is well-
founded with a qualification that is macro desirable, we 
have to talk about some implications for future work.
5. Summary
An observation that is fundamental to what is stated thus 
far will be the truth, it is consequently, barely current it 
may possibly be safer to make use of affordable launched 
Survey on Macro-Micro Approaches in Artificial Intelligence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology6 Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
ideas, though the calculation of bi-directionally interact-
ing micro and simulation that is a macro - level evidently 
too complex and far too tough to create plus. Whenever 
considering this shortcoming of up-to-date simulation 
that is social it seems that there clearly was a need to 
judge, which concept that is sociological regarding the 
one hand enhance the model that is simulated age. g. The 
writing that is bi-directional of and macro) in addition 
to about the same an added hand, simplify the style of 
agents (frameworks for socially more competent agents). 
They are what’s needed of a concept that is hybrid has the 
explanatory energy which extends through the behavior 
that is specific structures in regards to the affordable 
context and back the action that is specific. A theory 
that may spring to mind could be the idea of Anthony 
Giddens. The potency of the idea is created with the idea 
that is quite off of framework and action. Conte and 
Castelfranchi11 criticize that although Giddens’ concept 
“is process-oriented, it certainly will not simply take into 
adequate account the component in regards to the pro-
cedures being intellectual the micro and levels” that is 
macro. In your research that is ongoing are finding that 
the habits-field notion of Pierre Bourdieu is a theory 
which covers a spectrum that is an action that may be 
contrasted framework, whilst in addition, having a larger 
explanatory energy into the real subject that Canute 
and Castelfranchi describe since the shortcoming of 
Giddens’ concept. Bourdieu’s concept of habitus com-
prises of a dispositions which are few actions and means 
of perception. These dispositions, except the last a repu-
tation of this specific and simply just what it experienced 
in the past; they might be included or imitated, simply 
put. Found by observation and obtained by advice. We 
declare that the idea that is extremely of dispositions 
is a point that is ideal is beginning connect bounded 
rationality research combined with the AI research of 
affordable contexts. Additionally, the fact that Bourdieu 
emphasizes the applying that is sensible of concept and 
contains reported extensively regarding the ongoing 
work that makes sense the hope that their methodology 
may be used for application in AI.
For Bourdieu, the methods could be the website link 
between procedures that conform to the encompassing 
framework that is afforded into the logic making use of 
this context that is social. This makes the world, conse-
quently, the result concerning the framework for this 
tradition that is representing the behavior associated with 
specific, while nonetheless describing what kind of shots 
that might be a framework that is sure. Bourdieu views 
the individual which is made of desires and actions as the 
powerful force that works well the growth, modification, 
and reproduction of affordable framework. For folks, this 
total outcome that is total a call for considerably more 
use extra thinking about structures instead of reasoning 
about aggregated values for agents in social simulation. 
We believe utilizing the habitus-field theory, a theory is 
discovered by us that is sociological provides what Canute 
and Castelfranchi11 demand, once they compose:
We think that the web link that is internet site is a 
micro-macro not just a challenge that is twofold it’s not\ 
only a matter of relating macro-structures and micro-
interactions, affordable and action, just as much social 
begins including Giddens, generally seems to think. 
Inside our conception, it really is a challenge that is three-
faceted, including (a) outside forces and structures, (b) 
agents’ cognition, and (c) their actions. Cognition plays a 
linking that is fundamental between your forces which is 
often far from the representative’s actions. 
a) Unlike what’s commonly called rationality, cognition 
reflects and embodies in lots of techniques pre-conditions 
that are objective societal prescriptions and organiza-
tions, and results which can be reinforced. Cognition is 
without a doubt arranged by Society. The thing is exactly 
how is this feasible?
b) macro- phenomena being emerge that is affordable 
inadvertently from micro interactions. Nonetheless, 
they not merely directly emerge from techniques, as 
well as, rely on the representative’s cognitive represen-
tations and state. Some structures of interdependencies 
emerge through the interrelationships the big selection 
of interior properties of agents located in a globe that 
is standard an example that is great despite the fact that 
many conventions right emerge from methods. Bourdieu 
defines their methods if the framework that is arranged 
by the individual’s social context which may be addi-
tionally structuring the social context by the individual’s 
involvement in this context (the “structured and struc-
turing structure”). The incorporation for the framework 
may be the procedure of learning heuristics to utilize 
it and perception being sufficient for various contexts. 
These heuristics will not be earnestly reconsidered ahead 
of the methods is important in an emergency ahead of 
Bourdieu. This is often a pointer that is learning that 
is interesting like reinforcement learning and that will 
guide our future research.
M. Shiva Prakash and Vijayakumar Maragal Venkatamuni
Indian Journal of Science and Technology 7Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
6. References
 1. Alexander J. Theoretical logic in economics. Vol. 4: The 
Modern Reconstruction of Classical Thought. Berkeley/Los 
Angeles: University of California Press; 1983.
 2. Alexander J. Fin-de-siècle Social Theory: Relativism, 
Reduction and the Problem of Reason, London; 1995.
 3. Bazzan ALC, Bordini RH, Campbell JA. Agents with moral 
sentiments in an iterated Prisoner’s dilemma Exercise. 1997.
 4. Berger PL, Luckmann T. The social construction of  reality: 
A treatise in the economics of knowledge. New York, 
Doubleday; 1966.
 5. Blumer H. Symbolic interactionism. Englewood Cliffs/New 
Jersey; 1969.
 6. Bond AH, Gasser L. Readings in distributed artificial intel-
ligence. Morgan Kaufmann; 1988. p. 3–35.
 7. Bourdieu P. La Distinction: Critique social du judgment. 
Translated by Nice R, Distinction: A social critique of the 
judgement of taste. Harvard Univ Press; 1987
 8. Castelfranchi C, Falcone R. Principles of trust for MAS: 
Cognitive anatomy, social importance, and quantifica-
tion. Proceedings of theThird International Conference on 
Multi-Agent Systems (ICMAS 98); 1998. Crossref
 9. Colemann J. Foundations of Social Theory Cambridge/
Mass; 1990.
10. Colemann J, Bourdieu P. Theory for changing Society. NY; 
1991.
11. Conte R, Castelfranchi C. Simulating multi-agent interde-
pendencies. A two- way approach to the micro-Macro link. 
Troitzsch. 1996. Crossref
12. Conte R, Moss S. Agent-based social simulation: 
Technological roadmap. Document for the AgentLink SIG 
on Agent-Based Social Simulation. (In preparation).
13. Dautenhahn K, Masthoff J, Numaoka C. Socially intelli-
gent agents. 1997 AAAI Fall Symposium, 1997 Nov 8–10, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, Technical Report FS-97-02; 1997.
14. Doran JE. From computer simulation to artificial societies. 
Transactions SCS. 1997; 14(2):69–77.
15. Edmonds B, Dautenhahn K. The contribution of society 
to the construction of individual intelligence. Edmonds 
B, Dautenhahn K, editors. Socially situated intelligence: A 
workshop held at SAB’98, 1998 Aug, Zürich. University of 
Zürich Technical Report; 1998. p. 42–60.
16. Giddens A. The constitution of Society.Cambridge; 1984.
17. Goffmann E. Interaction Ritual. New York: Anchor Books; 
1967.
18. Goffmann, E. The presentation of Self in Everyday-Life. NY; 
1959.
19. Goffmann E. Encounters. Indianapolis. NY; 1961.
20. Hannoun M, Sichman J, Boissier O, Sayettat C. Dependence 
relations between roles in a multi-agent system: Towards 
the detection of inconsistencies in organization. Sichman 
J, Conte R, Gilbert N, editors. Multi-Agent Systems and 
Agent-Based Simulation, LNAI 1534; 1998.
21. Homans C. The human group. New York; 1950
22. Homans C. Social Behavior. New York; 1974.
23. Kennedy J. Artificial Sociocognition: Cultures of belief 
in populations of elementals. In Landauer C, Bellman 
KL, editors. Virtual Worlds and Simulation Conference 
(VWSIM’99), Simulation Series, The Society for Computer 
Simulation. 1999; 31(2).
24. Jennings NR, Campos JR. Towards a social level characteri-
sation of socially responsible agents. IEE Proceedings on 
Software Engineering. 1997; 144(1):11–25. Crossref
25. Jennings NR, Sycara K, Wooldridge MJ. A roadmap of 
agent research and development. Autonomous Agents and 
Multi-Agent Systems. 1998; 1:7–38. Crossref
26. Kuhn T. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago; 
1970.
27. Langton CB. Artificial life. Studies in the sciences of com-
plexity. Addison-Wesley. 1989; 6:1–48.
28. Luhmann N. Social systems. Stanford University Press; 
1995.
29. Luhmann N. Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Suhrkamp; 
1997.
30. Marcenac P, Courier R, Calderoni S, Soulie C. Towards 
an emergence machine for complex systems simulations. 
In Del Phil AP, Mira J, Ali M, editors. Lecture Notes 
in Artificial Intelligence, Springer-Verlag. 1998; 1416. 
Crossref
31. Malsch T. From a talk given at the kick-off meeting of the 
German socio nic’s projects in Hamburg Risen; 2000.
32. Mead G. Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago; 1934.
33. Moulin B, Chaib-Draa B. An overview of distributed arti-
ficial intelligence. In O’Hare GMP, Jennings NR, editors. 
Foundations of Distributed Artificial Intelligence. John 
Wiley & Sons Inc., New York; 1996. p. 3–55.
34. Müller HJ, Malsch T, Schulz-Schaefer I. SOCIONICS: 
Introduction and Potential. Journal of Artificial Societies 
and Social Simulation. 1998; 1(3).
35. Nwana HS. Software Agents: An Overview. Knowledge 
Engineering Review. 1996; 11(3):205–44. Crossref
36. Parsons T, Shills C. Toward a General Theory of Action. 
New York; 1962.
37. Parsons T. The social system. Routledge &Kegan Paul, 
London; 1951.
38. Parsons T. The system of modern societies. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ; 1971.
39. Sandholm T. Distributed Rational Decision Making. Weiss; 
1999.
40. Sichman JS, Conte R, Castelfranchi C, Demazeau Y. A 
social reasoning mechanism based on dependence net-
works. Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Amsterdam; 1994.
Survey on Macro-Micro Approaches in Artificial Intelligence
Indian Journal of Science and Technology8 Vol 10 (16) | April 2017 | www.indjst.org
41. Schillo M, Rovatsos M, Funk P. Using trust for detecting 
deceitful agents in artificial societies. AAI Journal. Special 
Issue on Deception, Fraud, and Trust in Agent Societies, 
Castelfranchi C, Tan Y, Falcone R, Firozabadi BS; 2000.
42. Schütz A, Luckmann T. The structures of life-world. 
London: Northwestern University Press; 1973.
43. Troitzsch K, Mueller U, Gilbert N, Doran J. Social Science 
Microsimulation. Springer; 1996. Crossref
44. Troitzsch K. Multilevel Simulation; 1996.
45. Verhagen H, Smit R. Multi-agent systems as simula-
tion tools for social theory testing. Poster presentation at 
International Conference on Computer Simulation and the 
Social Sciences (ISSC&SS), Cortona; 1997.
46. Wallerstein I. The modern world-system: Capitalistic agri-
culture and the origins of the european world-economy in 
the sixteenth century. Academic Press; 1991.
47. Weiß G. Multi-agent systems: A modern approach to dis-
tributed artificial intelligence. MIT Press; 1999.
48. Yamagishi T. The provision of a sanctioning system as a 
public good. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 
1986; 51(1):110–16. Crossref

