A reliability-based approach for influence
maximization using the evidence theory
Siwar Jendoubi1 and Arnaud Martin2
1 LARODEC, University of Tunis, ISG Tunis, Avenue de la Liberté, Cité
Bouchoucha, Le Bardo 2000, Tunisia
jendoubi.siwar@yahoo.fr
2 DRUID, IRISA, University of Rennes 1, Rue E. Branly, 22300 Lannion, France
Arnaud.Martin@univ-rennes1.fr
Abstract. The influence maximization is the problem of finding a set of
social network users, called influencers, that can trigger a large cascade
of propagation. Influencers are very beneficial to make a marketing cam-
paign goes viral through social networks for example. In this paper, we
propose an influence measure that combines many influence indicators.
Besides, we consider the reliability of each influence indicator and we
present a distance-based process that allows to estimate the reliability of
each indicator. The proposed measure is defined under the framework of
the theory of belief functions. Furthermore, the reliability-based influence
measure is used with an influence maximization model to select a set of
users that are able to maximize the influence in the network. Finally, we
present a set of experiments on a dataset collected from Twitter. These
experiments show the performance of the proposed solution in detecting
social influencers with good quality.
Keywords: Influence measure, influence maximization, theory of belief
functions, reliability, social network.
1 Introduction
The influence maximization problem has attracted a great attention in these
last years. The main purpose of this problem is to find a set of influence users,
S, that can trigger a large cascade of propagation. These users are beneficial in
many application domains. A well-known application is the viral marketing. Its
purpose is to promote a product or a brand through viral propagation through
social networks. Then, several research works were introduced in the literature
[14,8,1,21] trying to find an optimal set of influence users in a given social net-
work. However, the quality of the detected influence users stills always an issue
that must be resolved.
The problem of identifying influencers was first modeled as a learning prob-
lem by Domingos and Richardson [6] in 2001. Furthermore, they defined the cus-
tomer’s network value, i.e. “the expected profit from sales to other customers he
may influence to buy, the customers those may influence, and so on recursively”
ar
X
iv
:1
70
6.
10
18
8v
1 
 [
cs
.S
I]
  3
0 
Ju
n 
20
17
[6]. Moreover, they considered the market to be a social network of customers.
Later in 2003, Kempe et al. [14] formulated the influence problem as an opti-
mization problem. Indeed, they introduced two influence maximization models:
the Independent Cascade Model (ICM) and the Linear Threshold Model (LTM).
These models estimate the expected propagation size, σM , of a given node or set
of nodes through propagation simulation models. Besides, [14] proved the NP-
Hardness of the maximization of σM . Then, they proposed the greedy algorithm
to approximate the set of nodes that maximizes σM . ICM and LTM just need
the network structure to select influencers. However, these solutions are shown
in [8] to be inefficient to detect good influencers.
When studying the state of the art of the influence maximization problem,
we found that most of existing works use only the structure of the network to
select seeds. However, the position of the user in the network is not sufficient to
confirm his influence. For example, he may be a user that was active in a period
of time, then, he collected many connections, and now he is no longer active.
Hence, the user’s activity is an interesting parameter that must be considered
while looking for influencers. Besides to the user’s activity in the network, many
other important influence indicators are not considered. Among these indicators,
we found the sharing and tagging activities of network users. These activities
allow the propagation of social messages from one user to another. Also, the
tagging activity is a good indicator of the user’s importance in the network. In
fact, more he is tagged in others’ posts, more he is important for them. Therefore,
considering such influence behaviors will be very beneficial to improve the quality
of selected seeds.
To resolve the influencers quality issue, many influence indicators must be
used together to characterize the influence that exerts one user on another [10].
An influence indicator may be the number of neighbors, the frequency of posting
in the wall, the frequency of neighbor’s likes or shares, etc. Furthermore, a refined
influence measure can be obtained through the fusion of two or more indicators.
A robust framework of information fusion and conflict management that may
be used in such a case is the framework of the theory of belief functions [23].
Indeed, this theory provides many information combination tools that are shown
to be efficient [4,24] to combine several pieces of information having different
and distinct sources. Other advantages of this theory are about uncertainty,
imprecision and conflict management.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of influence maximization in a social
network. More specifically, our main purpose is to detect social influencers with
a good quality. For this goal, we introduce a new influence measure that com-
bines many influence indicators and considers the reliability of each indicator
to characterize the user’s influence. The proposed measure is defined through
the theory of belief functions. Another important contribution in the paper is
that we use the proposed influence measure for influence maximization purposes.
This solution allows to detect a set of influencers having a good quality and that
can maximize the influence in the social network. Finally, a set of experiments
is made on real data collected from Twitter to show the performance of the pro-
posed solution against existing ones and to study the properties of the proposed
influence measure.
This paper is organized as follows: related works are reviewed in section
2. Indeed, we present some data-based works and existing evidential influence
measures. Section 3 presents some basic concepts about the theory of belief
functions. Section 4 is dedicated to explaining the proposed reliability-based
influence measure. Section 5 presents a set of experiments showing the efficiency
of the proposed influence measure. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6.
2 Related works
The influence maximization is a relatively new research problem. Its main pur-
pose is to find a set of k social users that are able to trigger a large cascade
of propagation through the word of mouth effect. Since its introduction, many
researchers have turned to this problem and several solutions are introduced in
the literature [14,15,8,3,9]. In this section, we present some of these works.
2.1 Influence maximization models
The work of Kempe et al. [14] is the first to define the problem of finding influ-
encers in a social network as a maximization problem. In fact, they defined the
influence of a given user or set of users, S, as the expected number of affected
nodes, σM (S), i.e. nodes that received the message. Furthermore, they estimated
this influence through propagation simulation models which are the Independent
Cascade Model (ICM) and the Linear Threshold Model (LTM). Next, they used a
greedy-based solution to approximate the optimal solution. Indeed, they proved
the NP-Hardness of the problem.
In the literature, many works were conducted to improve the running time
when considering ICM and LTM. Leskovec et al. [17] introduced the Cost Effec-
tive Lazy Forward (CELF) algorithm that is proved to be 700 times faster than
the solution of [14]. Kimura and Saito [16] proposed the Shortest-Path Model
(SPM) which is a special case of the ICM. Bozorgi et al. [2] considered the
community structure, i.e. a community is a set of social network users that are
connected more densely to each other than to other users from other communities
[22,26], in the influence maximization problem.
The Credit Distribution model (CD) [8] is an interesting solution that investi-
gates past propagation to select influence users. Indeed, it uses past propagation
to associate to each user in the network an influence credit value. The influence
spread function is defined as the total influence credit given to a set of users
S from the whole network. The algorithm scans the data (past propagation) to
compute the total influence credit of a user v for influencing its neighbor u. In
the next step, the CELF algorithm [17] is run to approximate the set of nodes
that maximizes the influence spread in the network.
2.2 Influence and theory of belief functions
The theory of belief functions was used to measure the user’s influence in social
networks. In fact, this theory allows the combination of many influence indicators
together. Besides, it is useful to manage uncertainty and imprecision. This section
is dedicated to present a brief description of existing works that use the theory
of belief functions for measuring or maximizing the influence.
An evidential centrality (EVC) measure was proposed by Wei et al. [25] and
it was used to estimate the influence in the network. EVC is obtained through
the combination of two BBAs defined on the frame {high, low}. The first BBA
defines the evidential degree centrality and the second one defines the evidential
strength centrality of a given node. A second interesting, work was also intro-
duced to measure the evidential influence, it is the work of [7]. They proposed
a modified EVC measure. It considers the actual node degree instead of follow-
ing the uniform distribution. Furthermore, they proposed an extended version
of the semi-local centrality measure [3] for weighted networks. Their evidential
centrality measure is the combined BBA distribution of the modified semi-local
centrality measure and the modified EVC. The works of [7] and [25] are similar
in that, they defined their measures on the same frame of discernment, they used
the network structure to define the influence.
Two evidential influence maximization models are recently introduced by
Jendoubi et al. [10]. They used the theory of belief functions to estimate the
influence that exerts one user on his neighbor. Indeed, their measure fuses several
influence indicators in Twitter like the user’s position in the network, the user’s
activity, etc. This paper is based on our previous work [10]. However, the novelty
of this paper is that we not only combine many influence indicators to estimate
the user’s influence, but also we consider the reliability of each influence indicator
in characterizing the influence.
3 Theory of belief functions
In this section, we present the theory of belief functions, also called evidence
theory or Dempster-Shafer theory. It was first introduced by Dempster [4]. Next,
the mathematical framework of this theory was detailed by Shafer in his book “A
mathematical theory of evidence” [23]. This theory is used in many application
domains like pattern clustering [5,19] and classification [18,11,12]. Furthermore,
this theory is used for analyzing social networks and measuring the user’s influ-
ence [7,25,10].
Let us, first, define the frame of discernment which is the set of all possible
decisions:
Ω = {d1, d2, ..., dn} (1)
The mass function, also called basic belief assignment (BBA), mΩ , defines the
source’s belief on Ω as follows:
2Ω → [0, 1]
A 7→ m (A) (2)
such that 2Ω = {∅, {d1} , {d2} , {d1, d2} , ..., {d1, d2, ..., dn}}. The set 2Ω is called
power set, i.e. the set of all subsets of Ω. The value assigned to the subset
A ⊆ Ω, m (A), is interpreted as the source’s support or belief on A. The BBA
distribution, m, must respect the following condition:∑
A⊆Ω
m (A) = 1 (3)
We call A focal element of m if we have m(A) > 0. The discounting procedure
allows to consider the reliability of the information source. Let α ∈ [0, 1] be our
reliability on the source of the BBA m, then the discounted BBA mα is obtained
as follows: {
mα (A) = α.m (A) , ∀A ∈ 2Ω \ {Ω}
mα (Ω) = 1− α. (1−m (Ω))
(4)
The information fusion is important when we want to fuse many influence
indicators together in order to obtain a refined influence measure. Then, the
theory of belief functions presents several combination rules. The Dempster’s
rule of combination [4] is one of these rules. It allows to combine two distinct
BBA distributions. Let m1 and m2 be two BBAs defined on Ω, Dempster’s rule
is defined as follows:
m1⊕2 (A) =

∑
B∩C=A
m1(B)m2(C)
1−
∑
B∩C=∅
m1(B)m2(C)
, A ⊆ Ω \ {∅}
0 if A = ∅
(5)
In the next section, we present some relevant existing influence measures and
influence maximization models.
4 Reliability-based influence maximization
In this paper, we propose an influence measure that fuses many influence indi-
cators. Furthermore, we assume that these indicators may do not have the same
reliability in characterizing the influence. Then, some indicators may be more
reliable than the others. In this section, we present the proposed reliability-based
influence measure, the method we use to estimate the reliability of each indicator
and the influence maximization model we use to maximize the influence in the
network.
4.1 Influence characterization
Let G = (V,E) be a social network, where V is the set of nodes such that
u, v ∈ V and E is the set of links such that (u, v) ∈ E. To estimate the amount
of influence that exerts one user, u, on his neighbor, v, we start first by defining
a set of influence indicators, I = {i1, i2, . . . , in} characterizing the influence.
These indicators may differ from a social network to another. We note that
we are considering quantitative indicators. Let us take Twitter as example, we
can define the following three indicators: 1) the number of common neighbors
between u and v, 2) the number of times v mentions u in a tweet, 3) the number
of times v retweets from u.
In the next step, we compute the value of each defined indicator for each link
(u, v) in the network. Then, (u, v) will be associated with a vector of values. In
a third step, we need to normalize each computed value to the range [0, 1]. This
step is important as it puts all influence indicators in the same range.
In this stage, we have a vector of values of the selected influence indicators:
W(u,v) =
(
i(u,v)1 = w1, i(u,v)2 = w2, . . . , i(u,v)n = wn
)
(6)
The elements of W(u,v) are in the range [0, 1], i.e. w1, w2, . . . wn ∈ [0, 1], and we
define a vector W(u,v) for each link (u, v) in the network. Next, we estimate a
BBA for each indicator value and for each link. Then, if we have n influence
indicators, we will obtain n BBA to model each of these indicators for a given
link. Let us first, define Ω = {I, P} to be the frame of discernment, where I
models the influence and P models the passivity of a given user. For a given link
(u, v) and a given influence indicator i(u,v)j = wj , we estimate its BBA on the
fame Ω as follows:
m(u,v)j (I) =
wj −min(u,v)∈E
(
i(u,v)j
)
max(u,v)∈E
(
i(u,v)j
)
−min(u,v)∈E
(
i(u,v)j
) (7)
m(u,v)j (P ) =
max(u,v)∈E
(
i(u,v)j
)
− wj
max(u,v)∈E
(
i(u,v)j
)
−min(u,v)∈E
(
i(u,v)j
) (8)
After this step, the influence that exerts a user u on his neighbor v is character-
ized by a set of n influence BBAs. In the next section, we present the method
we use to estimate the reliability of each defined BBA.
4.2 Estimating reliability
The selected influence indicators may do not have the same reliability in char-
acterizing the user’s influence. Then, we estimate the reliability, αj , of each
influence indicator. We assume that “the farthest from the others the indicator
is, the less reliable it is”. For that purpose, we follow the approach introduced
by Martin et al. [20] to estimate reliability. Besides, we note that this operator
considers our assumption. In this section we detail the steps of [20] operator we
used to estimate the reliability of each influence indicator in this paper.
Let us consider the link (u, v), we have a set of n BBAs to characterize
the chosen influence indicators,
(
m(u,v)1 ,m(u,v)2 , . . . ,m(u,v)n
)
. Our purpose is
to estimate the reliability of each indicator against the others. To estimate the
reliability, αj , of the BBA m(u,v)j , we start by computing the distance between
m(u,v)j and each BBA from the rest of n−1 BBAs that characterizes the influence
of u on v, i.e.
(
m(u,v)1 ,m(u,v)2 , . . . ,m(u,v)j−1 ,m(u,v)j+1 , . . . ,m(u,v)n
)
:
δji = δ(mj ,mi) (9)
To estimate these distances, we can use the Jousselme distance [13] as follows:
δ (mj ,mi) =
√
1
2
(mj −mi)T D
=
(mj −mi) (10)
such that D
=
is an 2N × 2N matrix, N = |Ω| and D (A,B) = |A∩B||A∪B| .
Next, we compute the average of all obtained distance values as follows:
Cj =
δ1j + δ
2
j + . . .+ δ
n
j
n− 1
(11)
such that (δ1, δ2, . . . , δn) are the distance values between m(u,v)j
and
(
m(u,v)1 ,m(u,v)2 , . . . ,m(u,v)n
)
, (δ (mj ,mj) = 0). We use the average distance
Cj to estimate the reliability, αj , of the jth influence indicator in characterizing
the influence of u on v as follows:
αj = f (Cj) (12)
where f is a decreasing function. The function f can be defined as [20]:
αj =
(
1− (Cj)λ
)1/λ
(13)
where λ > 0.
After applying all these steps, we obtain the estimated value of the BBA
reliability, αj . To consider this reliability, we apply the discounting procedure
described in equation (4). Then, we apply these steps for all defined BBAs on
every link in the network.
4.3 Influence estimation
After discounting all BBAs of each link in the network, we use them to estimate
the influence that exerts one user on his neighbor. For this purpose, let us con-
sider the link (u, v) and its discounted set of BBAs
(
mα1(u,v)1
,mα2(u,v)2
, . . . ,mαn(u,v)n
)
.
We define the global influence BBA that exerts u on v to be the BBA that fuses
all discounted BBAs defined on (u, v). For this aim, we use the Dempster’s rule
of combination (see equation (5)) to combine all these BBAs as follows:
m(u,v) = m
α1
(u,v)1
⊕mα2(u,v)2 ⊕ . . .⊕m
αn
(u,v)n
(14)
The BBA distribution m(u,v) is the result of this combination.
Consequently, we define the influence that exerts u on v to be the amount of
belief given to {I} as:
Inf (u, v) = m(u,v) (I) (15)
The novelty of this evidential influence measure is that it considers several in-
fluence indicators in a social network and it takes into account the reliability of
each defined indicator against the others. Our evidential influence measure can
be considered as a generalization of the evidential influence measure introduced
in the work of Jendoubi et al. [10].
To maximize the influence in the network, we need to define the amount
of influence that exerts a set of nodes, S, on the hole network. It is the total
influence given to S for influencing all users in the network. Then, we estimate
the influence of S on a user v as follows [10]:
Inf (S, v) =

1 if v ∈ S∑
u∈S
∑
x∈IN(v)∪v
Inf (u, x) .Inf (x, v) Otherwise (16)
where Inf (v, v) = 1 and IN (v) is the set of in-neighbors of v, i.e. if (u, v) is a
link in the network then u is an in-neighbor of v. Next, we define the influence
spread function that computes the amount of influence of S on the network as
follows:
σ (S) =
∑
v∈V
Inf (S, v) (17)
To maximize the influence that exerts a set of users S on the network, we need
to maximize σ (S), i.e. argmax
S
σ (S). The influence maximization under the evi-
dential model is demonstrated to be NP-Hard. Furthermore, the function, σ (S),
is monotone and submodular. Proof details can be found in [10]. Consequently,
a greedy-based solution can perform a good approximation of the optimal influ-
ence users set S. In such cases, the cost effective lazy-forward algorithm (CELF)
[17] is an adaptable maximization algorithm. Besides, it needs only two passes
of the network nodes and it is about 700 times faster than the greedy algorithm.
More details about CELF-based solution used in this paper can be found in [10].
After the definition of the reliability-based evidential influence measure and
the influence spread function, we move to the experiments. Indeed, we made a
set of experiments on real data to show the performance of our solution.
5 Results and discussion
This section is dedicated to the experiments. In fact, we crawled Twitter data
for the period between the 08-09-2014 and 03-11-2014. Table 1 presents some
statistics of the dataset.
Table 1. Statistics of the data set [10]
Nbr of users Nbr of tweets Nbr of follows Nbr of retweets Nbr of mentions
36274 251329 71027 9789 20300
To characterize the influence users on Twitter, we choose the following three
influence indicators: 1) the number of common neighbors between u and v, 2)
the number of times v mentions u in a tweet, 3) the number of times v retweets
from u. Next, we apply the process described above in order to estimate the
amount of influence that exerts each user u on his neighbor v in the network.
To evaluate the proposed reliability-based solution, we compare the proposed
solution to the evidential model of Jendoubi et al. [10]. Furthermore, we choose
four comparison criteria to compare the quality of the detected influence users
by each experimented model. Those criteria are the following: 1) number of ac-
cumulated follow, 2) number of accumulated mention, 3) number of accumulated
retweet, 4) number of accumulated tweet. Indeed, we assume that an influence
user with a good quality is a highly followed user, mentioned and retweeted
several times and active in terms of tweets.
In a first experiment, we compare the behavior of the proposed measure with
fixed values of indicator reliability. Figure 1 presents the obtained results for two
fixed values of αj = α, which are αj = α = 0 and αj = α = 0.2. In Figure 1
we have a comparison according to the four criteria, i.e. #Follow, #Mention,
#Retweet and #Tweet shown in the y-axis of the sub-figures. We comapre the
experimented measure using the set of selected seed for each value of αj . Besides,
we fixe the size of the set S of selected influence users to 50 influencers, i.e. shown
in the x-axis of each sub-figure.
According to Figure 1, we notice that when α = 0 (red scatter plots), the
proposed reliability-based model does not detect good influencers according to
the four comparison criteria. In fact, the red scatter plot (α = 0) is very near
to the x-axis in the case of the four criteria, which means that the detected
influencer are neither followed, nor mentioned, nor retweeted. Besides, they are
not very active in terms of tweets. However, we see a significant improvement
especially when α = 0.2 (blue scatter plots). Indeed, the detected influencers are
highly followed as they have about 14k accumulated followers in total. Besides,
the model detected some highly mentioned and retweeted influencers, especially
starting from the 25th detected influencer. Finally, the influence users selected
when α = 0.2 are more active in terms of tweets than those selected when α = 0.
This first experiment shows the importance of the reliability parameter, α,
in detecting influencers with good quality. In fact, we see that when we consider
that all indicators are totally reliable in characterizing the influence (the case
when α = 0), we notice that the proposed model detects influencers with very
bad quality. However, when we reduce this reliability (α = 0.2) we notice some
quality improvement.
In a second experiment, we used the process described in section 4.2 to esti-
mate the reliability of each BBA in the network. Then, each BBA in our network
F
ig.1.
C
om
parison
of
the
reliability-based
evidentialm
odelw
ith
three
α
fixed
value
is discounted using its own estimated reliability parameter. We note that the pa-
rameter λ in equation (13) was fixed to λ = 5. To fix this value, we made a set of
experiments with different values of λ and the best results are given with λ = 5.
Furthermore, we compare our reliability-based evidential model (also called ev-
idential model with discounting) to the evidential model proposed by [10]. In
fact, this last model is the nearest in its principle to the proposed solution in
this paper. Besides, we fixe the size of the set S of selected influence users to
50 influencers. Figure 2 presents a comparison between the two experimented
models in terms of #Follow, #Mention, #Retweet and #Tweet (shown in the
y-axis of the sub-figures).
According to Figure 2, we note that the two experimented models detect
good influencers (shown in the x-axis). However, we see that the best compro-
mise between the four criteria is given by the proposed reliability-based evidential
model. In terms of accumulated #Follow, we notice that the most followed in-
fluencers are detected by the evidential model, also, our reliability-based model
detected highly followed influencers. In terms of #Mention, we see that the evi-
dential model starts detecting some mentioned influencers after detecting about
10 users that are not mentioned. However, the proposed reliability-based model
starts detecting highly mentioned users from the first detected influencer. Fur-
thermore, we see a similar behavior in the sub-figure showing the accumulated
#Retweet. Indeed, the proposed solution detects highly retweeted influencers
from the first user. In the last sub-figure that presents the comparison according
to the accumulated #Tweet, the best results are those of the proposed reliability-
based model.
This second experiment shows the effectiveness of the proposed reliability-
based influence measure against the evidential influence measure of [10]. In fact,
the best influence maximization model is always the model that detects the
best influencers at first. Indeed, in an influence maximization problem we need
generally to minimize the number of selected influencers in order to minimize
the cost. For example, this is important in a viral marketing campaign as it helps
the marketer to minimize the cost of his campaign and to maximize his benefits.
Furthermore, our influence maximization solution gives the best compromise
between the four criteria, i.e. #Follow, #Mention, #Retweet and #Tweet.
From these experiments we can conclude that the reliability parameter is
important if we want to measure the influence in a social network through the
consideration of several influence indicators. Indeed, we may have some influence
indicators that are more reliable in characterizing the influence of the others.
Furthermore, the proposed solution is efficient in detecting influencers with a
good compromise between all chosen influence indicators.
6 Conclusion
To conclude, this paper introduces a new reliability-based influence measure.
The proposed measure fuses many influence indicators in the social network.
Furthermore, it can be adapted for several social networks. Another important
F
ig.2.
C
om
parison
betw
een
the
proposed
reliability-based
solution
and
the
evidentialm
odelof
[10]
contribution of the paper is that we consider the reliability of each chosen in-
fluence indicator to characterize the influence. Indeed, we propose to apply a
distance-based operator that estimates the reliability of each indicator against
to the others and considers the assumption that “the farthest from the others the
indicator is, the less reliable it is”. Besides, we use the proposed reliability-based
measure with an existing influence maximization model. Finally, we present two
experiments that show the importance of the reliability parameter and the ef-
fectiveness of the reliability-based influence maximization model against the ev-
idential model of Jendoubi et al. [10]. Indeed, we obtained a good compromise
in the quality of detected influencers and we had good results according to the
four influence criteria, i.e. #Follow, #Mention, #Retweet and #Tweet.
For future works, we will search to test our influence maximization solution
on other social networks. Then, we will collect more data from Facebook and
Google Plus and we will prove the performance of the proposed reliability-based
influence maximization model. A second important perspective is about the in-
fluence maximization within communities. In fact, social networks are generally
characterized by a community structure. Then, the main idea is to take profit
from this characteristic and to search to select a minimum number of influence
users and to minimize the time spent to detect them.
References
1. Aslay, C., Barbieri, N., Bonchi, F., Baeza-Yates, R.: Online topic-aware influence
maximization queries. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Extending Database Technology (EDBT). pp. 24–28 (March 2014)
2. Bozorgi, A., Haghighi, H., Zahedi, M.S., Rezvani, M.: Incim: A community-based
algorithm for influence maximization problem under the linear threshold model.
Information Processing and Management 000, 1–12 (2016)
3. Chen, D., Lü, L., Shang, M.S., Zhang, Y.C., Zhou, T.: Identifying influential nodes
in complex networks. Physica A: Statistical mechanics and its applications 391(4),
1777–1787 (2012)
4. Dempster, A.P.: Upper and Lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping.
Annals of Mathematical Statistics 38, 325–339 (1967)
5. Denœux, T., Sriboonchitta, S., Kanjanatarakul, O.: Evidential clustering of large
dissimilarity data. Knowledge-Based Systems 106, 179–195 (2016)
6. Domingos, P., Richardson, M.: Mining the network value of customers. In: Pro-
ceedings of KDD’01. pp. 57–66 (2001)
7. Gao, C., Wei, D., Hu, Y., Mahadevan, S., Deng, Y.: A modified evidential method-
ology of identifying influential nodes in weighted networks. Physica A 392(21),
5490–5500 (November 2013)
8. Goyal, A., Bonchi, F., Lakshmanan, L.V.S.: A data-based approach to social in-
fluence maximization. In: Proceedings of VLDB Endowment. pp. 73–84 (August
2012)
9. Jendoubi, S., Martin, A., Liétard, L., Ben Hadj, H., Ben Yaghlane, B.: Maximizing
positive opinion influence using an evidential approach. In: Poceeding of the 12th
international FLINS conference (August 2016)
10. Jendoubi, S., Martin, A., Liétard, L., Ben Hadj, H., Ben Yaghlane, B.: Two evi-
dential data based models for influence maximization in twitter. Knowledge-Based
Systems 121, 58–70 (2017)
11. Jendoubi, S., Martin, A., Liétard, L., Ben Yaghlane, B.: Classification of message
spreading in a heterogeneous social network. In: Proceeding of IPMU. pp. 66–75
(July 2014)
12. Jendoubi, S., Martin, A., Liétard, L., Ben Yaghlane, B., Ben Hadj, H.: Dynamic
time warping distance for message propagation classification in twitter. In: Pro-
ceeding of ECSQARU. pp. 419–428 (July 2015)
13. Jousselme, A.L., Grenier, D., Bossé, E.: A new distance between two bodies of
evidence. Information Fusion 2, 91–101 (2001)
14. Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., Tardos, E.: Maximizing the spread of influence through
a social network. In: Proceedings of KDD’03. pp. 137–146 (August 2003)
15. Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., Tardos, E.: Influential nodes in a diffusion model for
social networks. In: Prceedings of the 32th International Colloquium on Automata,
Languages and Programming. pp. 1127–1138 (2005)
16. Kimura, M., Saito, K.: Tractable models for information diffusion in social net-
works. In: Proceedings of the 10th european conference on Principles and Practice
of Knowledge Discovery in Databases: PKDD. pp. 259–271 (2006)
17. Leskovec, J., Krause, A., Guestrin, C., Faloutsos, C., VanBriesen, J., Glance, N.:
Cost-effective outbreak detection in networks. In: Proceedings of KDD’07. pp. 420–
429 (August 2007)
18. Liu, Z.g., Pan, Q., Dezert, J., Martin, A.: Adaptive imputation of missing values
for incomplete pattern classification. Pattern Recognition 52, 85–95 (2016)
19. Liu, Z.g., Pan, Q., Dezert, J., Mercier, G.: Credal c-means clustering method based
on belief functions. Knowledge-Based Systems 74, 119–132 (2015)
20. Martin, A., Jousselme, A.L., Osswald, C.: Conflict measure for the discounting
operation on belief functions. In: International Conference on Information Fusion.
pp. 1003–1010. Cologne, Germany (juillet 2008)
21. Mohamadi-Baghmolaei, R., Mozafari, N., Hamzeh, A.: Trust based latency aware
influence maximization in social networks. Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence 41, 195–206 (March 2015)
22. Mumu, T.S., Ezeife, C.I.: Discovering community preference influence network by
social network opinion posts mining. In: Procedings of DaWaK. pp. 136–145 (2014)
23. Shafer, G.: A mathematical theory of evidence. Princeton University Press (1976)
24. Smets, P., Kennes, R.: The Transferable Belief Model. Artificial Intelligent 66,
191–234 (1994)
25. Wei, D., Deng, X., Zhang, X., Deng, Y., Mahadeven, S.: Identifying influential
nodes in weighted networks based on evidence theory. Physica A 392(10), 2564–
2575 (Mai 2013)
26. Zhou, K., Martin, A., Pan, Q., Liu, Z.g.: Median evidential c-means algorithm
and its application to community detection. Knowledge-Based Systems 74, 69–88
(2015)

