IARJSET  
 
 ISSN (Online) 2393-8021 
ISSN (Print) 2394-1588 
 
 
International Advanced Research Journal in Science, Engineering and Technology 
National Conference on Innovative Applications and Research in Computer Science and Engineering (NCIARCSE-2017) 
AGTI’s Dr. Daulatrao Aher College Engineering, Vidyanagar Extension, Karad 
Vol. 4, Special Issue 4, January 2017 
Copyright to IARJSET                                DOI   10.17148/IARJSET/NCIARCSE.2017.22                                                          79 
A Review Paper on General Concepts of 
“Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning” 
 
Mahind Rupali
1
, Patil Amit
2 
Assistant Professor, Computer Science & Engg, DACOE, Karad, India
 1
 
Student, Computer Science & Engg, DACOE, Karad, India
 2 
 
Abstract: Long days ago, there was all kind of work which is only done by the humans. There were no such machines 
and technologies like today. At that time, science is not developed and technologies were not invented. So the working 
is totally dependent on the peoples and humans have recognised that “Today‟s science is the tomorrow‟s technology”. 
New superiorly advanced technologies are not less than blessing of god. Adaptive inventions for reducing the human 
work and bright future were invented which is simply called as Artificial Intelligence and Machine learning. Even 
though there were many false assumptions at the early beginning, we are witnessing a new era of errorless technology 
and superior science. This review involves the general concepts of artificial intelligence and machine learning. 
 
Keywords: Digitalization, reasoning, general AI, supervised learning, unsupervised learning, humanoids. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
As the humans have proved their presence on the earth, it 
is important that every individual should understand what 
artificial intelligence and machine learning is going to 
mean for the human race .As a nice poem summarized by 
W. H. Auden which gives the relationship between human 
life and robotics: 
                       Those who will not reason 
                       Perish in the act; 
                       Those who will not act 
                       Perish for that reason. 
 
The poem explains that “Fittest survival” i.e. only those 
humans/machines will survive who prove their existence 
by their best performance, high intelligence and maximum 
capacity. Hence it‟s high time and precipice of one of the 
most magnificent discoveries of supremacy since man 
learnt to create tools and fire. It is a road that once we 
walk ahead; there will be no turning back, once we 
achieve machine super intelligence which will be self-
learning, completely automatic and self-improving. 
 
As we see any sci-fi movie like iron man, star wars, 
terminator etc. Which vary in completely equipped super 
hero‟s to the world destroying super robots .Even if 
anyone has seen missile or space shuttle launching, 
automatically driven cars, or simple robots which help in 
household chores to hard power full muscle works, which 
are very great examples of human intelligence. No doubt 
that artificial intelligence and machine learning are the two 
hottest buzzword all over the world right now, and often 
seem to be used interchangeably. 
 
II. RELATED WORK 
 
Peter Norvig and Stuart Russell [1] in their    research 
paper “Artificial intelligence: A modern approach” have  
 
 
implemented the basic perspectives of artificial 
intelligence. They concluded that the artificial intelligence 
is a combination of reasoning, learning, perception, 
linguistic approach and problem solving. 
Niklas Lavesson[3] also have described  about the 
supervised type of machine learning .The ambition of this 
review is to introduce the types of machine learning such 
as supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement etc. The 
review also explores the applications of AI and machine 
learning in real time. 
George F Ludger [10] who described structures and 
strategies for artificial intelligence. The review also 
contains the methodologies of artificial intelligence such 
as weak artificial intelligence and strong artificial 
intelligence. It also considers the current real world 
applications and current processes in artificial intelligence. 
 
III .ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGANCE (AI) 
 
According to father of artificial intelligence John 
McCarthy, who coined the term “Artificial intelligence” in 
1956, said that “It is the combination of science and 
engineering to make intelligent devices for human 
welfare.” 
 
“Artificial intelligence is an intellect [13] that is much 
smarter than the best human brain in practically every 
field, including computer science and linguistic logic.”It is 
a modern method of machines which will do muscle work 
and illustrate complex questions in a “intellectual” 
manner. It is concerned with the basic and most important 
aspects in our life i.e. philosophy, computer science, 
mathematics, linguistics, biology, neuron science, 
sociology etc.  AI plays a very important role to exhibit 
intelligent behaviour, to learn, demonstrate and give 
advice to the user.        
IARJSET  
 
 ISSN (Online) 2393-8021 
ISSN (Print) 2394-1588 
 
 
International Advanced Research Journal in Science, Engineering and Technology 
National Conference on Innovative Applications and Research in Computer Science and Engineering (NCIARCSE-2017) 
AGTI’s Dr. Daulatrao Aher College Engineering, Vidyanagar Extension, Karad 
Vol. 4, Special Issue 4, January 2017 
Copyright to IARJSET                                DOI   10.17148/IARJSET/NCIARCSE.2017.22                                                          80 
 
Fig. III. a Diagram of sectors in AI 
 
Artificial General Intelligence or AGI is a system that 
defines that the machine can do intellectual behaviour as 
the humans can do many processes at a time. A broader 
view to artificial intelligence is that it can be the 
combination of learning, perception, problem solving and 
adapting new solutions to the system. It also involves 
linguistic logic and reasoning [1]. 
Artificial intelligence has 2 types: 
         1. Weak AI. 
         2. Strong AI. 
 
1. Weak AI. 
The principle of Weak AI is that the machines behave as if 
they are intelligent. Weak AI proves that virtual abilities 
like thinking, talking, moving can be done by machine if 
they are programmed in that manner. E.g. In the chess 
game, the computer can play and move players 
automatically. The computer does not have thinking 
ability but in actual it is programmed so that the computer 
always takes right step. 
 
2. Strong AI: 
The principle of Strong AI is that the machines will do 
calculations and think itself and will predict the answer in 
future. E.g. The artificial intellectual supercomputer 
„WATSON‟ invented by IBM. Thus in future, there will 
be definitely such machines or may be humanoids which 
will do its own work and think more powerful than human 
beings. 
  
IV. MACHINE LEARNING 
 
Machine learning is a current application of AI which 
promotes the reality just to be able to give machines the 
access to data for more ease in human work and just to 
learn them for themselves. Learning [2] is a key hallmark 
of artificial intelligence. It is an ability of the machines to 
take real – time data and feedback and improves 
performance over a time. Machine learning is type of 
artificial intelligence which has ability to learn and takes 
the data to get good output. Both the terms, Artificial 
intelligence and machine learning combined together very 
frequently when the concepts like big data, data science 
and analysis comes in mind. Machine learning is very 
efficient solution to handle such a big data in multinational 
industries. They actually work like a super-computer. 
These machines or generally known as “Humanoids” are 
very perfect at their work. These robots/machines can talk, 
answer complex questions, and multiple jobs at a time. 
 
 
Fig.IV.a Diagram representing machine learning 
mechanism 
 
The diagram explains that machine learning done not    
only depend on how the know ledged engineer perform on 
training bases but also how he works for new experiments. 
Machine learning is one of the most important technical 
approaches to AI and the basis of many recent advances 
and commercial applications of AI. Modern machine 
learning is a statistical process that helps to define the 
output and future use of data [3].  
There are following types of learning: 
           1. Supervised learning. 
           2. Unsupervised/predictive learning. 
           3. Reinforcement learning. 
 
1. Supervised learning: 
 
 
Fig. IV. b Supervised learning model 
IARJSET  
 
 ISSN (Online) 2393-8021 
ISSN (Print) 2394-1588 
 
 
International Advanced Research Journal in Science, Engineering and Technology 
National Conference on Innovative Applications and Research in Computer Science and Engineering (NCIARCSE-2017) 
AGTI’s Dr. Daulatrao Aher College Engineering, Vidyanagar Extension, Karad 
Vol. 4, Special Issue 4, January 2017 
Copyright to IARJSET                                DOI   10.17148/IARJSET/NCIARCSE.2017.22                                                          81 
In this process, if the researchers tell the machine what the 
correct answer is for a particular input. It is most common 
technique for training neutral networks [4] and other 
machine learning architectures. It involves learning a 
mapping from a set of inputs to a target variable. The 
target is discrete and real value. It is solved by decision 
tress, naive tress [5], boosting and multi-layer [6] neutral 
networks. 
 
2. Unsupervised/predictive learning: 
 
 
Fig.IV.c Unsupervised learning model 
 
In this method, no labels are given to learning algorithm, 
leaving it on its own to find structure in its input. It can be 
a goal in itself i.e. hidden pattern[7] and data. Researchers 
don‟t know how to do at this moment, research is still 
going on. No target variables are provided. It is solved by 
grouping into K groups. 
 
3. Reinforcement learning: 
In this algorithm, The AI „agent‟[8] decides how to behave 
in order to get most of the work is done. A computer 
program interacts with dynamic environment in which it 
must perform a certain task to win against opponent. The 
program gives feedback in terms of punishment or reward. 
The machine itself selects actions to be performed for 
better output 
 
V.APPLICATIONS OF AI AND MACHINE 
LEARNING 
 
As we know that how AI is most useful topic in human 
life. There are many day-today examples of AI. There is 
siri by apple, google now by google, Watson by IBM and 
cortana by windows mobile for various operating systems 
which are intelligent digital personal assistants [9] which 
have speech and gesture recognition system which helps 
the user to find and sort out all the needed things without 
any physical appearance. 
 
Fig.IV.a Siri by apple 
 
 
Fig, V.b Watson by IBM 
 
 
Fig.V.c Cortana by Microsoft 
 
It will give all the information to you like....”where is 
nearest restaurant/college/bus station?”  or it will remind 
your pending work, alarm clock, personal information as 
well as your friend‟s birthday or important meetings to 
handle, etc. 
  
Many future and current researches are going on by 
scientists on humanoids i.e. robotics along with human 
behaviour and feelings. There are also high performance 
cars along with automatic drivers assists, missiles with 
radar, satellites and navigation systems.                                                                                                                                                                              
 
 
Fig.V.d.  Valkyrine 
IARJSET  
 
 ISSN (Online) 2393-8021 
ISSN (Print) 2394-1588 
 
 
International Advanced Research Journal in Science, Engineering and Technology 
National Conference on Innovative Applications and Research in Computer Science and Engineering (NCIARCSE-2017) 
AGTI’s Dr. Daulatrao Aher College Engineering, Vidyanagar Extension, Karad 
Vol. 4, Special Issue 4, January 2017 
Copyright to IARJSET                                DOI   10.17148/IARJSET/NCIARCSE.2017.22                                                          82 
 
Fig.V.e Google self-driving car 
 
The self-driving car called „Waymo‟ [11] which is a 
google initiative drives on the road without driver. Again 
NASA and GOOGLE are together for first ever humanoid 
astronaut known as „Valkyrine‟ [12] which is an absolute 
example of artificial intelligence. 
                                                                                            
                        VI. CONCLUSION 
 
The entire world is on the way of Digitalization and for 
that purpose the artificial intelligence and machine 
learning concepts plays an important role. Our research 
paper is totally based upon, how the intelligence and new 
machine technologies get invented in our day to day life. 
Today‟s machines are ready to give the knowledge based 
education and are responsible for improving the 
intelligence. In future, we don‟t think and imagine about 
the progress of world due to only Artificial Intelligence 
and Innovative Machines. We can‟t imagine about what 
happening in surrounding and in all over world because of 
scientists and engineers. Scientist developed the Robots 
who is working like a Human Being and also the research 
is going on to create the best world in future. Youth 
generation support is one of the most important parts to 
develop the new technologies. Combination of Science 
and Engineering and the quality machine learning will 
surely take the world at its highest fit. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
We are giving a sincere thanks to our Prof. Sayali S. 
Shinde madam and Prof Rupali N. Mahind for inspiring 
and sharing their wonderful thoughts regarding this subject 
with us. We are very thankful to our HOD of Computer 
Science and Engineering Dept. Resp. Prof. Ashish N. Patil 
Sir for helping us. A special thanks and appreciation to 
everyone who has contributed for this research paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Peter Norvig; Stuart Russell, “Artificial Intelligence: A Modern     
Approach". 
[2] Sally Goldman; Yan Zhou, "Enhancing Supervised Learning with 
Unlabeled Data", Department of Computer Science, Washington 
University, St.Louis, MO 63130 USA. 
[3] Niklas Lavesson,"Evaluation and Analysis of Supervised Learning 
Algorithms and Classifiers", Blekinge Institute of Technology 
Licentiate Dissertation Series No 2006:04, ISSN 1650-2140, ISBN 
91-7295-083-8  
 [4] Bing Liu, "Supervised Learning", Department of Computer Science, 
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), 851 S. Morgan Street, 
Chicago  
[5] T.S. Anantharman, M.S. Campbell, F.-h. Hsu, Singular extensions: 
Adding selectivity to brute-force searching, Artificial Intelligence 
43 (1) (1990) 99–110. Also published in: ICCA J. 11 (4) (1988) 
135–143. 
[6] Rich Caruana; Alexandru Niculescu- Mizil,"An Empirical 
Comparison of Supervised Learning Algorithms", Department of 
Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA 
Dissertation Series No 2006:04,ISSN 1650-2140,ISBN 91-7295-
083-8 
[7]  Zoubin Ghahramani, "Unsupervised Learning", Gatsby 
Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College Lond 
Unsupervised”, “Genetic Learning Algorithms”, “Reinforcement 
Learning and Control", Department of Computer Science, Stanford 
University,450 Serra Mall, CA 94305, USA.  
[9]  Girish Kumar jha, "Artificial Neural Networks and its applications" 
international journal of computer science and issues 2005. 
[10]  George F Ludger “Artificial Intelligence - Structures and strategies 
for complex problem solving” 5th Edition, Pearson, 2009. 
[11] https://techcrunch.com/.../googles-self-driving-car-unit-spins-out-
as-way... 
[12] spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/humanoids/new-r5-valkyrie-
robots 
[13]https://www.tutorialspoint.com/artificial_intelligence/artificial_inte
lligenc... 
 
BIOGRAPHIES 
 
 Ms. Mahind Rupali N. working as assitant 
professor in computer science & engineering 
department at Dr. Daulatrao Aher College of 
Engineering, karad 
 
 
  Patil Amit Umesh is currently pursuing 
computer science engineering at Dr. 
Daulatrao Aher College of Engineering, 
karad. The author has interest in web 
design and android development. 
 
 
 
 
 
      

