Western Oregon University
Digital Commons@WOU
Student Theses, Papers and Projects (Computer
Science) Student Scholarship
3-8-2017
The Emergence of Artificial Intelligence in the
Home: Products, Services, and Broader
Developments of Consumer Oriented AI
Bingqing Tang
btang14@mail.wou.edu
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.wou.edu/
computerscience_studentpubs
Part of the Management Information Systems Commons
This Professional Project is brought to you for free and open access by the Student Scholarship at Digital Commons@WOU. It has been accepted for
inclusion in Student Theses, Papers and Projects (Computer Science) by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons@WOU. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@wou.edu.
Recommended Citation
Tang, Bingqing, "The Emergence of Artificial Intelligence in the Home: Products, Services, and Broader Developments of Consumer
Oriented AI" (2017). Student Theses, Papers and Projects (Computer Science). 6.
http://digitalcommons.wou.edu/computerscience_studentpubs/6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Emergence of Artificial Intelligence in the Home: Products, Services, and Broader 
Developments of Consumer Oriented AI 
 
 
 
 
 
Bingqing Tang 
IS642 MIS Graduate Project 
Dr. David Olson, Dr. John Leadley & Dr. Scot Morse 
March 15, 2017 
 
  
Tang 1 
Abstract 
Current home automation system merges a family's lifestyle with the latest technology & 
energy management tools to simplify people's lives. It allows users to easily manipulate a variety 
of home systems, including appliances, security systems, and environmental systems. Setting up 
a home automation system confuses many consumers. Multiple product lines and platforms 
make choosing the best system difficult. Basic requirements of setting up a home automations 
system and the comparison between different platforms are explained.  
An intelligent home automation system makes intelligent decisions to control a home. 
This type system might use a weather report to adjust a home's lawn watering schedule, as well 
as adjust the thermostat for temperature control in the home.​ ​Traditional home automation 
systems require human decision making to control the home system. The future intelligent home 
will require less human interactions, that can do things automatically after it learns patterns from 
us. A new generation requires more developed AI to control the smart home automation. Based 
on the technology we have now, the possible consumer-oriented AI technology is predicted in 
this paper. 
When the market is growing rapidly, companies are supposed to have better opportunities 
to make money. Due to the increasing popularity of home automation systems, the competition is 
very intense. Companies try the best to take the first mover advantage. Three suggestions are 
made to help those companies to build their strategies.  
 
 
Tang 2 
Index Terms— smart home, home automation, artificial intelligence, virtual assistant, machine 
learning. 
 
  
 
Tang 3 
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents 3 
1.0 Introduction 4 
2.0 Background 5 
2.1 Definition of Artificial Intelligence 5 
2.2 Highlights of Home Automation 6 
2.3 Market Conditions 8 
2.4 Basic Introduction to the Main Products  Currently Available 8 
3.0 Statement of the Problem 10 
3.1 What is home automation? 11 
3.2 What would the future intelligent home automation systems be? 11 
3.3 What do companies need to do if they want to stand out among their rivals? 11 
4.0 Business Components 12 
4.1 The ecosystems 12 
4.2 Strengths of each company 16 
4.3 Strategies of each companies 20 
5.0 Technology Components 25 
5.1 Network 25 
5.2 Cloud 28 
5.3 APIs 30 
5.3.1 Smart Home Skill API 30 
5.3.2 List Skill API 31 
5.3.3 Flash Briefing Skill API 32 
6.0 Results 34 
6.1 What is home automation? 34 
6.2 What would the future intelligent home automation system be? 36 
6.3 What do companies need to do if they want to stand out among their rivals? 39 
7.0 Conclusions 41 
8.0 Future Research 45 
Works Cited 46 
 
Tang 4 
1.0 Introduction 
Artificial intelligence has been changing our lives for decades, and has been​ ​ used in 
several fields. The most recognizable one is probably robotics in manufacturing in the auto 
industry. Although the first home automation device was invented 50 years ago it didn’t thrive. 
and the idea of AI in home automation is not really familiar to us and seems brand new. Today a 
smart home enables us to control our house remotely and natively. The cloud-connected home 
hub or the home app on the smartphone that has AI, plays a central role in a smart home. AI in 
the home can help us do routine daily tasks more easily. In one case we may have a smart home 
hub like Amazon Echo Alexa, to control an array of devices in the home such as smart lights, 
thermostats, locks, and an ever expanding range of applications. Or, instead of a hub, we could 
use a virtual assistant app on a smartphone as a control. To operate smart devices, consumers 
speak and give the command. The commands are operated by the devices through their 
connection to the cloud. 
The market for remotely controlling home automation is at the beginning stage and it 
keeps growing rapidly. Data from PR Newswire shows the installed base of home automation or 
smart home systems in the United States in 2012 was only 3.5 million, but it increases three 
times to 10.2 million in 2014. We expect further growth in this market, and the number is 
expected to reach 30 million in 2017.​1 
Since the market is a new and rapidly growing market, companies try to get the 
first-mover advantage. So companies in the marketplace need to be clear about the general 
condition of the market, the position where they are in the market, the advantages they have 
 
Tang 5 
compared with their rivals, and the right direction to go before they can move forward. Looking 
into the general ecosystem around home automation helps them to be clear about the general 
condition of the market. Having discussions on the strengths and strategies that rival companies 
have helps them to figure out their current position in the market and the advantages they have 
compared to their rivals. Examining current technology, predicting the future of intelligent home 
automation based on currently available but as yet unused technology, and suggesting strategies 
based on those technologies can help companies find productive directions in which to to move 
forward. 
 Many consumers have been slowed in buying home automation systems by confusions 
and concerns. Letting consumers know background and current comparison information on home 
automation platforms before they make purchase decisions can help them be more willing to 
accept the new idea of adopting the home automation system. Discussing the capabilities of 
home automation and the requirements for building a home automation system helps consumers 
know what they need to use home automation.  
 
2.0 Background 
2.1 Definition of Artificial Intelligence 
According to the article from Stanford University, “It is the science and engineering of 
making intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to the similar 
task of using computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself 
to methods that are biologically observable.”​2 
 
 
Tang 6 
2.2 Highlights of Home Automation 
Artificial intelligence in the home is an essential part of the smart home.  The smart home 
concept has been around for several decades. It now enables people to control their home 
remotely through apps and specific devices. An increasing number of individuals are adopting 
smart home options because more and more people are aware of the limitations of the earth's 
resources and home automation can  be quite helpful  in making a  home truly smart and green. 
Although the concept has been around for a while, the real smart home has only taken shape in 
recent years.  
In April, 2014, Drew Hendricks wrote an article  The History of Smart Homes​3​, discussed 
that during 1901-1920, many  home appliances were invented, such as the gas oven, the 
refrigerator, dishwasher, the electric washing machine, dryer and so on. Although the home 
appliance is not a  typical consideration in thinking of smart homes, the invention was a 
remarkable achievement during early twentieth century and was the first automation of 
household chores. 
The first smart devices, ECHO IV and the Kitchen Computer, emerged 50 years later, 
although the products were never commercially sold. Jim Sutherland, an engineer, who is also a 
family man in Pittsburgh, Penn. made the ECHO IV Home Computer​4​. He developed this 
computer to control many aspects of his home and with the permission of his employer, 
Westinghouse, he took modules home and built the ECHO IV. ECHO IV is an acronym for 
Electronic Computing Home Operator. It comprised four large cabinets (6'×2'×6') weighing 
approximately 800 lbs in total and a CPU with program panel on it, magnetic core memory, I/O 
circuitry and power supplies. 
 
Tang 7 
According to the April 1968 issue of Popular Mechanics, the Sutherlands were extending 
the system to store recipes, compute and create shopping lists, track family inventory, control 
home temperature, turn appliances on and off, and predict the weather. Moreover, ECHO IV was 
able to act as a family message center, a place where people could leave notes to each other. One 
year later, the Kitchen Computer came out. The original advertisement for Honeywell is "If she 
can only cook as well as Honeywell can compute."  People were not likely or able to afford at 
least $10,000 in 1969 to buy a machine which could store recipes without being able to cook.​5 
Both the ECHO IV and  Kitchen Computer reveal the desire of people wanting to have 
more control of their home, get more leisure time and enhance their lives. Homemakers long ago 
realized that claims of increased leisure time are illusory. 
In the 1970s, X10, the grandfather of automation was established. According to Smart Home 
Tech​6​, it was a simple system that used home power lines to foster communication between 
multiple appliances. Due to the system's reliance on power lines, it was highly susceptible to the 
electrical interface issues. 
In 2010 the Nest Learning Thermostat enters the picture. Two men who created the iPod 
and iPhone founded Nest. It was created to control energy consumption by adjusting home 
temperature automatically through a  sensor. According to Nest, since 2011 the Nest Learning 
Thermostat has saved over 8 billion kWh of energy in millions of homes worldwide​7​. 
Independent studies showed that it saved people average of 10-12% on heating bills and 15% on 
cooling bills. 
The first personal assistant, a system that has many similarities to a home automation 
system and can in fact become part of than kind of system, could be said to be Siri, a voice 
 
Tang 8 
activated “servant” embedded in Apple iOS software in their iPhones in 2010. It allowed 
consumers to place phone calls, search the web, write notes and do other activities on their 
phones without using their hands. Siri has become more sophisticated since its introduction. In 
2016, Amazon Echo – a hands-free speaker that you control with your voice came into the 
market. Later, as competition, Google released Google Home. Both of them are personal 
assistants used in the home. You can search the web, get a personalized daily briefing, check 
traffic, add items to the calendar, create shopping lists, track a package and many other activities 
by saying a command to the devices. These devices also are used to control devices for home 
automation. 
 
2.3 Market Conditions 
 Data from PR Newswire shows that the installed base of home automation or smart 
home systems in the United States in 2012 was only 3.5 million, but that it went up remarkably 
to 10.2 million in 2014, almost three times that in 2012. Further growth in this market is 
expected and the number may reach 30 million in 2017​1, ​The sales of smart home devices and 
controllers increased from 22.1 million to 32.4 million during 2014 to 2016 according to data 
from Consumer Technology Association​8​. The global intelligent virtual assistant (IVA) market 
could garner revenue of $3.6 billion by 2020, registering a CAGR of 35.2% during the forecast 
period of 2015-2020. North America dominates the world intelligent virtual assistant market​9​. As 
a result, the growth of this area is rapidly increasing and it has huge potential. 
2.4 Basic Introduction to the Main Products  Currently Available 
 
Tang 9 
  
  Amazon Echo Amazon Echo Dot Google Home 
 
 
 
 
Size 9.3"×3.3"×3.3." 1.3"×3.3"×3.3."  5.62"×3.79"×3.79."  
Weight 37.5 oz. 5.7 oz. 16.8 oz. 
Retail Price $179.99 $49.99 $129 
Always 
Listening 
Yes No Yes 
Wake-up-wo
rd 
Alexa Alexa Ok Google 
Customizable 
Appearance 
No 
Black/White 
No 
Black/White 
Yes 
7 Colors Fabric ×3 
Metal ×3 
Features - Echo is 
Bluetooth-enabled so 
that you can stream 
other popular music 
services like iTunes 
from your phone or 
tablet. 
- Answers questions, 
reads audiobooks and 
the news, reports 
traffic and weather, 
gives info on local 
businesses, provides 
sports scores and 
schedules, and more - 
Using the Alexa 
- Echo Dot has all the 
features the Amazon 
ECHO has, besides it is a 
hands-free, 
voice-controlled device 
with a small built-in 
speaker. You also could 
connect to your speakers 
using line-in or Bluetooth. 
- Alarm, calculator, 
calendar, dictionary, 
light control, music, 
news, radio, shopping 
list, traffic, TV 
streaming, weather, 
delight, provide 
information 
- Google Home could 
answer followed up 
questions 
- Music can play on 
multiple Google Home 
and Google Cast 
speakers in your house 
at once 
 
Tang 10 
Voice Service 
Controls lights, 
switches, and 
thermostats 
- Uber, Domino's 
- Over 100 new skills 
from third-party 
developers 
Compatible 
partners 
Audio:​ Amazon Prime Music, Spotify, Pandora, 
Tunein, iHeartRADIO, Audible​ ​audiobooks, 
text-to-speech for Kindle eBooks 
Smart Home:​ Wemo, Nest, Philips Hue, Samsung 
SmartThings, Insteon, TP-Link, Ecobee, IFTTT 
Tasks: ​Google Calendar, Yelp, movie showtimes 
Audio:​ YouTube 
Music, Spotify, 
Pandora, Google Play 
Music, Tunein 
Smart Home:​ Google 
Chromecast, Nest, 
Philips Hue, Samsung 
SmartThings, IFTTT 
Video:​ YouTube 
(Chromecast required) 
Tasks:​ Google 
Calendar, Google Keep 
Table 2.1 Main Hubs on the Market 
There are several voice-activated hub products on the market that allow you to control the home. 
Amazon Echo Dot, compared with Amazon Echo and Google Home, is designed to be the 
easiest portable device due to its lightweight and small size. However, its battery does not last 
long, so it does not  always have the listening feature.  The always listening feature operates 
during stand by and as long as someone says the wake-up word, it will conduct your command.  
3.0 Statement of the Problem 
 
Tang 11 
3.1 What is home automation? 
Home automation allows users to easily manipulate a variety of home systems, including 
appliances, security systems, and environmental systems. Setting up a home automation system 
confuses many consumers. Multiple product lines and platforms make choosing the best system 
difficult. Examining basic system requirements and comparing platforms helps explain basic 
home automation. 
3.2 What would the future intelligent home automation systems be?  
An intelligent home automation system makes intelligent decisions to control a home. 
This type  system might use a weather report to adjust a home's lawn watering schedule, as well 
as adjust the thermostat for temperature control in the home. 
Traditional home automation systems require human decision making to control the 
home system. A new generation requires more developed AI to control the smart home 
automation.  
Future trends analysis would be used to predict the intelligent home automation system. 
3.3 What do companies need to do if they want to stand out among their rivals? 
When the market is growing rapidly, companies are supposed to have better opportunities 
to make more money.  
 
Tang 12 
Due to the increasing popularity of home automation systems, the competition is very 
intense. The more companies jump into the market the more difficult it is to win the war among 
the rivals.  
Solving this problem requires looking at the ecosystem of the smart home market, 
examining the strengths and the strategies of current companies in the field and then, drawing 
conclusions of the suggestions that will direct companies future actions. 
4.0 Business Components 
4.1 The ecosystems  
 
Figure 4.1 The Ecosystems 
 
Tang 13 
Home AI market belongs to the ecosystem showed above. All the markets, including 
home AI, personal computers, tablets, mobile phones, automobile infotainment systems, services 
(media and cloud services) and advertising all influence each other.  
 
Figure 4.2 Revenue of the Smart Home Automation Market in the U.S. from 2015 to 2021 (in 
Billion U.S. Dollars) 
According to the market analysis from Statista, the predicted future of smart home 
automation will increase from $2.76 billion to $9.21 billion during 2015 to 2021​10​. The annual 
growth rate is 38% during this 6-year period. Many famous companies such as Amazon, Google, 
Microsoft, Apple, Intel, Samsung, and Facebook have been  developing their own AI products 
for years. Since Home AI market is new and growing market, many companies try to gain the 
first mover advantage to be the market leader. Being the first mover as early as possible is 
 
Tang 14 
essential for them because if they do not take action, other companies will probably take the 
opportunity from them. Those who use one home automation system tend to use the same 
software in their car or mobile phone. If companies do not get the market share as soon as 
possible, it is harder for them to get it when the users have adopted other systems already. The 
high market growth rate should lead to the low rivalry. Since the high growth rate will lead to 
more space for each companies, they tend to fight less with each other. However, the potential 
impacts of Home AI market to the whole ecosystems increase the rivalry. 
 
Figure 4.3 Apple’s Revenue from iTunes, Software and Services from 1st Quarter 2013 to 1st 
Quarter 2017 (in billion U.S. dollars) 
 
Tang 15 
For example Apple, a delay in entering the home AI market may affect sales of iPhones, 
iTunes music and movies, apps and services. According to data from Apple, revenue from 
iTunes, software and services grew steadily during 2013 to 2017​11​. The media sales revenue is 
18.4% of Apple’s total revenue. In addition, according to the research by Sensor Tower, the 
average U.S. iPhone user spent $40 on apps and in-app purchases in 2016 and this was up from 
$35 the previous year​12​. Apple wants to protect the stable growth of the iOS ecosystem it has 
already achieved from being influenced by the growth of the smart home market. If iPhone user 
buys a Google Home for his house, he will probably purchase music from Google for streaming 
on that device. Users may also prefer using the same music streaming app both in their house and 
on their smartphone. Importantly, the profit margin in software and services such as music and 
movies are much higher than selling hardware. Protecting this market is more urgent than 
hardware markets, to some extent.  
Moreover, because of consumer’s preferences for using one system, sales in this area 
influence the broader ecosystems. If companies cannot take advantage of the smart home part, 
they will lose the market share in the other parts of the technology device market. For example, 
if a person has already bought an iPhone, when he considers buying a tablet, he will probably 
buy an iPad. Picking an operating system is also an important factor when they make other 
purchase decisions. Buyers are more willing to choose a  system that can gives them more 
convenience. For instance, by staying with Apple products they do not have to convert all their 
files in the iOS system to other systems. As a result, the two impacts increase the rivalry from 
low to high. 
 
Tang 16 
As part of the ecosystem, putting the artificial intelligence in automobiles is also an 
essential action companies will have to take to keep customers in their circle. It allows people 
using the same systems not only on their smartphone or in their home, but also in the car. The 
more people interact with a system that has artificial intelligence, the more it will learn from us. 
As a result, people do not want to switch from one system to another one since that would cause 
starting over on the learning process. This is also the reason why many companies have been 
partnered with automobile manufacturers. 
Another part of the ecosystem would be advertising market. Through the hub, companies 
are able to sell ads to their users from the advertisers. They know more about the customers’ 
buying and living behavior through customers’ daily use of the hub; shopping lists, purchases 
through amazon prime, pizza orders, and more, all help the company to provide personalized 
recommendations for advertisers to address to customers. Some local businesses would benefit 
from cooperating with them. These companies sell their user's digital footprints to advertisers by 
tracking their searching behavior.  
4.2 Strengths of each companies 
Amazon has advantages on it online retailing business and it cloud services. As a big 
online retailer, it is easy for Amazon to promote its Echo devices by putting it on the official 
webpage. Increasing the sales performance of Echo also can empower its retailing business. 
Forrester Principal Analyst Thomas Husson said, “The more people use Alexa devices, the more 
likely they are to spend money on Amazon.” According to the statistics from Experian 
Information Solutions shown above, Echo owners buy products on Amazon Prime 32% of the 
 
Tang 17 
time they use the Amazon Echo, which is quite impressive since the first Echo was just released 
4 years ago and people are not so familiar with the new way of buying things.  
 
Figure 4.4 Revenue of Amazon Web Services (in millions) 
Another strength of Amazon is its cloud service, Amazon Web Services (AWS), which 
contributes more than half of their net income. Since both the control-hub and the home app 
build all the artificial intelligence in the cloud, it is advantage for Amazon to build its own AI. 
Apple has great reputation in its iOS system’s security and ease-of-use. Since Apple 
restricts third-party apps, it protects the iOS system from being easily attacked. Many consumers 
regard iOS system as easier to use than Android, they prefer to pay more to buy Apple’s product.  
 
Tang 18 
 
Figure 4.5 Familiarly with Virtual Digital Assistants (VDAs) in the United States, as of 
September 2016, by use 
Apple also has a great reputation for its AI assistant, Siri. According to the data from 
Vantiv and Socratic Technologies, people are most familiar with Siri. This is probably because 
of the huge sales volume of iOS embedded devices like iPhone and iPad. Although Apple does 
not have the device for home use, Apple can use the iPhone as its device. More importantly, Siri 
can speak over 20 languages and Siri can speak Chinese. As it is reported by GFK that, 75% of 
consumers in China are expecting to adopt smart home technology​13​. 
Google had 80.52% of the desktop search engine market in February, 2017. Google’s 
huge search inventory and PageRank algorithm delivers the most relevant and correct high 
quality answers. According to the report from The Economist,“Apple Siri handles over 2 billion 
 
Tang 19 
commands a week and 20% of Google searches on Android-powered handsets in America are 
input by voice​14​.” One of the most important functions for the voice-activated control hub is to 
answer user questions with high quality. 
Besides, according to the Business Insider, there are estimated to be over 1.5 billion 
Android users out there in the world, all of whom have phones that could theoretically get 
upgraded with Google Assistant. Plus, Assistant is built into Google Allo, the company’s latest 
messaging app, and Google Pixel, the company’s flagship app​15​. As a result, those Android users 
tend to use Google’s systems. 
 
Figure 4.6 Worldwide Smartphone Vendor Market Share (Share in Unit Shipments) 
Samsung, as a big smartphone company could also use the smartphone as their home 
device, just like Apple. Samsung’s market share in smartphone market is about 20%; higher than 
Apple. Moreover, Samsung has developed consumer electronic markets which are the devices 
already in people’s homes. If Samsung has its own home system, people would prefer to adopt it 
 
Tang 20 
since they’ve already has all those devices in the homes, and the same-brand system will work 
with those devices well. 
 
Figure 4.7 Market Share of Each Computer Operating Systems 
Microsoft Windows has about 90% of the market share in the operating systems market. 
It is a great advantage for Microsoft to spread its personal assistant Cortana out. 
4.3 Strategies of each companies 
Different companies have various approaches to make themselves more broadly 
competitive. The main way they make themselves more powerful is to cooperate with other 
companies. With  partners, the power of the companies increases.  
Amazon’s Alexa is open-source, which allows users to develop their own Alexa 
functions when they have an idea. Developers and programmers can use Amazon Web Service 
(AWS) to develop their own “skills.” It enables them to add their own functionalities by writing 
simple coding and then Amazon allows other users to download those skills. The skills created 
by those who use the hub everyday would be more helpful and thoughtful. It benefits Amazon by 
making the Alexa functions and features more complete and keeps their customers’ loyalty.  
 
Tang 21 
 Amazon has two approaches to make Alexa everywhere: sell cheap devices and 
cooperate with other companies. The price of Amazon Echo Dot is $50 and $180 for Alexa. 
Since the price level is lower than a high quality bluetooth speaker alone, many new adopters are 
interested in trying the new technology. Cooperating with other companies to make Alexa 
everywhere lets them keep their customers in their circle. Alexa Voice Service (AVS) is 
Amazon's intelligent cloud-based service. It allows developers to voice-enable any connected 
product with a microphone and speaker. Amazon is willing to add AVS to other devices, and 
other companies' devices and services are encouraged to connect to it.  
According to the article from Twice newspaper, Alexa adds voice control technology to 
LG's SmartThinQ Smart Home system, and SmartThinQ's remote sensors are also compatible 
with Amazon's automatic product-ordering dash technology. Imbued with AVS technology, the 
Echo-like SmartThinQ Bluetooth speaker/hub can now respond and control LG's varying 
SmartThinQ devices and appliances. For instance a hub can instruct  an LG appliance to 
function. A washing machine with the sensor attached not only can notify a user when a laundry 
cycle is complete, but also place an order at Amazon for more detergent​16​. 
Another co-operative venture is with a wearable device-making company Pebble 
according to eWEEK. The Pebble Core is a fitness tracker, music player, and GPS tracker. 
Consumers can use it without a smartphone, and it launched in January 2017. The Pebble Core 
allows users to employ voice control for a wide variety of tasks, from ordering pizza, to getting 
weather and traffic updates, or even to shop for products on Amazon.com. The Core is a small 
Android device with a button that can be hacked to perform just about any function for users. It 
also includes an SOS capability that can report the user's location in an emergency​17​. 
 
Tang 22 
 Smartphone company Huawei announced a smartphone with Amazon Alexa. 300 million 
smartphones will have machine learning ability, says Deloitte. In 2016, all the intelligence is in 
the cloud, but in 2017, faster processors will enable machine learning natively​18​.  
TechRepublic, at CES 2017, Ford announced that it would be bringing Amazon’s voice 
service Alexa to certain cars in 2017 and high speed Wi-Fi hotspot capability to some models in 
2018. Users will be able to start, stop, lock, unlock, and even check the fuel levels, mileage of 
the vehicle using Alexa. 
Amazon allows individual developers to create their own Alexa Skills to quickly 
complete many features, while Apple focuses more on control over their technology in order to 
assure security and ease-of-use. Security & privacy problem is a big concern which makes 
people hesitate, even stops some customers from adopting smart home solutions. Apple uses this 
concern to be its advantage. It has presented itself as a safer system and hardware manufacturer 
for years.The Apple iOS has achieved a great reputation as a stable and reliable operating 
system. Apple’s restricting third-party applications in the iOS app store prevents many unsafe 
attacks from happening. Apple also uses the same strategy in solving  the security and privacy 
problem when people use the home-control app-HomeKit. According to the article from 
Computerworld, Apple offers tough security and privacy protection with the HomeKit. It 
includes end-to-end encryption, secure chips and a range of other security measures​19​. To be 
Homekit-certified, gadget makers must include special chips to work with Apple’s system. Apple 
also requires developers to buy specific WiFi and Bluetooth networking chips. Apple might win 
more trust from the customers but this action increases the difficulties for vendors to develop 
home products for them. 
 
Tang 23 
According to Apple, there are 44 automobile manufacturers that have partnered with 
them in supporting Carplay for over 200 models. It enables people to take what they want to do 
on their iPhone and put them on their car’s built-in display while driving. 
Google has invested a huge amount of funds to develop their AI research. According to 
the news from Gamenguide, Google has invested $4.5 million with Montreal AI Research and 
hired Hugo Larochelle who was a top scientist at Twitter and part of the central Artificial 
Intelligence team. In 2014, Google acquired British company DeepMind Technologies for 
$600M​20​. 
Samsung is creating its new assistant Bixby uses technology developed by Viv. Viv was 
started by the creators of Siri back in 2012. Bixby is expected to be more intelligent than Apple 
Siri. According to the report from Cult of Mac, there are several reasons. Firstly, Bixby was built 
by AI experts and the machine learning ability is better than Siri because it can handle more 
complex queries. Secondly, it has the ability to control all native applications installed on the 
Galaxy S8. For instance, people are able to start and end workout tracking in S Health. Since 
Samsung does not restrict third-party developers like Apple does, Bixby has greater control over 
third-party apps as well. Thirdly, Bixby has the visual search and text recognition feature. Bixby 
will have the ability to analyze the image, identify objects and read text via the camera app. 
Fourthly, it has the feature that allows sending payments both between Bixby Pay users and 
third-party services like PayPal and Venmo​21​. 
While, Amazon focuses on using Alexa to drive commerce, and Google focuses on 
search, Microsoft wants Cortana to stand out from the crowd as a productivity tool. Like the 
Amazon Echo, Cortana will be able to control select smart home gear. Also, Microsoft is 
 
Tang 24 
spreading Cortana out from the Windows 10 PC to devices like Harman Kardon speaker and 
next generation cars from companies like Nissan.  
 
Tang 25 
5.0 Technology Components 
5.1 Network 
Homeowners need to build the network for their smart home devices. How to use Google 
Home to install the lights controlled by voice-activated hub in homes will be explained step by 
step.  
There are three parts to set up. The first part is connecting the network of the Philips Hue 
light bulbs, the second part is setting up Google Home, and third part is to connect the Google 
Home with Philips Hue bridge.  Google Home only cooperates with some home automation 
companies, so there are limited choices for each type of automated system a homeowner might 
want to install. 
 
Figure 5.1 Philip Hue Bridge 
To set up the Philips Hue Light, there are three steps. Step 1: Users need to screw the 
light bulbs into existing lamps and turn them on. Step 2: Set up the bridge. Plug in the bridge and 
it will automatically power up. Connect it to your Wi-Fi router using the network cable provided. 
 
Tang 26 
Wait for the three lights to come on as shown above. Step 3: Download the Philips Hue App to 
let the bridge detect and connect all the light bulbs available.  
Figure 5.2 Philip Hue App Interface 
After setting up all the three steps, users are able to control the lights through the App on 
the smartphone. Then, they need to set up the Google Home. First, plug in Google Home device 
to let it power on. Install the Google Home app and follow the steps to set up the device.  
 
Tang 27 
Figure 5.3 Google Home App Interface 
Choose the Wi-Fi network you want to connect to your Google Home. Make sure to 
connect your mobile device/tablet to the same Wi-Fi network that you intend to use to set up 
your Google Home device. If you're attempting to set up Google Home on 5GHz WiFi 
connection, your mobile device must support 5GHz. Since we need to connect Google Home 
with Philips Hue bridge, we’d better connect both of them under the same network so that they 
can be paired later. 
 
Tang 28 
 
Figure 5.4 Google Home App Interface 
The last step is to pair Google Home hub with Philips Hue bridge. Go to the Home 
Control and add devices via brands. Press the link button on the bridge when pairing. After 
pairing successfully, there is a list of the home devices that are connected to the Google Home. 
Users are able to control all the gadgets through voice and their mobile app. 
5.2 Cloud 
How does the cloud work? The Amazon Web Service (AWS),which is the cloud service 
hosted by Amazon, show you the specific process when Amazon Echo gets a command. 
 
Tang 29 
 
 
Figure 5.5 The Cloud Working Process of Amazon Echo 
Amazon hosts its own cloud service called the Amazon Alexa Service. So, how does the 
cloud actually work? Developers register a skill through amazon’s developer portal by defining 
metadata about their skills such as the name, logo, what keywords they want to activate , and 
what kind of queries to respond to. The metadata about that skill gets deployed onto Amazon 
Alexa Service. The costumed code that implements the skill is actually not deployed onto the 
Alexa Service itself but it is deployed separately. However, the developer puts a reference to 
where the implementation lives as part of the metadata they deployed onto the Amazon Alexa 
Service. This lets them update the implementation for their skill whenever they want to without 
having everything get into the hardware every time. It is really a great workflow since it 
essentially lets the developer and the consumer use the Echo device like a live report to test 
 
Tang 30 
changes with. The simplest way to write an implementation for a skill is using AWS Lambda 
function which is an AWS service that enables you to deploy functions without worrying about 
creating a runtime environment for the code executive. 
5.3 APIs 
Application Programming Interface(API) is a set of subroutine definitions, protocols, and 
tools for building application software. Alexa, the voice service that powers Amazon Echo, 
provides capabilities, or skills, that enable customers to interact with devices in a more intuitive 
way using their voice. Alexa skill APIs are designed to support the Amazon Voice Service. 
Three APIs which are Smart Home Skill API, List Skill API, and Flash Briefing Skill API will 
be explained. 
5.3.1 Smart Home Skill API 
 
 
 
 
Tang 31 
 
Figure 5.6 Amazon Echo Smart Home Skill API 
 
According to Amazon.com, the Smart Home Skill API is to allow the smart home to 
function easily. Users just need to give the Echo device their command and the home devices 
will be controlled through the hub.  
 
5.3.2 List Skill API 
The List Skill API ensures lists are updated across all channels. That means the API 
notifies developers when a customer tells Alexa to add something to their list or makes a change 
 
Tang 32 
to an existing item. Alexa understands the user’s speech request, converts it to a To-do or 
Shopping item, and sends the user a notification with the new item that was added to the list. The 
List Skill API also updates the lists for Alexa when users make changes to their lists online or in 
their mobile applications. 
 
5.3.3 Flash Briefing Skill API 
 
Figure 5.7 Amazon Echo Flash Briefing Skill API 
A Flash Briefing skill API provides a quick overview of news and other content such as 
comedy, interviews, and lists that a customer discovers and enables in the Skills section of the 
Alexa app. Customers receive their Flash Briefing by asking their Alexa-enabled device things 
like, “Alexa, give me my Flash Briefing” or “Alexa, tell me the news”. Alexa either reads text 
 
Tang 33 
content or plays audio content that is provided by each enabled skill. Typically a Flash Briefing 
becomes a part of a customer’s daily routine as they get ready for work or school, or wind down 
after their day​22​. 
There are thousands of Alexa Skills developed by programmers are available in the Alexa 
Skill Store. Different categories and customers rates provide the Alexa users with the most 
relevant and useful skills. 
 
Figure 5.8 Amazon Echo Alexa Skills 
  
 
Tang 34 
6.0 Results 
6.1 What is home automation? 
A smart home is not a fantasy anymore. It merges a family's lifestyle with the latest 
technology & energy management tools to simplify people's lives. Home automation allows 
homeowners to control their home either remotely or natively. Using a smartphone, tablet or 
voice-activated hub to integrate and control all the gadgets in the home brings a lot of 
convenience to people. The reason that people initially adopt smart home technology is mainly to 
save the energy and money. For instance, according to the data posted on the Nest smart 
thermostat, on average, the Nest Thermostat saved 10-12% on heating and 15% on cooling. 
Based on typical energy costs, they have estimated average savings of $131 to $145 a year. As a 
result, these home automation devices do help homeowners to save money l and bring them 
convenience.  
The core of the home automation system requires artificial intelligence in the home-hub, 
which understands people’s command and conducts their commands from them in the cloud. 
People did need to open up different apps to control the household appliances. They had one app 
to turn on the light and another app to adjust the heating. That was inconvenient when they tried 
to control their homes.  Instead, they wanted all the gadgets and appliances to be controlled and 
made to function at the same time. For now, all this can be done by directing the commands 
through  artificial intelligence  in the cloud.  To do that, all the gadgets and the control hub must 
be connected to Wi-Fi and they also need to be linked to each other in a local area network. 
 
Tang 35 
The simplest system requirements are the self contained units that allow direct connection 
to the internet. They can be from multiple vendors. The next level is where you have chosen a 
protocol and all of the devices share that protocol. Compare the protocols. 
The way introduced in the 5.0 part is to set up a voice-activated home automation system 
requires either a hub or a smartphone and some smart gadgets. The hub and the smartphone have 
to be connected to the Internet. All the smart gadgets need to be able to connect to the same 
network as the control hub. Both the voice-activated hub and the smart gadgets need to be under 
the same network so that they can talk to each other. 
 
 
  
 
Tang 36 
6.2 What would the future intelligent home automation system be? 
Nowadays, home automation is more about being able to control our house remotely and 
natively. It still needs human interaction most of the time. The intelligent home automation 
system will require very little human interaction and the devices will do things automatically 
according to the established patterns of use that customers follow. The home hub will  control all 
your smart devices. By simply talking to the devices or pointing to an object the devices will 
appear to function by themselves, controlled by the hub. Intelligent home automation is able to 
learn  the routines in people’s daily lives to get better at helping them. It will know when to start 
making coffee, when to turn on the lights, or heat water for a shower. It can have the cognitive 
ability to know the actions which save on electricity and heating bills with amazing precision.  
Current smart devices in the home have all the AI happening in the cloud. One 
predictable future trend of smart home automation is that the AI will not be totally in the cloud. 
Companies currently build the intelligence  in the cloud is because it is easy to control and 
manage and this helps them on costs. However, it also still leads to some stability and reliability 
problems.  
According to the table 2.1, the two most popular home-control hubs on the market are the 
Amazon Echo Alexa and Google Home. Many people are confused by which one they should 
buy since these two products have similar features and functionalities. Each has their own 
strengths and weaknesses.  Google Home offers more choice in appearance with two different 
materials and 7 different colors while Alexa Echo and Alexa Dot offer only two colors each. The 
price of Amazon Echo Alexa is $179.99 and the price of Amazon Alexa Dot is $49.99 while the 
 
Tang 37 
price of Google Home is $129. The price point for Google Home is at the middle of Amazon 
Alexa and Alexa Dot. Amazon Echo can be linked in by bluetooth, but Google Home has no 
bluetooth connection for smartphones. Answering questions is an important feature determine 
how intelligent the system is. Due to the powerful search engine and large search inventory, 
Google does a better job than Amazon Alexa on its answering question feature. Google Home is 
able to answer  follow-up questions, but Alexa cannot. Compared with the Google home, 
however, Amazon Alexa has more compatible partners which enables Amazon to keep its 
customers tightly in its marketing, sales and outreach circle. 
According to the report from ZDNet, in 2016, all the intelligence is in the cloud, but in 
2017, faster processors will enable machine learning natively​22​. Moreover, IBM has released 
tools for developers to plug its Watson AI into any device or thing. According to IBM, Project 
Intu is an experimental service that allows developers to quickly and seamlessly integrate various 
cognitive services, such as conversation and speech-to-text with the capabilities of different 
devices, spaces and physical objects​24​. Developers need to have a Bluemix cloud account to 
allow them to  build cognitive experiences for various platforms, including Raspberry PI, 
MacOS, Windows, and Linux. 
An example of a deep learning device currently on the market is the Nvidia baby monitor. 
Studies have shown that the increasing risks of a baby suddenly ding during sleep is caused by 
infants sleeping on their stomachs. There are a lot of expensive baby monitors which are capable 
of tracking the baby's breathing and pulse. However, parents want to catch problems before they 
happen. As a result, the deep learning baby monitor by Nvidia was trained to determine if the 
child is present in its crib initially to improve the recognition ability by feeding it thousands of 
 
Tang 38 
downloaded images. Then, it was trained to distinguish whether the baby was on its stomach or 
not and other important information  such as asleep, awake, crying or face covered. Parents then 
get alerts when there is an emergency situation. The device accuracy increases as parents allow 
deep learning on their devices and surveillance of their baby individually. Nvidia also works 
hard on advanced features such as facial emotion recognition, different types of crying and spit 
up​25​. 
As a result, it is possible that, in the near future, AI will be built into the devices instead 
of the cloud. However, the retail price of a device that has real AI built-in is much higher than 
the price of the “dumb” devices running AI in the cloud that are on the market right now.  
Regarding a report from PCWorld magazine, the basic functionality Watson would like 
to work on is making devices talk to each other. For example, a washing machine could tell the 
dryer which program it should use for the cloth just washed or tell its owner when to order 
detergent. “Project Intu is working with appliance makers Whirlpool, Panasonic, Bragi, and 
Nokia to demonstrate how Watson adds its cognitive computing capabilities to their products​26​. It 
appears that another possibility in the future, is that home appliances will talk to each other and 
do things according to the pattern they learned from the households pattern of use.  
Since Google and Samsung has developed the ability of visual search which can identify 
objects through their cameras, then the home hub probably could integrate with the camera. For 
example, Google Home could have a camera built on the device which can identify who is in the 
front the camera.  
  
 
Tang 39 
6.3 What do companies need to do if they want to stand out among their rivals? 
According to the market analysis from Statista, the projected annual growth rate of smart 
home automation is 38% during 6-year period​27​. Since the market is growing rapidly, there are 
many companies that are interested in jumping in to make money. However, many famous 
companies, such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Apple, Intel Samsung, and Facebook have all 
been making contributions and developing their AI for years. The intense competition increase 
the difficulties for any company to win the battle or for a new company to enter the competition.  
There are three suggestions based on the analysis of the ecosystem and the strategies big 
companies have. Firstly, if the companies do not want to be squeezed out automatically either on 
the smart home market or the technological devices market, they need to take action as early as 
possible.  
Secondly, companies do not have to copy other companies’ steps totally. For example, 
Apple has been expected to launch their own home hub. But, Time.com notes, that it appears 
Apple is more interested in turning Siri into an omnipresent AI assistant across many devices, 
rather than designing a single device specifically to serve as a Siri machine. Apple made the 
decision not follow in Amazon’s footsteps to give themselves  a different and more 
advantageous position over its rivals​28​. There are 43.5% of U.S. citizens using iPhones in 2016 
according the data from EMarketer​29​. Those who use the Apple iOS system on their mobile 
phone tend to choose the same system in their home to make all the devices connected. As a 
result, it looks like Apple is making a smart decision. 
 
Tang 40 
Thirdly, companies need to partner with a wide variety of companies to build their own 
ecosystem and keep the customers in their circle. Amazon Alexa, Apple CarPlay and Android 
Auto are embedded into different automobile manufacturers. Those companies all want to see 
their customers  use the same operating systems as their smartphone so that they don’t lose 
customers. 
 
  
 
Tang 41 
7.0 Conclusions 
Having the lamp turn on at sunset, or turning the lamp off remotely from bed are things a 
smart home can easily do. Artificial intelligence in the home helps people control and manage 
their homes with more efficiency. The cloud-connected home hub or the home app on the 
smartphone plays a central role in the home automation system. Artificial intelligence runs the 
hub or the app. A stand-alone home hub and the apps to control all the devices via voice are all 
connected under the same network, and the hub or smartphone must be connected to the Internet. 
Individual devices cannot talk to each other and function unless they are in the same local 
network and central home-control hub or smartphone apps must be connected to Wi-Fi because 
they work in the cloud.  
There are several objectives of this research paper. Consumers need to know background 
and current comparison information on home automation before they make solid purchase 
decisions. Companies in the marketplace need to be clear about the general condition of the 
market, the position where they are in the market, the advantages they have compared with its 
rivals, and the right direction to go before they can move forward. 
Many consumers have been slowed in buying home automation systems by confusions 
and concerns. Discussion on the background and capabilities of home automation helps 
consumers know the needed information about home automation. Listing all the capabilities of 
the two main voice-controlled hub systems on the market helps explain the features and 
functions of Amazon Echo Alexa and Google Home. Explaining the requirements of setting up a 
smart home minimizes their concern that the difficulty of installing the smart home is beyond 
 
Tang 42 
their capabilities. This information makes it easier for consumers to carry out their purchase 
decision if they are interested in adopting a home-automation system in their house. 
 For companies, looking into the general ecosystem around home automation helps them 
to be clear about the general condition of the market. Having discussions on the strategies and 
strengths that rivals have helps them to figure out their current position in the market and the 
advantages they have compared  to their rivals. Examining current technology, predicting  the 
future of intelligent home automation based on current available but as yet unused technology, 
and suggesting strategies based on those technologies can help companies find productive 
directions in which to to move forward.  
The requirements of a basic home automation system is a router which can be connected 
to the WiFi, a controlled-home smart device (either a voice-activated home hub, or a 
smartphone), a starter kit which consists of sensors and the bridge. For example, when letting the 
voice-control home hub to turn on the light, a home hub, a lamp, smart light bulbs, a bridge 
controlling the light bulbs, a smartphone, and a router are required. 
 Comparing the two popular home-control hub one the market, which are Amazon Echo 
Alexa and Google Home, they have similar features and functionalities in general. However, 
they still have some differences. Google Home offers more appearances for people to choose 
from than Amazon Echo. The price level of Google Home is at the middle of Amazon Echo 
Alexa and Dot. Amazon Echo could be linked in by bluetooth for streaming, but Google Home 
cannot. Google did better job than Amazon Alexa on answering question feature due to its 
outstanding search engine. Google Home is able to answer the follow-up questions, but Alexa 
 
Tang 43 
cannot. Amazon Alexa has more compatible partners which enables Amazon keep customers in 
the circle tightly. 
Future intelligent home should require minimum human interaction and the devices will 
do things for us automatically when they start learning the patterns from us. Based on the current 
market conditions and the actions each big companies take. Three predictions have been made. 
Firstly, the intelligence does not have to be in the cloud totally. AI will be embedded in or built 
into the devices instead of in the cloud. Secondly, the home appliances will talk to each other and 
give command from one to another automatically. For example, the washing machine tells the 
dryer which program it should use for the cloth just washed or tell its owner when to order 
detergent. Thirdly,the home hub probably could integrate with the camera. For example, Google 
Home could have a camera built on the device which can identify who is in the front the camera.  
The home automation market is a growing market and it has huge potential. However, the 
developed products on the market are still at the beginning stage. Many companies want to jump 
in and make money. However, the intense competition increases the difficulties. Companies all 
have their strengths and strategies. There are three suggestions for those companies. Firstly, 
companies need to take action as early as possible if they are interested in entering the market. 
Secondly, companies do not have to copy others step, they can have their own approach. Thirdly, 
companies need to partner with a variety of companies to build their own ecosystem and keep the 
customers in their circle.  
There are some limitations of this paper. Firstly, since the technology is growing so fast, 
it may overestimate or underestimate technology trends. Secondly, the business suggestions tend 
 
Tang 44 
to focus more on the medium to large size companies. For small companies, it might not be as 
valuable. Thirdly, the information might not be up to date because of the rapid growth of 
technology.  
 
Tang 45 
8.0 Future Research 
When home automation makes our home more intelligent, people benefit for managing 
their home easier and saving the electricity and heating bills. However, people cannot stand 
worrying about  the side effect, which is the security problem.  
According to the research of Home Automation Security System and 
Method,“Unfortunately, while current home automation systems may turn off, turn on, or adjust 
the setting of a device such systems have not generally been able to lock out or partially restrict 
access to the device. Usually the controller can be manually overridden by a user at the physical 
location of the device. Often the device can be separated from the home automation controller 
and operated independently from the home automation system. Thus, a home automation system 
is effective at controlling devices, but not effective at restricting access to the home automation 
devices​30​.” It is possible that someone can hack into your home automation system and open 
your door locks. 
As a result, future research needs to look at how to make the home automation system 
much more secure. It has already provided convenience to people, it now needs to provide 
reliable security. The related field would be IoT, local area network, and Zigbee which is the 
security standard used in the home automation field.  
 
  
 
Tang 46 
Works Cited 
 
[1] Reportlinker. "Smart Homes and Home Automation 4th Edition." PR Newswire: News 
Distribution, Targeting and Monitoring. December 01, 2016. Accessed March 03, 2017. 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/smart-homes-and-home-automation-4th-edition-3003
72021.html​. 
 
[2] McCarthy, John. "WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE?" WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE? Stanford University, 12 Nov. 2007. Web. 23 Jan. 
2017. 
 
[3] IoT Evolution. “The History of Smart Homes.” Last modified April 22, 2014. 
http://www.iotevolutionworld.com/m2m/articles/376816-history-smart-homes.htm​. 
 
[4] Sutherland, Jay. 1994. "Electronic Computer for Home Operation (ECHO): The first home 
computer." IEEE Annals Of The History Of Computing 16, no. 3: 59. Academic Search Premier, 
EBSCOhost (accessed October 22, 2016). 
 
[5] The World of Software Development. “If You Can't Stand the Coding, Stay Out of the 
Kitchen: Three Chapters in the History of Home Automation.” Last modified August 12, 2000. 
 
Tang 47 
http://www.drdobbs.com/architecture-and-design/if-you-cant-stand-the-coding-stay-out-of/18440
4040​. 
 
[6] Mashable. “Home Smart Home: A History of Connected Household Tech.” Last modified 
2016. ​http://mashable.com/2015/01/08/smart-home-tech-ces/#Jh0AcnQTEkqA​. 
 
[7] Nest. “Nest Learning Thermostat.” Last modified 2016. 
https://store.nest.com/product/thermostat?selectedVariantId=T3007ES. 
 
[8] Consumer Technology Association. CEA and Parks Associates Find Twenty Percent of U.S. 
Broadband Households To Acquire One or More Smart Home Devices Within the Next Year. 
Last modified October 16, 2014. 
https://www.cta.tech/News/PressReleases/2014/October/CEA-and-Parks-AssociatesFind-Twenty
-Percent-of-U.aspx​. 
 
[9] PR Newswire World Intelligent Virtual Assistant Market - BFSI is the Highest 
Revenue-Generating Segment, Accounting for 39.9% Share. Last modified Feb 18, 2016. 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/worldintelligent-virtual-assistant-market----bfsi-is-th
ehighest-revenue-generating-segment-accountingfor-399-share-300222450.html 
 
 
Tang 48 
[10] ​PR Newswire World Intelligent Virtual Assistant Market - BFSI is the Highest 
Revenue-Generating Segment, Accounting for 39.9% Share. Last modified Feb 18, 2016. 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/worldintelligent-virtual-assistant-market----bfsi-is-th
ehighest-revenue-generating-segment-accountingfor-399-share-300222450.html 
 
[11] ​Gassée, Jean-Louis. "The Second Largest Part of Apple’s Revenue Now Comes from 
Something Called Services." Quartz. May 02, 2016. Accessed March 15, 2017. 
https://qz.com/674049/the-second-largest-part-of-apples-revenue-now-comes-from-something-ca
lled-services/. 
 
[12] Lovejoy, Ben. "The Average US IPhone User Spent $40 on Apps Last Year, Downloaded 
33 Apps." 9to5Mac. February 22, 2017. Accessed February 25, 2017. doi:CNet. 
 
[13] "Smart Home Appeal in Asia: China Leads over South Korea and Japan." GfK Global. 
January 13, 2017. Accessed March 15, 2017. 
http://www.gfk.com/insights/press-release/smart-home-appeal-in-asia/. 
 
[14] "How Voice Technology Is Transforming Computing." The Economist. January 07, 2017. 
Accessed March 15, 2017. 
http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21713836-casting-magic-spell-it-lets-people-control-w
orld-through-words-alone-how-voice. 
 
 
Tang 49 
[15] Weinberger, Matt. "Why Amazon's Echo Is Totally Dominating." Business Insider. January 
14, 2017. Accessed February 19, 2017. 
http://www.businessinsider.com/amazon-echo-google-home-microsoft-cortana-apple-siri-2017-1
. 
 
[16] Wolpin, Stewart. "Alexa Adds Voice Control To LG's SmartThinQ Smart Home; Also 
Bows Smart Fridge." Twice. September 26, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017. 
http://www.twice.com/alexa-adds-voice-control-lgs-smartthinq-smart-home-also-bows-smart-fri
dge/62874​. 
 
[17] Goode, Lauren. "Fitbit Formally Announces That It Is Buying Smartwatch Maker Pebble." 
The Verge. December 07, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017. 
http://www.theverge.com/2016/12/7/13867158/fitbit-buys-pebble-smartwatch-acquisition-deal​. 
 
[18] Dignan, Larry. "300 Million Smartphones Will Have Machine Learning Ability, Says 
Deloitte." ZDNet. January 12, 2017. Accessed March 15, 2017. 
http://www.zdnet.com/article/300-million-smartphones-will-have-machine-learning-ability-says-
deloitte/. 
 
[19] Evans, Jonny. "DDoS Attack: Apple's HomeKit for a Safer Smarthome." Computerworld. 
October 24, 2016. Accessed February 25, 2017. 
 
Tang 50 
http://www.computerworld.com/article/3134042/apple-ios/ddos-attack-apple-s-homekit-for-a-saf
er-smarthome.html​. 
 
[20] Joseph, LJ. "Google Artificial Intelligence Latest News & Update: $4.5 Million Funded To 
Montreal AI Research; Twitter Top Scientist Hugo Larochelle Hired?" Gamenguide. November 
22, 2016. Accessed February 19, 2017. 
http://www.gamenguide.com/articles/71731/20161122/google-artificial-intelligence-latest-news-
update-4-5-million-funded-to-montreal-ai-research-twitter-top-scientist-hugo-larochelle-hired-by
-google.htm​. 
 
[21] Bell, Killian. "How Samsung Plans to Blow Siri out of the Water." Cult of Mac. January 19, 
2017. Accessed February 25, 2017. 
http://www.cultofmac.com/463184/how-samsung-plans-to-blow-siri-out-of-the-water/​. 
 
[22] "Alexa Skills Kit." Alexa Skills Kit. Accessed March 15, 2017. 
https://developer.amazon.com/alexa-skills-kit. 
 
[23] Tung, Liam. "IBM's Watson AI Could Soon Be in Devices from PCs to Robots, Thanks to 
Project Intu." ZDNet. November 10, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017. 
http://www.zdnet.com/article/ibms-watson-ai-could-soon-be-in-devices-from-pcs-to-robots-than
ks-to-project-intu/​. 
 
 
Tang 51 
[24] "Watson Developer Cloud." Project Intu | IBM Watson Developer Cloud. 2017. Accessed 
January 23, 2017. ​http://www.ibm.com/watson/developercloud/project-intu.html#​. 
 
[25] Albanese, Ali. "BabbyCam Baby Monitor Uses Deep Learning to Keep Babies Safe." The 
Official NVIDIA Blog. October 28, 2016. Accessed January 23, 2017. 
https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2016/10/30/babbycam-baby-monitor-deep-learning/​. 
 
[26] Sayer, Peter. "IBM's Watson Looks for a Role in the Home." PCWorld. September 03, 
2016. Accessed January 23, 2017. 
http://www.pcworld.com/article/3115858/ibms-watson-looks-for-a-role-in-the-home.html​https://
www.wired.com/2016/11/fb-3/​. 
 
[27] "Home Automation - United States | Statista Market Forecast." Statista. Accessed March 15, 
2017. https://www.statista.com/outlook/280/109/home-automation/united-states. 
 
[28] Bajarin, Tim. "Apple: Why It's Not Building An Amazon Echo Rival." Time. February 17, 
2017. Accessed February 26, 2017. 
http://time.com/4674522/apple-echo-amazon-siri-iphone-airpods/​. 
 
[29] EMarketer. "US IPhones Users as Share of Smartphone Users 2014-2016 | Statistic." 
Statista. February 2016. Accessed February 26, 2017. 
 
Tang 52 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/236550/percentage-of-us-population-that-own-a-android-smar
tphone/​. 
 
[30] Matsuura, Craig, Greg Cooper, Thomas Leishman, and Control4 Corporation. "Patent 
US20100321151 - Home Automation Security System and Method." Google Books. April 04, 
2008. Accessed February 26, 2017. ​http://www.google.com/patents/US20100321151​. 
 

