Final Performance Report 
NONLINEAR CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Grant   AFOSR#-FA9550-07-I-0214 
For the period 
March 15,2007 to June 30, 2009 
Submitted by 
Christopher I. Byrnes, Principal Investigator 
Alberto Isidori, Co-Principal Investigator 
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering 
Washington University, St. Louis 
;ioUo°i YW> 
CONTENTS 
I EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  1 
II RESEARCH TASKS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS     5 
2.1 Output regulation for lumped nonlinear systems  5 
2.2 Nonlinear oscillations  7 
2.3 Asymptotic proxies and moment problems for signals, systems and 
control    8 
2.4 Sensitivity, Bifurcation and Uniqueness for Hydrodynamic Systems   . . 10 
2.5 Geometric Output Regulation for Nonlinear Distributed Parameter 
Systems  13 
2.6 Regulation Methods Using Zero Dynamics Inverse Design  19 
IV PERSONNEL LNFORMATION  28 
4.1 Personnel  28 
4.2 Honors & Awards  28 
V TRANSITIONS AND DISCOVERIES  31 
5.1 AFRL Point of Contact  31 
5.2 New Discoveries  31 
VI PUBLICATIONS  32 
CHAPTER 1 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The principal goal of this research program was to develop a systematic methodology for the 
design of feedback control schemes capable of shaping the response of complex dynamical sys- 
tems. A continuation of an ongoing research effort, the specific research program we proposed 
was aimed at the development of a systematic control methodology for lumped and distributed 
parameter systems, applicable to both the equilibrium and the nonequilibrium cases. The typical 
design objectives involve designing feedback schemes which achieve one or more of the follow- 
ing: asymptotic tracking, an appropriate form of internal stabilization, and asymptotic disturbance 
rejection. 
For linear and nonlinear systems, stability has been classically defined as closed-loop exponen- 
tial stability of an equilibrium. In the equilibrium case, when taken together these form the control 
task classically known as the servomechanism or output regulation problem, a problem which is 
one of the defining problems of classical automatic control. For linear multivariable systems this 
problem was addressed in very elegant geometric terms by Davison, Francis. Wonham [26, 28] and 
others. In particular, one of the most relevant contributions of [28] was a clear delineation of what 
is known as internal, model principle, i.e. the fact that the output regulation property is insensitive 
to plant parameter variations "only if the controller utilizes feedback of the regulated variable, and 
incorporates in the feedback path a suitably reduplicated model of the dynamic structnre of the 
exogenous signals which the regulator is required to process." Conversely, in a stable-closed loop 
system, if the controller utilizes feedback of the regulated variable and incorporates an internal 
model of the exogenous signals, the output regulation property is insensitive to plant parameter 
variations. 
There is now an extensive literature on output regulation for nonlinear control systems. As 
we describe, part of our ongoing research effort is the design of internal models, using immersion 
techniques, for attenuating disturbances and tracking reference trajectories for nonlinear control 
systems. This effort was transitioned by Boeing to the development of improved (e.g., lower cost, 
lower weight) actuators for UCAV's. a transition which has been tested with success using their 
1 
X-45A simulator. 
In general, there are important existing and emerging DOD research and development pro- 
grams which will require nonequilibrium control methodologies. While flight control in a trim 
condition is a typical problem of output regulation near an equilibrium setting, tailless or nearly 
tailless aircraft, such as UCAV's, will also have multiple nonlinear axes and a smaller domain of 
stability than conventional aircraft, involving nonlinear trajectories which cannot be regarded as 
small perturbations of an asymptotically stable equilibrium. Moreover, these aircraft enjoy less 
drag and more agility, and require less control to produce significant nonlinear excursions. Taking 
advantage of these nonequilibrium nonlinearities in tailless aircraft also promises to impact afford- 
ability by enabling the use of smaller, low cost actuators to enhance agility and maneuverability. 
As another motivation, the design of aircraft capable of longer strike capabilities has become 
more important as access to a worldwide network of air bases diminishes,. These aircraft will 
typically need to weigh less and have increased agility. Both of these desirable characteristics 
will need controller designs which are able to tolerate, or even incorporate, significant nonlinear 
excursions. As another example, the JDAM kit, which can convert conventional missiles into 
smart weapons, induces a periodic, spinning, motion during the end game in order to improve 
accuracy as well as to acquire additional information about the target. Underscoring the nonlinear, 
nonequilibrium nature of this problem is the very existence of (locally) isolated, stable periodic 
orbits, a nonlinear phenomenon which has no linear counterpart. Such examples also point to an 
important feature of nonequilbrium controller design which is desirable for existing and emerging 
DoD technologies, the potential to take advantage of - rather than to attenuate - nonlinear effects. 
Of course, one of the essential features of being able to shape the steady-state response of a 
nonlinear feedback system is to clearly delineate what the steady-state response of a control sys- 
tem is. To this end, we proposed developing this concept of steady-state response for input-output 
feedback systems that typically arise in in problems of non-equilibrium nonlinear feedback sys- 
tems. After considerable research, we have accomplished this research task, using the notion of the 
limit set of a set, rather than the more customary concept of the limit set of a point, pioneered by 
G. D. Birkhoff. This broader concept was used by Ladyzhenskaya in her study of the two ditnen- 
sional Navier-Stokes equation and by Hale and Sell in their study of general infinite dimensional 
dynamical systems. 
As discussed above, another key to output regulation is the design and use of internal models 
to yield asymptotic proxies for state feedback laws which would be classically designed using 
knowledge of states and uncertain parameters, but which can, in fact, be unobservable from the 
measured output. Our current design philosophy is ihe parallel design of two separate controllers. 
The first controller, commonly referred to as the internal model, generates an asymptotic proxy for 
the input which renders invariant a set on which the error variables are zero. Under an appropriate 
system invertibility hypothesis, this input is unique and is typically a function of slate variables 
and uncertain parameters. For this reason, the internal model contains an immersed copy of the 
exosystem and a set of uncertain parameters but is itself detectable using a proxy for the desired 
input as the output of the internal model. In the classical local case, we have shown that the second 
system locally exponentially stabilizes the interconnection of the plant and the first controller. In 
the nonequilibrium case, it renders the invariant set attractive. 
The other focus of our proposed research program focused on the problem of output regulation 
for linear and nonlinear distributed parameter systems. The incorporation of linear and nonlin- 
ear distributed parameter effects also presents an opportunity in the control of complex dynamical 
systems. Indeed, flow control provides examples of the potential impact of nonlinear control of 
distributed parameter systems involving both equilibrium and nonequilibrium cases. For example, 
active control of flutter and of buffeting would increase the life-cycle of aircraft through suppress- 
ing buffet loads on fighter aircraft with vertical tails as well as on the tails of commercial and 
transport aircraft. Our research efforts focused on developing a systematic design methodology 
for the output regulation of linear parabolic boundary control systems in n spatial dimensions. For 
set-point control problems for lumped systems or for distributed parameter systems evolving in 
one spatial dimension, the exosystem generating constant signals is finite dimensional. In higher 
spatial dimensions, however, it often will need to be infinite dimensional and we needed to begin 
with an extension of the more classical cases to this setting. We proposed two approaches to this 
research task. The first was based on the geometric theory of the regulator equations, and has been 
successfully researched for bounded input and output operators in the literature. In this report, we 
also describe our research in the unbounded case. The second approach is based on compensator 
design using zero dynamics, ultimately leading to an infinite dimensional compensator. 
Another of our longer term goals was the development of a theory of nonlinear output regula- 
tion as parallel as possible to the theory we envision for linear problems. While output regulation 
is an asymptotic theory and the long time existence of solutions to open-loop nonlinear distributed 
parameter systems remains extremely challenging, we have been successful in establishing long 
time existence and asymptotic behavior for the control of certain examples or system classes us- 
ing particular feedback design methods ([20, 21, 16, 17, 19, 18]). Still, the control of nonlinear 
distributed parameter systems is sufficiently difficult that our proposed research efforts have fo- 
cused on local results for output regulation with respect to signals and disturbances generated by- 
finite-dimensional exogeneous systems, where techniques such as center manifold methods can 
yield some powerful insights. We emphasize the fact that these local techniques are not simply an 
appeal to linearization. Even in the lumped nonlinear case, elementary examples show that a so- 
lution to the problem of output regulation for the linearization does not solve the output regulation 
problem for the nonlinear problem. 
CHAPTER II 
RESEARCH TASKS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
2.1    Output regulation for lumped nonlinear systems 
An essential aspect of output regulation, in both the equilibrium and the nonequilibrium cases. 
is the development of a model for a system which generates the disturbances to be rejected or the 
signals to be tracked. The generators of these two types of signals can be connected in parallel, 
so that we typically assume there is one exogenous signal generator. One of our objectives was 
to investigate the properties of exogenous signal generators, as well as to delineate the properties 
of bounded signals which can be generated by exogenous systems with an appropriate form of 
stability. The goais of this research thrust were described in the body of our proposal. In the 
classical equilibrium approach to output regulation, in order to produce periodic exogenous signals 
one is forced into the unecessary compromise of using an exosystem with an equilibirium, such as 
the harmonic oscillator. As an extreme example, in the nonlinear case, every perioidic singal, with 
a given period, is some nonlinear output of the one-dimensional system, f = 1. In our research we 
have considerably enhanced classical output regulation theory by including nonlinear exosystems 
with no equilibria. Another of our objectives was to develop the foundations for a non-equilibrium 
theory of nonlinear output regulation, giving a more general (non-equilibrium) definition of the 
problem. 
Of course, one of the essential features of being able to shape the steady-state response of a 
nonlinear feedbaclc system is to clearly delineate what the steady-state response of a control system 
is. After considerable research, we have accomplished this research task, using the notion of an 
u-'-limit set of a set, rather than the more customary concept of an c^-limit set of a point, pioneered 
by G. D. Birkhoff. This hroader concept was used by Ladyzhenskaya in her study of the two 
dimensional Navier-Stokes equation and by Hale and Sell in their study of general infinite dimen- 
sional dynamical systems. In [7], we developed this concept for input-output feedback systems 
that typically arise in in problems of non-equilibrium nonlinear feedback systems. 
This recent advance is significant and clarifies and extends our previous research on a non- 
equilibrium theory of nonlinear output regulation. In particular, it allows for a more general (non- 
equilibrium) definition of the problem, deriving necessary conditions, and, using these necessary 
conditions, we present a set of sufficient conditions and a design methodology for the solution 
of the problem in question. Our analysis leads to a non-equilibrium enhancement of the internal 
model principle, which can be expressed as a relationships between two uniformly stable attractors. 
The first is an attractor for the combined dynamics of the exogenous signal generator and the so- 
called zero-dynamics of the plant to be controlled, intrinsic to the formulation of the problem. The 
second is the uniformly stable attraetor for the dynamics of the closed-loop system determined 
by the controller which solves the problem of output regulation, under hypotheses which are non- 
equilibrium enhancements of those familiar from the equilibrium case. This enhancement of the 
internal model principle asserts, roughly speaking, that any controller solving the problem of output 
regulation has to contain a copy of an attraetor which may combine the dynamics of the exogenous 
system with certain nontrivial steady-state motions occurring in the plant to be controlled. In the 
simple case in which there is only one (and trivial) such steady-state motions, and the analysis is 
only local, the theory we develop reduces to the one presented in our earlier work. On the other 
hand, the more general approach discussed here makes it possible to solve problems to which none 
of the existing design methods for output regulation is applicable. 
The foundations of this theory were originally presented in [24], which relied heavily on [33] 
in a preliminary preprint form. For the sake of completeness we shall review the basic assumptions 
considered in this work. Rather than assuming that the zero-dynamics of the controlled plant have 
a globally asymptotically stable equilibrium, this assumption is replaced with the (substantially 
weaker) hypothesis that the zero dynamics of the plant "augmented by the exsosystem" have a 
compact attractor. In this work, though, we have retained the (rather strong) assumption, itself also 
common to ail earlier literature, that the set of all "feedforward inputs capable of securing perfect 
tracking" is a subset of the set of solutions of a suitable linear differential equation (assumption 
of "immersion" into a linear system). In the subsequent paper [25] we showed that, within the 
new framework, the assumption of linearity can also be weakened and replaced by the assumption 
that the set in question is a a subset of the set of solutions of a suitable nonlinear differential 
equation (assumption of "immersion" into a nonlinear system). These results were subsequently 
generalized to the ease of a system having higher relative degree, by showing how output regulation 
can he achieved by means of a (dynamic) pure error feedback. 
2.2    Nonlinear oscillations 
The most classical example of a nonequilibrium attractor for a nonlinear dynamical system is 
a periodic orbit. In two dimensions. Poincare-Bendixson Theory gives a complete criterion for 
the existence of periodic orbits for differential equations leaving a bounded domain invariant and 
having no equilibria in the domain. The only bounded planar domain with these properties is 
an annulus. It has long been a goal in the theory of dynamical systems and ordinary differential 
equations to extend some versions of Poincar6-Bendixson Theory to higher dimensions, and some 
progress has been made some on replicating this theory, under fairly strong hypotheses. Most 
of the research starts with a region, generalizing the two dimensional annulus, that is positively 
invariant. More explicitly, suppose M C R3 is a closed bounded domain with smooth boundary 
which is diffeomorphic to B"~l x 51. We say that M, which is shaped like a higher dimensional 
"doughnut," is a solid n-torus. For example, it is a famous question of Smale [ II ] as to whether 
every nowhere zero vector field that points inward on the boundary of a solid three torus must have 
a periodic orbit. If this had turned out to be true, it would have been a neat generalization of an 
essential part of the Poincare-Bendixson theory to three dimensions. Moreover, in three and higher 
dimensions, there are a lot of examples of nonlinear systems with this property arising in biology, 
chemistry, physics and engineering [8J. As it turns out, the answer to Smale's question is no. 
Nonetheless, in [2] we have developed a positive answer to a more restricted set of such prob- 
lems by incorporating some ideas similar to those in Lyapunov theory, but adapted for the ease of 
periodic orbits rather than for equilibria. In some more detail, an angular ODe-form on a bounded 
domain D for a vector field X in Vect(RD) is a closed differential one-form u = J2i=-.\ aidXi such 
that 
n 
where X», for i — 1,..., n are the components of tbe vector field X. 
In [2] we have proved the following result. 
Theorem 2.1. Suppose X G VectfR") defines a differential equation x — f{x) on Mn which 
leaves a solid torus M positively invariant. If X has an angular one-form, then X has a periodic 
solution. 
Moreover, in [2] we have proved that the conditions hypothesized in this theorem are necessary 
conditions for the existence of a locally asympotically periodic orbit for a smooth vector field X 
on any smooth manifold, including Rn. 
Our most recent research directions include the continuing development of a more general, 
user-friendly criterion [IJ based on the results of 12] as well as its applications to specific dif- 
ferential equations, such as those describing biological and electronic systems. In particular, we 
are developing a general criterion that applies to specific differential equations, such as those de- 
scribing a phase-locked loop circuit and mathematical models of biological systems, such as the 
May-Leonard equations describing the population dynamics of three competing species with im- 
migration into the population pool. 
2.3    Asymptotic proxies and moment problems for signals, systems and control 
In this project, we also proposed to research a general concept embodying the behavior of 
asymptotic proxies for a system state or for state feedback laws. This was based on a serendipitous 
discovery we have made as we tried to glean some insight about asymptotic proxies by analyzing 
the dynamics of a fast filtering algorithm, viewed as a nonlinear, discrete-time dynamical system 
on the space of positive real transfer functions. Our original interest in these dynamics stemmed 
from the asymptotic evolution of proxies for the Kaiman gain, but the analysis of the phase portrait 
also contributed to the solution of two long-outstanding problems in interpolation theory. 
The first resulted in a new design methodology for speech analysis and synthesis, including 
speaker recognition as a biometric and a new technique for high-resolution spectral estimation. 
Four U.S. Patents have now been granted for these new design methodologies. The development 
of this phase portrait also contributed to the solution of the rational Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation 
problem with degree constraints, leading to a new methodology for shaping the response of robust 
control systems. Indeed, many robust control problems, including the standard Hx problem, can 
be reduced to Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation. This approach yields a systems theoretic parame- 
terization, in the discrete-time case, of all solutions not exceeding the degree of the widely used 
central solution. In addition, we have shown that each such solution is the unique minimum of a 
convex, mixed entropy integral that can be derived as the primitive of a closed one-form which is 
canonically associated to the generalized moment formulation of the Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation 
8 
problem. The moment problem as formulated by Krein and Nudel'man is a beautiful generaliza- 
tion of several important classical moment problems, including the power moment; problem, the 
trigonometric moment problem and the moment problem arising in Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation. 
However, the importance of rational functions in systems and control and other engineering ap- 
plications imposes certain complexity constraints. In [3, 5, 4] we present a new formulation of 
the moment problem which respects these constraints. While this version of the problem is de- 
cidedly nonlinear, the basic tools still rely on convexity. We give a complete parameterization of 
all solutions. This can be seen as a global analysis approach, where one studies an entire class 
of solutions as a whole. We then show that each solution in this class can be obtained by mini- 
mizing a strictly convex nonlinear functional. Thus the methodology employed is a combination 
of nonlinear analysis, geometry and optimization. Finally, we apply these results to interpolation 
problems of the Carathodory and of the Nevanlinna-Pick type, arising in signal processing and con- 
trol theory, where we consider smooth bijective transformations from spaces of tuning parameters 
to entire classes of solutions. 
Prediction-error methods for ARMA modeling play a major role in system identification, but 
in general they lead to nonconvex optimization problems for which global convergence is not guar- 
anteed. In fact, although these algorithms are computationally simple and quite reliable, there is so 
far no theoretically satisfactory algorithm for ARMA parameter estimation. In [ 10] we identify cer- 
tain classes of ARMA models in which prediction error minimization leads to convex optimization. 
It is known that model approximation via prediction error identification leads to an optimization 
problem that is related to the minimization of the Kullback-Leibler divergence criterion. This, in 
tum, leads naturally to our theory of analytic interpolation and generalized moment problems with 
complexity constraints. 
In [C. I. Byrnes, P. Enqvist, and A. Lindquist, Identifiability and well-posed ness of shaping- 
filler parameierizations: A global analysis approach, SIAM J. Control and Optimization, 41 (2002), 
23-59] we proved that any stochastic process of degree n is characterized by its first n + 1 eovari- 
ance coefficients together with its first n cepslral coefficients. This paper also contains a solution 
of the corresponding inverse problem. In [9] we provide an approximation-theoretic justification 
of this solution. More precisely, we approximate any given spectral density with a rational one 
having a prescribed number of poles and zeros (n poles and m zeros inside the unit disc and their 
conjugates), as a model-marching problem of a type previously considered by other authors in the 
context of least-squares estimation. Here we instead utilize the Kullback-Leibler divergence as a 
distance measure. The stationarity condition for optimality requires that the approximant matches 
n + 1 covariance moments of the given power spectrum and m cepstral moments of the corre- 
sponding logarithm, although the latter with possible slack. 
Over the past three decades there has been interest in using Pade approximants K with n = 
deg(K) < deg(G) = N as reduced-order models for the transfer function G of a linear system. 
The attractive feature of this approach is that by matching the moments of G we can reproduce the 
steady-state behavior of G by the steady-state behavior of K, for certain classes of inputs. Indeed, in 
[6] we illustrate this by finding a first-order model matching a fixed set of moments for G, the causal 
inverse of a heat equation. A key feature of this example is that the heat equation is a minimum 
phase system, so that its inverse system has a stable transfer function G and that K can also be 
chosen to be stable. On the other hand, elementary examples show that both stability and instability 
can occur in reduced order models of a stable system obtained by matching moments using Pade 
approximants and, in the absence of stability, it does not make much sense to talk about steady-state 
responses nor does it make sense to match moments. In this paper, we review Pade approximants, 
and their intimate relationship to continued fractions and Riceati equations, in a historical context 
that underscores why Pade approximation, as useful as it is. is not an approximation in any sense 
that reflects stability. Our main results on stability and instability states that if N > 2 and I, r > 0 
with 0 < l-r-r = n < N there is a non-empty open set of stable transfer functions G, having infinite 
Lebesque measure, such that each degree n proper rational function K matching the moments of 
G has / poles lying in C~ and r poles lying in C~. The proof is constructive. 
2.4    Sensitivity, Bifurcation and Uniqueness for Hydrodynamic Systems 
Of considerable importance in fluid dynamics are problems related to predicting the onset of 
turbulence and understanding the underlying mechanisms. During this research period, in a joint 
work with John Burns at VPI & State University, we have made some interesting discoveries 
related to these issues for a model problem described by a viscous Burgers' equation. In partic- 
ular, consider the initial boundary value problem for the one dimensional Burger's equation with 
[0 
Reynolds number R 
zt(x,t) m R->zffX(x.t) - z(x,t)z,(x,t), 0 < * < 1, (2.1) 
z(x, 0) = <p(x) 
z(l,t} = 0, 
It can be rigorously proven (see e.g., [69]) that for every initial condition c? the time dependent 
solution z(x, t) will approach zero, i.e., 
limz(x,t) = 0   for all  0 < x < 1. 
Nevertheless, one finds that depending on the size and shape of the initial condition the numerical 
solution of this problem (using any standard numerical method) instead converges to a nonzero 
steady state solution. In [67J we were able to show that, for a finite difference time marching 
scheme (based on the Crank-Nicolson method) this strange anomaly is due to the particular non- 
linearity in Burgers equations and the fact that all computers use finite floating point arithmetic. 
Indeed, for any given computer arithmetic we can predict exact conditions on an initial condition 
for which the solution will converge to a false (nonzero) solution. 
In continued efforts in studying this example we have exhibited in numerical simulations that 
this situation can be explained in terms of a problem in sensitivity of the Neumann boundary 
condition to a small non-homogeneous term. Namely we have been able to show in numerical 
experiment that the false solutions arise as solutions to a bifurcation problem that derive from (2.1) 
by replacing the homogeneous boundary condition at x = 0 by a non-homogeneous coudition. In 
particular these false solutions are solutions of the problem 
xt{x,t) = R~lz.rr(x.t) - z{xj.)zx{x,t). 0 < x < 1. (2.2) 
5(i,0) -*»(*) 
zx(0J) = -a. 
*(!,*)-0, 
1! 
where a is a small (bifurcation) parameter. Indeed, even for positive nnmbers a less than machine 
precision zero we can, depending on the initial condition, obtain a nonzero steady state. 
With the Reynolds number R and the (constant) non-homogenous Neumann boundary input 
c. considered a.s bifurcation parameters we first show that, for each fixed R there is a saddle-node 
bifurcation with respect to the boundary parameter a. Namely, for large a the associated stationary 
Burgers' problem has no equilibria but for decreasing a there is a critical value at which there is 
a single stationary solution which has the following property: The linearization of the spatial 
Burgers' operator about this stationary solution has a simple zero eigenvalue and all others are 
negative. For all smaller values of a, there are two stationary solutions, denoted by h^x) (Left) 
and hft(x) (Right). 
/*\ COS 
007 
0.08' 
■q / 
oca 
„J 0,02?    ; 
0.01 [ j 
n-l  
/    \ 
0.09p 
0.0»! 
: 
OJM 
0.03: 
a .095 
r\ 
\ 
O.OSr- 
0.OC 
0.07- 
0.04; 
UM 
occ 
oo: 
m 
.0878 
a = .08 a = .04 
Fig.l Bifurcation hi a for fixed R 
The stationary solution IIL(T) is stable and generally very small (near zero) while the station- 
ary solution hn(x) is (very slightly) unstable and tends to be large in comparison with h{,(z). The 
linearization about /tfl(j) has one very small positive eigenvalue and all other eigenvalues are neg- 
12 
ative. Nevertheless, for small values of a (and larger values of R) an interesting anomaly appears, 
for certain initial data the solution of the corresponding time dependent Burgers' problem can con- 
verge to a spurious (nonexistent) numerical stationary solution very near hH{x). We expect that 
this situation may well be related to the general problem of sensitivity and onset of turbulence. We 
note that, in a standard way, this problem can be recast as a somewhat different bifurcation problem 
for Burger's equation with a non-homogenous forcing term. In a related work we have obtained a 
complete bifurcation analysis of homogeneous and non-homogeneous boundary controlled viscous 
Burgers' equation in [12]. We expect that the results in [12] will be useful in obtaining a complete 
understanding of the bifurcation mechanisms for the boundary controlled Burgers equation and, in 
turn, we expect this to shed new light on the corresponding problems in hydrodynamics. 
The existence of such false solutions is very disturbing. This is especially true considering 
that a control mechanism based, for example, on a controller using such a model could produce 
devastating results. 
More recent work by the authors strongly suggests that a similar anomaly takes place for a 
broad class of nonlinear parabolic equations containing convective type terms. Moreover, there 
is a strong numerical evidence that the same type of anomaly may occur for real hydrodynamic 
equations - Euler and Navier Stokes. We have identified a sensitivity/bifurcation phenomenon 
which, together with unavoidable limitations of computer arithmetic, has lead us to understand, 
at a fundamental level, the underlying mathematical origins and of strictly numerical solutions to 
certain hydrodynamic type boundary value problems. We expect that similar such bifurcations 
occur for many similar problems and therefore that one must include such considerations in any 
computational study of non-unique solutions to partial differential equations that govern physical 
systems such as fluid flows. 
2.5    Geometric Output Regulation for Nonlinear Distributed Parameter Systems 
Our second main area of research in distributed parameter systems was concerned with pursu- 
ing our systematic efforts toward the design of control laws for problems of tracking and distur- 
bance rejection, i.e., regulation, for a general class of linear and nonlinear distributed parameter 
systems for a wide range of applicable control and sensing mechanisms. In this area we have sig- 
nificantly extended our earlier work on design methods based on geometric constructs involving 
13 
the regulator equations to include boundary controlled nonlinear distributed parameter systems. 
Here we have studied the problem of solving or approximating solutions to the regulator equa- 
tions using iterative methods such as Newton iteration and various fixed point methods in infinite 
dimensional Banach spaces. 
An important goal in the development of a systematic theory of nonlinear output regulation is 
to establish a theory as parallel as possible that which has been established for finite dimensional 
linear [26, 27, 28] and nonlinear systems ([33, 32, 13, 30, 341). In this direction, we note that 
for a large class of linear DPS problems those state feedback control laws which solve the prob- 
lem of output regulation for a stable linear system with bounded inputs and outpnts can also be 
characterized in an appealing systems theoretic fashion [36, 37], [38, 39] and [18]. 
Output regulation is an asymptotic theory and the long time existence of solutions to open-loop 
nonlinear distributed parameter systems remains extremely challenging. Nonetheless, we have 
been successful in establishing long time existence and asymptotic behavior for certain examples 
or system classes using particular feedback design methods (see, e.g., [20, 21, 16, 17, 19, 18]). For 
example, our current efforts are primarily focused on local results for output regulation with respect 
to signals and disturbances generated by finite-dimensional exogeneous systems (see, however, 
[311 for a discussion of infinite-dimensional exosystems). In our setting, the exosystem is both 
finite dimensional and neutrally stable [33] and we can appeal to powerful center manifold methods 
to obtain some nontrivial insights and results. We emphasize the fact that these local techniques 
are not simply an appeal to linearization. Even in the lumped nonlinear case, elementary examples 
[23] show that a solution to the problem of output regulation for the linearization does not solve 
the output regulation problem for the nonlinear problem. 
Thus we have considered the output regulation problem for a special class of nonlinear dis- 
tributed parameter systems (NLDPS). The main goal of our work was to show that the geometric 
theory of nonlinear output regulation, which has been extensively developed for lumped nonlinear 
systems, can be extended in a local setting to this class of NLDPS. Our approach is geometric, 
based on the center manifold theorem. Even for local problems, however, one must surmount 
technical issues that inevitably arise in the infinite dimensional setting. The particular class of 
nonlinear systems and exogenous systems for which center manifold methods can be used to ob- 
tain state feedback control laws for solving problems of tracking and disturbance attenuation is 
14 
quite large and includes most common systems arising in the literature. The main restriction in 
our main result is that the input and output operators are bounded in the Hubert state space. This 
means that things like point observations are not allowed. This is merely a technical issue and 
providing detailed proofs in these more general cases is currently in progress. 
Thus consider an abstract nonlinear infinite dimensional system 
i = Az + f(z) + Bu + d (2.3) 
Ü! — s(w) (2.4) 
2(0) - 20, (2-5) 
y = c(z),   yr = q{w) (2.6) 
e =* y - Vr- 
where z is the state of the system in the infinite dimensional Hubert space Z; u is a control; y is 
the output and z0 £ Zis the initial state of the system and d is a disturbance. Here the nonlinear 
term f(z) satisfies /(0) = 0, /-(0) = 0. Conditions on the linear operator A are given below. 
In addition we assume there exists a neutrally stable [331 finite dimensional exogenous system 
dm 
— = ${w) (2.7) 
u;(0) = wo G W, (2.8) 
(here we assume that W is a finite dimensional Hüben vector space) that generates both a reference 
signal yr and the disturbance d. Namely, we assume 
Vr(t) = q(w(t))     q-.W^Y. (2.9) 
d(t) =p{w{t))    p : W*-*Z.. (2.10) 
The objective of output regulation is to find a control law 
v. = ~,{w) ~ Tw + 7(1*1), 
r e £(w,u), 7(0) = o, pro) - o. 
aw 
15 
so thar closed-loop trajectories exist and so that the error 
e(t} = y(i.)-yM) = e(z(t))-q(z(t)). 
exists as t —» -t-oc and tends to 0. 
Assumption 2.5.1.       1. (—A) is a sectorial operator with compact resolvent. Therefore (—A) 
generate a Hilbert scale Za. 
2. The analytic semigroup T(t) ~ eAl is exponentially stable (Notice that it is also a contraction 
semigroup). 
3. Be 3(U, Z) and P e £(W, 2) are bounded. 
4. Ce B(20. F) for some a > 0, i.e., there is a constant cQ so that jjCVJjy < c0Ü¥>||a. 
5. We assume that the exosystem has the origin as a neutrally stable equilibrium, i.e., w = 0 is 
a fixed point which is Lyapunov stable but not attracting. A center is an example of such a 
fixed point. This, in particular, implies a(S) C iK (i.e., the spectrum of S is on the imaginary 
axis) and has no non-trivial Jordan blocks. 
Remark 2.1. In our examples, and quite often in practice, .4 is self-adjoint. We also note that, 
since we assume (—A) is sectorial, we work with the semigroup exp(.4f) rather than exp(--4i) as 
is done, for example, in Henry [29]. 
In order to simplify the exposition we will impose the following simplifying assumptions. 
Assumption 2.5.2. For simplicity of the exposition we will assume that the input and measured 
output are linear functions of the state of the plant and reference signal and disturbance are linear 
functions of the state of the exosystem. Thus we assume 
c(w) = Cw, q(w) — Qw. 
The following result was obtained in [14]. 
16 
Theorem 2.1. Under assumptions 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, the (local) state feedback regulator problem for 
(2.3)-(2.6) is solvable if, and only if, there exist mappings K : W — D{A) C Z and -> : W —* ^ 
satisfying the "regulator equations," 
-^-s{w) = Av(w) + f(v{w)) + B-y{w) + Pw (2.11) 
ow 
c(v(w)) = q(u>). (2.12) 
In this case a feedback law solving the state feedback regulator problem is given by 
u(t) - y(w)(t). (2.13) 
Modulo the inherent technical difficulties that arise in infinite dimensions, Theorem 2.1 can be. 
obtained using an argument similar to that given in [33]. Indeed, under the assumptions on A, B 
and C, we can appeal to a version of the Center Manifold Theorem to aid in the proof. 
Not every problem of output regulation is solvable. Indeed even in the linear case there is a 
non-resonance condition requiring that the transfer function of the plant 
G(s) = C(sI-A)-1B,  aep{A), (2.14) 
be left invertible for all .5 in the spectrum of S, i.e., no eigenvalue of the exo-sysiem, a £ cr(5), is 
a transmission zero of the plant. 
Assuming that the regulator equations are solvable in [15] we considered the problem of obtain- 
ing approximate solutions IT and 7 of the regulator equations (2.11), (2.12). In the typical parabolic 
case, A is an elliptic operator and the first regulator equation produces a system of nonlinear elliptic 
boundary value problems. This elliptic system is then coupled with an auxiliary operator equation 
via the constraint in the second regulator equation. 
The approximate methods proposed here are based on Newton or fixed point iteration. To this 
end we introduce the following notation for the decomposition of the solutions - and 7 into the 
linear parts which solve the regulator problem for the corresponding linear problem. Namely, set 
TC(W) = Tlw ■+• v(w),   i{vo) = Tw + y{w). 
Here TI and V solve the linear approximation to the regulator equations in (2.11), (2.12) 
TlSw = AUw -r (BY + P)w, (2.15) 
CUw = Qw,  V vi 6 W. 
17 
Under our assumptions on .4 and S it is straightforward to obtain simply representations for II and 
T and we can therefore consider small perturbations of the solutions 138; 39. 36, 19, 18) for the 
linear problem. Using the above notations we ean write the regulator equations as 
dxivi) 
Ylw 
du? 
Sw = A(nw + Z{w)) (2.16) 
+ B (Yw + g{w)) + f {Tlw + Jf(iiO) + Pw. 
0 « CTT(W) - Qw 
= C(Ihu+ *(«}))-Qw. 
With our choice of II and F satisfying (2.15) the regulator equations in (2.16) become 
dw 
-Sw =Ax{w) -r f ijlw + n{w)) + Bg(w) 
0 =Cn(w). 
(2.17) 
In the first equation we solve for TT to get 
'dn(w 
? = A_i 
dw 
Sw - / (Ihr 4- K(W)) - Bj(w) 
0 = CK{W). (2.18) 
Next we apply the C to the first equation in (2.18) and use the second condition to obtain 
0 = CA~l 
dir{w) 
dw 
Sw — f (flu? + 5r(u/)) - B^{w) 
Notice that (7(0} = —CA  lB and, under the non-resonance assumption that G(Q) is invenible we 
can solve for -y to obtain 
g(w) = G(0)-*CA- f(lXw + ~,{w))-^Sw (2.19) 
Setting 
- >i-i = A ~^Sw -f(Tlw + Sr(ui)) - Bg{w)\ . 
F2\     \=G(0r'CA- f(Uw + if(w))-^-Sw aw 
18 
our problem reduces to finding X so that 
X = F(X). X = (2.20) 
This fixed point problem can also be written as 
?(X) = X-F(X) = 0. 
It is in this form that we consider Newton iterations. 
2.6    Regulation Methods Using Zero Dynamics Inverse Design 
In another research effort we have obtained important insight into the practical solution of 
regulation problems for boundary control systems using our recently developed zero dynamics in- 
verse design methodology. We have applied this methodology to numerous prototypical examples 
of linear and nonlinear boundary control systems acting in bounded domains in one and several 
spatial dimensions. For a wide variety of tracking problems for both interior and boundary control 
problems the numerical results are astounding. Indeed, the zero dynamics design methodology 
provides a remarkably simple approach to the design of control laws capable of shaping the re- 
sponse of complicated nonlinear infinite dimensional systems in more mathematically complex 
case of boundary observation end control. In a most amazing recent discovery we have been able 
to show that the the zero dynamics design method is intimately related to the geometric design 
method which is based on center manifold theory in infinite dimensions. Indeed, for certain prob- 
lems of ouLput regulation the regulator given by the zero dynamics inverse is precisely the regulator 
equations whose solution provides the desired control law. 
One advantage of the zero dynamics inverse (ZD1) design method for designing a feedback 
compensation scheme achieving asymptotic regulation is that only the value of the signal yr(t) 
to be tracked or rejected are known at any instant of time. In analogy with the non-equilibrium 
formulation of output regulation the control objective is to achieve zero steady-state error together 
with ultimate houndedness of the state of the system and the controller(s). with a bound determined 
19 
by bounds on the norms of the initial data and yr. In particular, a controller solving this problem 
depends only on a bound on the norm of yr not on the particular choice of yr, which is used only 
as an input to the controller. ZDI design consists of the interconnection of a stabilizing feedback 
compensator and a cascade controller, designed in a universal way from the zero dynamics of the 
closed-loop feedback system. This methodology has evolved over a series of papers for asymp- 
totic regulation for specific linear boundary control systems and for set-point control of linear and 
nonlinear boundary control systems in one spatial dimension, in which case the input and ontput 
spaces for the transfer functions were finite dimensional. In this paper, we formulate the main in- 
gredients of the zero dynamics inverse design methodology for a class of abstract linear boundary 
control systems for problems with infinite dimensional input and output space. 
Given a plant to be controlled, the ZDI design consists of the interconnection, via a memo- 
ryless filter, of a stabilizing feedback compensator and a cascade controller, designed in a simple 
universal way from the zero dynamics of the closed-loop feedback system. Key features of the 
design are to ensure that the closed loop feedback system is "persistently stable" when driven with 
sufficiently small input signals and that the "zero dynamics inverse" is input-to-state stable (ISS), 
for appropriate choices of norms. Of course, for nonlinear DPS, the compactness underlying in 
the success of the ISS philosophy [57], [55 j for lumped systems is not directly available in infinite 
dimensions. In particular, crucial technical details, including the global existence, uniqueness and 
regularity of solutions to the interconnected systems, need to be checked in order to confirm that 
the basic design philosophy works. The zero dynamics design methodology we formulate here 
has evolved over a series of papers for asymptotic regulation for linear boundary control systems 
and for set-point control of nonlinear boundary control systems [44, 45, 46, 47, 48]. In a paper 
under review [43] the ZDI philosophy is illustrated by the design of an overall controller solving 
the problem of asymptotic regulation for a boundary controlled viscous Burgers' equation, for a 
broad class of input signals. 
20 
REFERENCES 
[1] Byrnes, C. I., Topological Methods for Nonlinear Oscillations, to appear in The Notices of 
the Amen Math. Soc. 
[2] Bymes, C. 1. and Bröckelt, R. W., Nonlinear Oscillations and Vector Fields Paired with a 
Closed One-Form, submitted to J. ofDiff. Eqns. 
[3] C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Important Moments in Systems and Control, SLAM J. Control 
and Optimization, 47 (2008) 2458-2469. 
[4] C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, The moment problem for rational measures: convexity in the 
spirit of Krein, in Modern Analysis and Application: To the centenary of Mark Krein. Vol. I: 
Operator Theory and Related Topics, Birkhtuser, 2009. 
[5] C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Important moments in systems, control and optimization, Proc. 
48th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, 2009, to be published. 
[6] C. 1. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, On the stability and instability of Pade approximants, 
Festschrift for Yutaka Yamamoto, Springer Verlag Lecture Notes Series in Control and Infor- 
mation Sciences, 2010. 
[7] A. Isidori and C. I. Byrnes, Steady-State Behaviors in Nonlinear Systems with an Application 
to Robust Disturbance Rejection, Annual Reviews in Control 32 (2008) 1-16. 
|8] Li, B., Periodic orbits of autonomous ordinary differential equations: Theory and applica- 
tions, Nonlinear Analysis TMA 5 (1981) 931-958. 
[9] T. T. Georgiou and A. Lindquist, A convex optimization approach to ARMA modeling, IEEE 
Trans. Automatic Control, to be published. 
110] A. Lindquist. "Prediction-error approximation by convex optimization, in Modeling, Esti- 
mation and Control'*: Festschrift in honor of Giorgio Picci on the occasion of his sixty-fifth 
Birthday, A. Chiuso, A. Ferrante and S. Pinzoni (eds), Springer-Verlag, 2007, 265-275. 
21 
[11] Smale, S.. Differentiable dynamical systems, Bull, of the Amer. Math. Soc. 73 (1967) 747 - 
817. 
[12] C.I. Byrnes, J. Dockery, D.S. Gilliam, "Bifurcations and Attractors for a Boundary Feedback 
Controlled Burgers Equation," to appear in Proceedings European Control Conference, Kos, 
Greece. 
[13] C. I. Bymes, F. Delli Priscoli and A. Isidori, Output Regulation of Uncertain Nonlinear Sys- 
tems, Birkhäuser - Boston, 1997. 
[14] C.I.Bymes, D.S. Gilliam, "Geometric theory of output regulation for nonlinear DPS," sub- 
mitted to ACC 2008. 
[15] C.I. Byrnes and D.S. Gilliam, "Approximate Solutions of the Regulator Equations for Non- 
linear DPS", to appear in Proc. IEEE CDC 2007. 
[16] C. I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, A. Isidori and V.l. Shubov, Set point boundary control for a non- 
linear distributed parameter system, Proceedings of the 42nd IEEE Conference on Decision 
and Control, pp 312-317, Dec 9-12, 2003, Maui, Hawaii. 
[17] C. I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, A. Isidori, V.l. Shubov, Static and Dynamic Controllers for Bound- 
ary Controlled Distributed Parameter Systems," Proceedings of the 43rd Conference on De- 
cision and Control, Nassau, The Bahamas, December (2004). 
]18] C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, I.G. Lauko and V.l. Shubov, "Output regulation for linear dis- 
tributed parameter systems," IEEE Transactions Automatic Control, Volume 45, Number 12, 
December 2000, 2236-2252. 
[ 19] Byrnes, C.I., D.S. Gilliam and V Shubov, "On the global dynamics of a controlled viscous 
Burgers* equation," Journal of Dynamical and Control Systems, (1998), no. 4, 457-519. 
[20] C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, and VI. Shubov, Example of Output Regulation for a system with 
unbounded inputs and outputs, Proceedings 38th IEEE Conf Dec. Control, 4280-4284. 1999. 
[21 ] C.I. Bymes. D.S. Gilliam, VI. Shubov and G. Weiss, The output regulator problem for regular 
linear systems, preprint Texas Tech University, (2000). 
22 
[22] C.I.Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, V.l. Shubov. and G. Weiss, Regular linear systems governed by a 
boundary controlled heat equation, Journal of Dynamical and Control Systems, Vol. 8, Issue 
3,341-370.(2002). 
123] C. 1. Bymes and A. Isidori, Nonlinear Output Regulation: Remarks on Robustness Proc. of 
27th Allerton Conf. Communic, Contr., Comp., 150-158, 1989. 
[24] C. I. Byrnes and A. Isidori, Limit Sets. Zero Dynamics and Internal Modeis in the Problem 
of Nonlinear Output Regulation, IEEE Trans. Ant. Control. 48 (I0):1712-1723, 2003. 
]25] C. I. Byrnes and A. Isidori, Nonlinear internal models for output regulation, IEEE Trans, on 
Automatic Control, AC-49, 2244-2247, (2004). 
[26] EJ.Davison, The robust control of a servomeehauism problem for linear time-invariant mul- 
tivariable systems, IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr., AC-21: 25-34, 3 976. 
[27] B.A.Francis, The linear multivariable regulator problem, SIAMJ. Contr. Optimize 14: 486- 
505, 1977. 
[28] B.A. Francis and W. M. Wonham. The internal model principle of control theory. Automatica, 
12:457^65, 1976. 
[29] D. Henry, "Geometric Theory of Semilinear Parabolic Equations." Springer-Verlag, 1989. 
[30] S. Huang, Nonlinear Output Regulation. SIAM. Philadelphia. 2004. 
[31] E. Immonen, A Feedforward-Feedßack Controller for Infinite-Dimensional Systems and Reg- 
ulation of Bounded Uniformly Continuous Signals. To appear in International Journal of 
Robust and Nonlinear Control. 
[32] 
[33] A. Isidori and C.I. Byrnes. Output regulation of nonlinear systems. IEEE Trans. Autom. 
Contr., AC-25: 131-140, 1990. 
|34] A. Pavlov. N. van de VVouw and H. Nijmeijer, Uniform Output Regulation of Nonlinear Sys- 
tems: A convergent Dynamics Approach, Birkhauser, Boston, 2006. 
23 
135] A. Pazy, Semigroups of Linear Operators and Applications to Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983. 
136) S. A. Pohjolainen, Robust Multivariable PI-Controller for Infinite Dimensional Systems, 
IEEE Trans. Aut Control, (1982), Vol. AC-27, No. I, 17-30. 
[37] S. A. Pohjolainen, On the asymptotic regulation problem for distributes parameter systems, 
Proc. Third Symposium on Control of Distributed Parameter Systems, Toulouse, France (July 
1982). 
138] J.M. Schumacher, Finite-dimensional regulators for a class of infinite dimensional systems. 
Systems and Control Letters, 3 (1983), 7-12. 
[39J J.M. Schumacher, A direct approach to compensator design for distributed parameter sys- 
tems, SIAM J. Control and Optim. 21, 823-836, 1983. 
[40] A. Vanderbauwhede and G. Iooss, "Center manifold theory in infinite dimensions." Dynamics 
Reported: Expositions in Dynamical Systems Vol. 1, Springer-Verlag, (1992), 125-163. 
[41 ] S. Van Gils and A. Vanderbauwhede, '"Center manifolds and contractions on a scale of Banach 
spaces," J. Funct. Anal. 72 (1987) 209-224. 
[42] T. Basar and P. Bernhard, H-inftnity Optimal Control and Related Minimax Design Problems: 
A Dynamic Came Approach, Birkh auser, Boston, MA, August 1995. (Revised 2nd edition 
of 1991 book, with the same title). 
[43] C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, C. Hu, VI. Shubov, Asymptotic regulation for distributed param- 
eter systems, Preprint Texas Tech University, 2008. (Submitted and under review). 
[44] C.I. Bymes, D.S. Gilliam and C. Hu, Set-point boundary control for a Kuramoto-Sivashinsky 
equation. Proceedings of the 45th IEEE Conference on Decision & Control, pp. 75-81, San 
Diego, CA., 2006. 
[45] C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam and A. Isidori, Interior Point Control of a Heat Equation Using 
Zero Dynamics Design, Proceedings of the 2006 American Control Conference, 2006, pp. 
1138-1143. 
24 
f46J C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, A. lsidori and V. 1. Shubov, Zero Dynamics Modeling and Bound- 
ary Feedback Design for Parabolic Systems, Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 44 
(2006), no. 9-10, pp. 857-869. 
[47] C. 1. Byrnes, D. Gilliam A. lsidori and V.l. Shubov, Set-point boundary control for a viscous 
Burgers equation, New Directions in Control Theory and Applications, Springer Verlag, 2005. 
[48] C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, A. lsidori and V.l.Shubov, Static and Dynamic Controllers for 
Boundary Controlled Distributed Parameter Systems, Proc. 43rd IEEE Conference on Deci- 
sion and Control, pp. 3324-3325, (2004). 
[49] C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, V.l. Shubov and G. Weiss The output regulator problem for regular 
linear systems, preprint Texas Tech University, (2000). 
150] C. I. Byrnes, A. lsidori. Limit Sets. Zero Dynamics, and Internal Models in the Problem of 
Nonlinear Output Regulation, IEEE Trans. Aut. Control. AC-48 2003. p 1712-1723. 
[51] C. I. Bymes, A. lsidori, Nonlinear Internal Models for Output Regulation, IEEE Trans, on 
Automatic Control, AC-49, 2244-2247, (2004). 
[52] A. Cheng and K.A. Morris, Transfer functions for boundary control systems, Proceedings of 
the 38nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Phoenix, Az., December 1999. 
[53] J. C. Doyle, K. Glover, P. P. Khargonekar, B. A. Francis, State-space solutions to standard H2 
and Hx control problems , IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr., AC-34: 831-847, 1989. 
[54] L.F. Ho, D. L. Russell, "Admissible input elements for systems in Hilbert space and a Cai- 
Ieson measure criterion,' SIAM J. Contr. and Optimiz, 21, No. 4, July 1983, pp 614-640. 
[55] A. lsidori, Nonlinear Control Systems, vol II, Springer Verlag (New York, NY), 1999. 
[56] D. Salamon, Infinite-dimensional linear systems with unbounded control and observation: A 
functional analytic approach. Trans, of American Math. Soc, v. 300, pp. 383-431, 1987. 
[57] E. D. Sontag, On the input-to-state stability property, European J. Control 1 (1995) 24-36. 
25 
[58] Staffans, Olof J. , George Weiss, Transfer functions of regular linear systems. III. Inversions 
and duality. Integral Equations Operator Theory 49 (2004), no. 4, 517-558. 
[59] Staffans, Olof, George Weiss, Transfer functions of regular linear systems. II. The system 
operator and the Lax-Phillips semigroup. Trans. Arner. Math. Soc. 354 (2002), no. 8, 3229- 
3262 (electronic). 
[601 C. McMillian and Triggiani. R. , Min-max game theory for partial differential equations with 
boundary/point control and disturbance. An abstract approach , R. Triggani, Lecture Notes in 
Control and Information Sciences, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 1993. 
[61] C. McMillian and Triggiani. R. , Min-Max game theory for a class of boundary control 
problems, C. McMillan and R. Triggiani, Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sci- 
ences,Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 1994. 
[62] C. McMillian and Triggiani. R. (1994). Min-max Game Theory and Algebraic Riccati Equa- 
tions for Boundary Control Problems with Continuous Input-Solution Map. Part II: The Gen- 
eral Case , Applied Mathematic. and Optimization, 29. 1-65. 
[63 ] George Weiss, Transfer functions of regular linear systems. I. Characterizations of regularity. 
Trans. Arner. Math. Soc. 342 (1994), no. 2, 827-854. 
[64] G. Weiss, "Regular linear systems with feedback," Math, of Control, Signals and Systems 7 
(1994), 23-57. 
[65] G. Weiss, "Transfer functions of regular linear systems, Part I: Characterizations of regular- 
ity," Trans. Amer. Math. Society, 342 (1994), pp. 827854. 
[66] G. Weiss, and Marius Tucsnak, "Observation and Control for Operator Semigroups," 
[67] E. Allen, J.A. Bums, D.Gilliam, J. Hill. V.l. Shubov, "The impact of finite precision arith- 
metic and sensitivity on the numerical solution of partial differential equations," J.Math. 
Computer Modeling, (2002). 
26 
[68] Edward Allen, John A. Burns, David .S Gilliam, "Sensitivity and Numerical Estimation for 
Convective Nonlinear Systems." Proceedings 47th IEEE Conference on Decision and Con- 
trol, December 2008. 
[69] T.I. Zelenyak, M.M. Lavrentiev Jr., M.P. VLshnevskii, "Qualitative Theory of Parabolic Equa- 
tions, Pan 1." VSP, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 1997. 
27 
CHAPTER IV 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
4.1    Personnel 
Christopher I. Byrnes    Professor. Washington University, St. Louis 
Alberto Isidori Professor, Washington University, St. Louis 
David S. Gilliam Professor, Texas Tech University 
Anders Lindquist Professor, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden 
Nathan McGregor Washington University, St, Louis 
Brian Whitehead Washington University 
4.2    Honors & Awards 
3 IEEE Fellows (Dr.s C.I. Byrnes, A. Isidori, A. Lindquist). 
Dr. A. Lindquist has been invited to give an invited one-hour lecture at the joint IEEE/Chinese 
Control Theory Society Meeting in Shanghai in December 2009 
In 2009, Dr. C. I. Byrnes was named an inaugural Fellow of SIAM. 
In 2009, Dr. C. I. Byrnes was named an Associate Fellow of AIAA. 
In 2009, Dr. C. I. Byrnes held the Giovanni Prodi Chair in Nonlinear Analysis at the Univer- 
sity of Wuerzburg, Germany. 
Dr. A. Lindquist was awarded the W.T. and Idalia Reid Prize for his contributions to stochas- 
tic systems and control at the SIAM Annual Meeting in July 2009. 
At the 47th IEEE CDC, Cancun, Mexico, in December 2008, Dr. C. I. Byrnes was awarded 
the 2008 Hendrik W. Bode Lecture prize from the Control Systems Society of IEEE. 
Dr. A. Lindquist presented an invited plenary lecture at the Internationa) Congress on the 
Applications of Mathematics (ICAM), Santiago de Chile, March 13-17, 2006. 
Dr.  A. Isidori has been appointed President of the International Federation of Automatic 
Control (IFAC). 
28 
Dr. Christopher I. Byrnes was awarded the W.T. and Idalia Reid Prize for his contributions 
to linear and nonlinear systems and control at the SIAM Annual Meeting in July 2005. 
Dr. A. Isidori was installed as Edwin H. Murty Professor of Engineering at Washington 
University, November 2004. 
Dr. A. Isidori was elected Fellow of 1FAC, July 2005. 
The paper: C. Bonivento. A. Isidori. L. Marconi, A. Paoli, Implicit fault tolerant control: 
application to induction motors, Automatica, 40, pp. 355-371, (2004) was given the triennial 
Automatica award at the IFAC World Congress in Prague, 2005. 
At the 42nd IEEE CDC, Maui, Hawaii, in December 2003, C. I. Bymes, T. Georgiou and A. 
Lindquist were awarded the 2003 IEEE George S. Axelby Award for the best paper in the 
IEEE Trans, on Aut. Control. 
The paper A convex optimization approach to the rational covariance extension problem, 
by C. L Bymes, S. V. Gusev and A. Lindquist was selected in 2000 to be published in an 
enhanced form in SIAM Review as a "SIGEST" paper. 
At the 40th IEEE CDC, Orlando, Florida, in December 2001, A.Isidori was awarded the 
2001 Hendrik W. Bode Lecture prize from the Control Systems Society of IEEE. 
Te triennial IFAC Best Paper Award, (C.l. Byrnes and A. Isidori), 1993 IFAC World Congress. 
IEEE George S. Axelby Award as the best paper in the IEEE Trans, on Aut. Control, 1993 ( 
C.I. ByrnevS and A. Isidori). 
Dr. C.l. Byrnes was elected in March 2001 as a Foreign Member of the Royal Swedish 
Academy of Engineering Sciences. 
Dr. C.I. Byrnes, was installed as the Edward G. and Florence H. Skinner Professor of Sys- 
tems and Engineering at Washington University, St. Louis, 1998. 
Dr. C.I. Bymes, elected Fellow of the Academy of Sciences of St. Louis in 1998. 
29 
Dr. C.I. Byrnes was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Technology from the Swedish Royal 
Institute of Technology, November 1998. 
The Graduate College Distinguished Research Award: C.I. Byrnes, 1988, ASU. 
Fellow, Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science: C.I. Byrnes, 1986. 
"Quazza Medal" awarded to Dr. A. Isidori at 13th 1FAC World Congress in San Francisco, 
1996 for "Pioneering and Fundamental Contributions to the Design of Nonlinear Feedback 
Systems." 
Alberto Isidori was listed in the Highly-Cited database among the top 10 most-cited authors 
in Engineering in the world for the period 1981-1999. 
Dr. A. Lindquist, Zaborszky Lecturer for the year 2000. 
Dr. A. Lindquist, Gordon McKay Visiting Profesor, Berkeley, 2002. 
Dr. A. Lindquist, Israel Pollak Distingushed Lecturer, 2005 
Dr. A. Lindquist, Foreign Member of Russian Academy of Natural Sciences, 1997. 
Dr. A. Lindquist elected Member of the Royal Swedish Acad. of Engr. Sei., 1996. 
Dr. A. Lindquist, Honorary Member of Hungarian Operational Res. Soc, 1994. 
30 
CHAPTER V 
TRANSITIONS AND DISCOVERIES 
5.1    AFRL Point of Contact 
Dr. Siva S. Banda, Senior Scientist for Control Theory, Air Vehicles Directorate, Air Force Re- 
search Laboratory, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. Phone: (937)255-8677, Fax: (937)656- 
4000, siva.banda@wpafb.af.mil 
5.2   New Discoveries 
C.I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Method and Apparatus for Speech Analysis and Synthesis, 
United States Patent 5,940,791, August 17, 1999. 
C.I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Method and Apparatus for Speaker Recognition, U.S. Patent 
6,256,609, July 3, 2001. 
C.I. Byrnes, A. Lindquist and T.T. Georgiou, A Tunable High-Resolution Spectral Estimator, 
U.S. Patent 6,400,310, June 4, 2002. 
C.I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Method and Apparatus for Speaker Verification Using a Tun- 
able High-resolution Spectral Estimator, US Patent No. 7,233,898. 
12 extensions or foreign patent applications pending. 
31 
CHAPTER VI 
PUBLICATIONS 
1. Edward Allen, John A. Burns, D.S. Gilliam, "On the use of Numerical Methods for Anal- 
ysis and Control of Nonlinear Convecrive Systems," Proceedings 47th IEEE Conference on 
Decision and Control, December 2008. 
2. C. I. Byrnes, On Brockett's Necessary Condition for Stabilizability and the Topology of 
Liapunov Functions on Rn, Communications in Information and Systems, 8 (2008) 333-352. 
3. C. I. Byrnes, Topological Methods for Nonlinear Oscillations, to appear in The Notices of 
the Amer. Math. Soc. 
4. C. I. Byrnes and R. W. Brockett, Nonlinear Oscillations and Vector Fields Paired with a 
Closed One-Form, submitted to Journal of Differential Equations. 
5. C.I. Byrnes, I. Dockery, D.S. Gilliam, "Bifurcations and Attractors for a Boundary Feed- 
back Controlled Burgers Equation," Proceedings of European Control Conference 2007, 
Kos, Greece, 5037 - 5043. 
6. C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam. "Approximate Solutions of the Regulator Equations for Nonlinear 
DPS," Proceedings of the 46th IEEE Conference on Decision & Control, December 2007. 
7. C.I. Bymes, D.S. Gilliam, "Geometric Output Regulation for a Class of Nonlinear Dis- 
tributed Parameter Systems," Proceedings 2008 American Control Conference, Seattle, Wash- 
ington, June 2008. 
8. C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, 'The Steady-State Response of a Nonlinear Control System, Lya- 
punov Stable Attractors, and Forced Oscillations." Proceedings of the 18th International 
Symposium, on Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems (MTNS 2008), Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg, Virginia (USA), 2008. 
9. C.l. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, Zero dynamics inverse design for asymptotic regulation of the 
heat equation: the non-colocated case, Proceedings 2009 American Control Conference, St. 
Louis, Mo. (2009). 
32 
10. C.I. Byrnes, D.S. Gilliam, "On the transfer function of the zero dynamics 
for a boundary controlled heat problem in two dimensions," to appear in Proceedings 48th 
IEEE Conference on Decision and Control. December 2009. 
11. C. 1. Byrnes, D. S. Gilliam, C.-B. Hu and V. I. Shubov, Asymptotic Regulation for Dis- 
tributed Parameter Systems, submitted to Intern. Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control. 
12. C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Interior point solutions of variarional problems and global 
inverse function theorems, . Intern. Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, 16 (2007), 
1-18. 
13. C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, "Variational problems and global inverse function theorems," 
Intern. Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control 16 (2007) 1-18. 
14. C. 1. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, A note on the Jacobian Conjecture , The Proc. of the AMS, 
136(2008)3007-3011. 
15. C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Important Moments in Systems and Control, SIAM J. Control 
and Optimization, 47 (2008) 2458-2469. 
16. C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, Important moments in systems, control and optimization, 
Proc. 48th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, 2009, to be published. 
17. C. I. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, The moment problem for rational measures: convexity in the 
spirit of Krein, in Modern Analysis and Application: To the centenary of Mark Krein, Vol. 
1: Operator Theory and Related Topics, BirkhLuser, 2009. 
18. C. 1. Byrnes and A. Lindquist, On the stability and instability of Pade approximants, Festschrift 
for Yutaka Yamamoto. Springer Verlag Lecture Notes Series in Control and Information Sci- 
ences, 2010. 
19. J. Cupidon, D.S. Gilliam, R. Eubanks, F. Ruymgaart, "Some properties of canonical correla- 
tions and variates in infinite dimensions," Journal of Muhivariate Analysis 99, p 1083-1104, 
(2008). 
33 
20. J. Cupidon. D.S. Gilliam, R. Eubanks, F. Ruymgaart. "The deka-method for analytic func- 
tions of random operators with applications to functional data. Bernoulli 13, 1179-1194 
(2007). 
21. G. Fanizza, J. Karlsson, A. Lindquist and R. Nagamune, Passivity-preserving model reduc- 
tion by analytic interpolation. Linear Algebra and Applications 425 (2007), 608-633. 
22. T. T. Georgiou and A. Lindquist, A convex optimization approach to ARMA modeling, IEEE 
Trans. Automatic Control 53 (2008), 1108-1119. 
23. D.S. Gilliam, T. Hohage, X. Ji and F. Ruymgaart, "The Frechet-derivative of an analytic 
function of a bounded operator with some applications," International Journal of Mathemat- 
ics and Mathematical Sciences Volume 2009, Article ID 239025, 17 pages. 
24. D.S. Gilliam, F. Ruymgaart. A.C.M. van Rooij "Fourier-Cesaro approximation in the Haus- 
dorff metric with application to noisy deconvolution. Book Chapter to appear in Advances 
in the GIBBS PHENOMENON with detailed introduction, published by Sampling Publishin, 
New York, 2009, A.J. Jerri, Editor. 
25. A. Isidori and C. I. Byrnes, Steady-State Behaviors in Nonlinear Systems with an Applica- 
tion to Robust Disturbance Rejection, Annual Reviews in Control 32 (2008) 1-16. 
26. J. Karlsson and A. Lindquist, Stable rational approximation in the context of interpolation 
and convex optimization, Proc 46th IEEE Decision and Control Conference, 2007, pp. 
4353 - 4360. 
27. J. Karlsson and A. Lindquist, Stability-preserving rational approximation subject to interpo- 
lation constraints, IEEE Trans. Automatic Control 53(7) (2008), 1724 - 1730. 
28. J. Karlsson, T. T. Georgiou and A. Lindqnist, The inverse problem of analytic interpolation 
with degree constraint and weight selection for control synthesis, IEEE Trans. Automatic 
Control, to be published. 
29. J. Karlsson, T.T. Georgiou and A. Lindquist, Weight selection for gap robustness with degree- 
constrained controllers, Proc. 47th IEEE Conf. Decision and Control, 2008, 4127 - 4134. 
34 
30. J. Karlsson. T. Georgiou and A. Lindquist, The inverse problem of analytic interpolation 
with degree constraint, submitted for publication. 
35 
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 
The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including 
suggestions for reducing the burden, to the Department of Defense, Executive Service Directorate (0704-0188). Responderts should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number, 
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ORGANIZATION. 
REPORT DATE (DD-MM- YYYY) 
18-11-2009 
2. REPORT TYPE 
Final 
DATES COVERED (From - To) 
15 March 2007 - 30 June 2009 
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 
Nonlinear Control Systems 
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 
5b. GRANT NUMBER 
FA9550-07-1-021' 
5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 
6. AUTHOR(S) 
Dr. Christopher I. Byrnes 
Dr. Alberto Isidori 
5d. PROJECT NUMBER 
5e. TASK NUMBER 
5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Engineering 
Washington University 
St. Louis, MO 
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
Air Force Office of Scientific Research 
875 N. Randolph St, Suite 325 
Arlington, VA 22203 
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATIOr 
REPORT NUMBER 
10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRC      M(S) 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 
12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
Distribution A 
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 
14. ABSTRACT 
The principal goal of this research program was to develop a systematic methodology for the 
design of feedback control schemes capable of shaping the response of complex dynamical systems. 
A continuation of an ongoing research effort, the specific research program we proposed 
was aimed at the development of a systematic control methodology for lumped and distributed 
parameter systems, applicable to both the equilibrium and the nonequilibrium cases. The typical 
design objectives involve designing feedback schemes which achieve one or more of the following: 
asymptotic tracking, an appropriate form of internal stabilization, and asymptotic disturbance 
rejection. 
15. SUBJECT TERMS 
16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 
a. REPORT 
uu 
b. ABSTRACT 
UU 
c. THIS PAGE 
UU 
17. LIMITATION OF 
ABSTRACT 
SAR 
18. NUMBER 
OF 
PAGES 
37 
19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Dr. Fariba Fahroo 
19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 
(703)696-8429 
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8/98) 
Prescnbed by ANSI Std. Z39.18 
Adobe Professional 7.0 

