 1 
Investigating the Effectiveness of Tactile Feedback for 
Mobile Touchscreens  
Eve Hoggan, Stephen A. Brewster and Jody Johnston 
Glasgow Interactive Systems Group, Department of Computing Science 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK 
{eve, stephen}@dcs.gla.ac.uk     www.tactons.org 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents a study of finger-based text entry for 
mobile devices with touchscreens. Many devices are now 
coming to market that have no physical keyboards (the 
Apple iPhone being a very popular example). Touchscreen 
keyboards lack any tactile feedback and this may cause 
problems for entering text and phone numbers. We ran an 
experiment to compare devices with a physical keyboard, a 
standard touchscreen and a touchscreen with tactile feed-
back added. We tested this in both static and mobile envi-
ronments. The results showed that the addition of tactile 
feedback to the touchscreen significantly improved finger-
based text entry, bringing it close to the performance of a 
real physical keyboard. A second experiment showed that 
higher specification tactile actuators could improve per-
formance even further. The results suggest that manufactur-
ers should use tactile feedback in their touchscreen devices 
to regain some of the feeling lost when interacting on a 
touchscreen with a finger. 
Author Keywords 
Tactile feedback, multimodal interaction, touchscreens, 
mobile interaction, fingertip interaction. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2. [User Interfaces]: Haptic I/O.  
INTRODUCTION 
Touchscreen mobile devices are becoming ever more popu-
lar with both manufacturers and users. As there is no need 
for a physical keyboard to take up space on the device, they 
can have larger screens which can be used more flexibly, 
meaning a better display of videos, web pages or games, or 
reconfiguring the display as required, for example rotating 
from portrait to landscape. A soft keyboard can be dis-
played when text must be entered. The most popular such 
device at the present time is the Apple iPhone (Figure 1), 
but many other manufacturers have also removed the phys-
ical keyboards from devices such as PDAs, digital cameras 
and music players. The use of a touchscreen also allows 
novel forms of interaction, for example using gestures [14] 
on the screen to control a device, or more flexible forms of 
text entry and navigation. 
Although the keyboards used on touchscreen devices are 
based on the original physical mobile keyboards, one im-
portant feature is lost: the buttons cannot provide the tactile 
response that physical buttons do when touched or clicked. 
Without the tactile feedback, users can only rely on audio 
and visual cues which can be ineffective in mobile applica-
tions due to small screen size, outside noise, social restric-
tions and the demands of other real world tasks [9]. Studies 
of touchscreen text entry have shown the difficulties of typ-
ing with a stylus on the touchscreen using the standard 
QWERTY keyboard and have proposed various different 
keyboard layouts to combat this [11, 16]. Despite these re-
sults, the primary method for data entry is still the standard 
QWERTY keyboard. In an initial, small study [1] we 
showed that entering text on a touchscreen when on the 
move can be problematic and that adding artificial tactile 
feedback can reduce error rates. 
 
Figure 1: The Apple iPhone, a finger-operated touchscreen 
phone. 
A mobile device user’s context can be extremely varied, for 
example, travelling on the train, at a party or in the gym. 
The user expects to be able to interact effectively with the 
device in all of these situations. For example, sending 
emails and browsing the Web on a touchscreen mobile de-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy. 
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04…$5.00. 
 
Copyright 2008 ACM  978-1-60558-011-1/08/04Ö$5.00. 
 
vice whilst on the train to work is a common activity. A 
solution is needed that makes the entry of text efficient and 
simple in these situations.  
One other important issue is that devices like the iPhone 
have done away with the stylus and just use the finger for 
input (and in fact multiple fingers for certain interactions). 
The previous generation of touchscreen phones used a small 
stylus for interaction. This is advantageous from the de-
vice’s point of view as the interaction point is very clear 
and easy for the device to recognise. They are, however, 
less convenient for users who have to get the stylus out 
each time they want to interact with the device and the sty-
lus is easy to lose. There has been little study of the effects 
of using a finger on the screen for interaction. Given the 
necessary limited size of these devices, widgets are often 
too small [13] or positioned in an awkward way preventing 
them from being selected easily with a finger. This makes it 
even more difficult for users to interact with their devices 
when, for example, travelling to work on a bumpy train. 
In an effort to address these issues, this paper presents a 
study into the use of tactile feedback for a touchscreen mo-
bile phone QWERTY keyboard where a fingertip is used to 
press the keys. Our aim was to quantify the effects of tactile 
feedback in mobile and static settings by comparing a de-
vice with a physical keyboard to a touchscreen phone and 
then to the touchscreen phone with added tactile feedback. 
BACKGROUND 
The amount of research in mobile tactile feedback for text 
entry is limited as, up until this point, there have always 
been physical buttons on the devices providing their own 
natural tactile feedback. The research has focused on more 
complex feedback instead such as calendar alerts and navi-
gation cues [2, 4]. 
Previous research into tactile interaction on mobile devices 
has often focused on new hardware, for example, a tactile 
stylus [8] for use on touchscreens and also a piezo-electric 
display [7, 15] for use with a stylus. These projects have all 
provided tactile feedback by attaching a physical actuator to 
the back of the device, or to the stylus, or by building cus-
tom device displays. The experiments discussed here in-
volve the use of the standard, built-in mobile phone vibra-
tion actuator which can be found in almost all commercially 
available devices and compare them to specialised external 
vibrotactile actuators. By using the actuator already in the 
device, the tactile feedback is not restricted by expensive or 
rare technology and does not require any hardware to be 
added to the device which could increase its size or weight 
which may be inappropriate for mobile devices.  
Brewster et al. [1] reported a small study investigating the 
effects of adding tactile feedback to keyboard interactions 
on a PDA operated with a stylus. They compared a standard 
PDA soft keyboard to one with artificial tactile feedback 
presented when the keys were pressed. The artificial tactile 
feedback in this case was created using a small vibrotactile 
actuator attached to the back of the device (the same as 
Figure 10). Results showed that, in a static lab setting, with 
tactile feedback users entered significantly more text, made 
fewer errors and corrected more of the errors they did 
make. In mobile use (on a subway train) they found many 
of the tactile benefits reduced, but users still corrected sig-
nificantly more errors. This study was small, but provided 
the motivation for our work. To fully understand the effects 
of tactile feedback we need to evaluate both a real physical 
keyboard and one with artificial tactile feedback to see how 
they compare. If we can achieve the same level of perform-
ance as a real keyboard then we can combine the benefits of 
touchscreen displays with physical buttons. Our previous 
study only used six participants in the mobile condition so it 
is hard to draw any strong conclusions. Also, fingertip use 
was not tested, only stylus-based interactions. The work 
reported here builds on this previous study to validate it and 
to extend its range. 
There have been several studies into mobile interaction with 
touchscreens using styli that do not involve tactile feed-
back. MacKenzie [11] has conducted various experiments 
investigating the use of different keyboard layouts to assist 
in text entry using a touchscreen. However, these different 
layouts have not become commercially available and are 
unlikely to, just as the Dvorak [3] keyboard layout has been 
proven to be superior in numerous cases but has never been 
widely adopted. For this reason, we looked at augmenting 
the current QWERTY keyboard layout with tactile feed-
back. 
This paper presents experiments conducted in both a lab 
setting and mobile environment investigating text entry on a 
touchscreen device with and without tactile feedback. The 
aim is to explore the effects of tactile feedback from key-
board events (confirming that the fingertip is touching a 
button, confirming that the button has been pressed and 
highlighting whether the fingertip has slipped off the button 
or not) to see if performance can be improved.   
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
After initial investigations using currently available mobile 
touchscreen devices, the Palm Treo 750 and a Samsung 
i718 (Figure 2) were chosen for the experiment. The Palm 
Treo was chosen for the control condition as it is a popular 
device and has a physical keyboard, allowing us to compare 
typing performance between a touchscreen and real, phys-
ical buttons. The Samsung i718 was chosen as it is a new 
device and has a large touchscreen display, ideal for pre-
senting a full QWERTY virtual keyboard. The i718 phone 
contains a Samsung Electro-Mechanics Linear Resonant 
Actuator and Immersion VibeTonz technology to control 
the actuator and produce sophisticated tactile effects 
(www.immersion.com). This actuator consists of a moving 
magnetic mass, an electromagnet and a spring. The system 
is underdamped with a very high Q (i.e. sharply peaked 
resonance). The resonant frequency is ~175Hz. The small 
size of the mass and the strength of the resonance makes 
 3 
this actuator ideal for short, sharp effects (such as are found 
in mechanical buttons) because it reaches maximum accel-
eration in 2 to 3 wavelengths (10 to 20ms). This is one of 
the best vibration actuators available in a standard phone 
and is much more controllable than a standard motor. 
 
Figure 2: A Palm Treo 750 and a Samsung i718. 
Feedback Design 
A standard QWERTY touchscreen keyboard was created 
for the i718 that matched the one on the Treo in terms of 
button size and keyboard layout. We could then add tactile 
effects as required using the built in actuator and Immer-
sion’s Vibetonz studio (their tactile authoring tool). The 
exact size and spacing of the physical keys on the Treo 
were copied when designing the touchscreen buttons on the 
i718. The Treo keys were 50x35mm with a gap of 3mm 
between each. The i718 has a 2.8inch touchscreen with 
240x320 pixels. The touchscreen buttons we designed for 
the i718 were slightly larger than its standard soft keyboard, 
because they were based on the physical Treo keys and 
were designed for use with the fingertip not a stylus, but in 
all other respects were exactly the same as standard Win-
dows Mobile buttons: they highlight when pressed.  
In this study, a set of simple Tactons [2] was created to rep-
resent the different keyboard events and keys that exist on a 
touchscreen keyboard. A fingertip-over event (when the 
fingertip has touched a button) used a 1-beat smooth Tac-
ton, a fingertip-click event used a 1-beat sharp Tacton, 
while a fingertip-slip event (when the fingertip moved over 
the edge of a button) used a 3-beat rough Tacton. All of the 
tactile feedback was created using the standard internal 
vibration actuator in the i718 device.  
Fingertip-Over Event 
One of the key features lost in a touchscreen keyboard is 
feeling the edges of the keys. We created a tactile equiva-
lent to this so that users could feel around the display and 
know when they were on a key or moving between one key 
and the next. In other work, such as Brewster et al. [1] this 
was not included, but is a key feature of a real keyboard and 
is important for working out when the fingers are touching 
the keys and orienting in the display. 
In a standard interface, a mouse over event is fired when the 
mouse pointer is moved over a GUI element such as a but-
ton. This was adapted to create a fingertip-over event which 
is fired when the finger moves over any button in the inter-
face. When the fingertip-over event is triggered, a 1-beat 
smooth 300ms Tacton is presented. The cue uses a 250Hz 
sine wave with increasing intensity during the ramp up time 
and decreasing intensity during the ramp down time to cre-
ate a smooth rounded feeling button (Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3: Fingertip-Over Tacton waveform with ramp up and 
down to make it feel smooth and rounded. 
Home Keys 
On traditional physical keyboards it is common to find 
raised ridges on the ‘F’ and ‘J’ keys used for orientation. To 
recreate this on the touchscreen keyboard, when the ‘F or J’ 
key triggers the fingertip-over event a different textured 
Tacton is presented. The Tacton is 1-beat 300ms amplitude 
modulated 250Hz sine wave, which feels rough. 
Fingertip-click Event 
Tactile feedback was used to confirm that a button had been 
pressed. When the fingertip-click event was triggered, a 1-
beat sharp 30ms Tacton was presented. The cue used a 
175Hz square wave and no ramp up or ramp down time to 
create a very short and quick ‘click’ resembling the ‘click’ 
felt when depressing a physical button. 
Fingertip-Slip Event 
An event was triggered whenever the fingertip moved over 
the edge of any button on the screen, indicating a transition 
or slip from one to the next (fingertip slips can be trouble-
some for users and can cause errors that are often unde-
tected). This allowed users to run their fingertips over the 
buttons feeling all of the edges. When the fingertip-slip 
event is triggered, a 3-beat rough 500ms Tacton is pre-
sented. The rough texture is created using an amplitude 
modulated 175Hz sine wave. This Tacton was designed to 
be attention grabbing and to feel very different to the other 
cues allowing easy identification of a slip by the user. 
Methodology  
We designed an experiment to investigate the effects of 
incorporating tactile feedback into mobile touchscreen but-
tons. The experiment compared user performance on a typi-
cal mobile device featuring a real, physical keyboard (Palm 
Treo), to a touchscreen keyboard with added tactile feed-
back (Samsung i718) and to the same device with no tactile 
feedback. The experiment hypotheses were as follows: 
1. Participants will be able to enter text with the least er-
rors and greatest speed on the physical keyboard; 
2. Tactile feedback will improve speed and accuracy of 
text entry on touchscreen keyboards;  
 
3. Touchscreens with tactile feedback will achieve com-
parable accuracy and speed levels to physical key-
boards;  
4. Tactile feedback will improve the speed and accuracy 
of text entry on touchscreens when mobile. 
We needed participants who had some expertise in text en-
try on mobile devices, so before beginning the experiment 
participants were required to complete a questionnaire on 
their text entry habits. We chose participants who send, on 
average, 1 - 10 text messages on a QWERTY mobile device 
per day as they can be considered moderate users who have 
experience of using physical keyboards. It was not possible 
to get enough participants who had experience of 
touchscreen keyboards as they are not yet common. Users 
were given training with the keyboards as discussed later.  
We used a within-subjects design where the conditions 
were:  
1. Standard mobile device with physical keyboard (the 
control Physical condition); 
2. Touchscreen mobile device with tactile feedback added 
to soft keyboard (the Tactile condition); 
3. Touchscreen mobile device with soft keyboard (the 
Standard condition). 
The phrase set used for the text in the experiment was from 
MacKenzie [10] and has been used successfully in several 
studies [11, 17]. It is a 500-phrase set with no punctuation 
symbols and no upper case letters. Due to time constraints 
from our experimental design, the full set of 500 phrases 
could not be used so a random set of 30 phrases was selec-
ted for each run of the experiment. This resulted in each 
condition (Standard, Tactile and Physical) lasting approxi-
mately 20 minutes. All conditions were tested in a static lab 
environment and also on the move on a subway train. 
EXPERIMENT 1 – LAB AND MOBILE STUDY 
Twelve participants took part in this experiment. All par-
ticipants were students or staff at the University with an age 
range of 18 to 38 years. There were 3 female participants 
and 9 male participants. Two participants were left-handed. 
All participants were seated during the experiment and 
asked to hold the device in their hands at all times. 
Participants were shown a phrase and asked to memorise it, 
then type it in using the keyboard for each condition. They 
were asked to enter it as quickly and as accurately as pos-
sible. Each phrase was shown at the top of the screen until 
the participant began typing at which point the phrase dis-
appeared. The interface used on the i718 is shown in Figure 
4. The Treo had the same display, except the onscreen key-
board was not shown; participants hit the physical ‘Enter’ 
key to submit a phrase. This method sits in between the text 
creation method and the text copy method. Text creation 
(where users come up with their own messages), although 
most realistic, is difficult to use as errors cannot easily be 
detected. Text copy (users copy messages on the screen) is 
not very realistic as most users do not copy their text mes-
sages or emails, for example, from a piece of paper onto 
their device. The method used in this experiment was not 
text creation, but the participants were not copying text 
directly onto the device either making it a slightly more 
realistic scenario (Brewster et al. used the copying method 
in their earlier study). Timing began when the participants 
hit the first key and stopped when they hit ‘Submit’ (or En-
ter on the Treo). They moved on to the next task whether or 
not the phrase was correct.  
 
Figure 4: Screenshot of the experiment interface. 
The mobile part of the study could have been tested in 
many different ways, for example, with users walking [14]. 
This has been shown to be an effective way to generate 
some of the workload of using a device whilst on the move 
[1]. We chose to investigate the interaction on a subway 
train (Figure 5) on the Glasgow Underground. People use 
PDAs and phones on trains and buses every day whilst 
commuting. The underground is a good platform for testing 
as noise levels are very dynamic, being quiet when stopped 
at a station, but very noisy when the train is in motion. 
Light levels again vary dramatically. Vibration and move-
ment are also very changeable. When the train is stopped 
there is little vibration. However, when it accelerates and 
decelerates people are subjected to lots of forces and vibra-
tion from the engine and general movement. Another im-
portant factor for this experiment is that the within-subjects 
design used meant that participants had to use three differ-
ent keyboards which took around one hour. This would be 
too far for some of the participants to walk. The subway 
allowed us to test in a realistic usage situation but without 
fatiguing the users too much.   
Conditions in this experiment were fully counterbalanced. 
Half of the participants completed the lab-based experiment 
first while the other half took part in the mobile subway 
train session first. For both the lab and mobile parts of the 
experiment, the keyboard conditions were also counterbal-
 5 
anced. The first set of conditions was completed on one day 
and the second set was completed at least one day later, to 
avoid participant fatigue. A training period was given be-
fore each trial (with five phrases for each keyboard type) to 
familiarise each user with the interface to be used. Tactile 
feedback was described and users were given the chance to 
physically feel the feedback with their fingertips. The de-
pendent variables measured in the experiment were speed, 
accuracy, keystrokes per character and subjective workload 
(using the NASA TLX workload assessment [5]). We add-
ed an extra factor, annoyance, to the workload analysis to 
specifically focus on any issues of irritation that the tactile 
feedback might cause the participants. 
 
Figure 5: The mobile condition of the experiment on the sub-
way train. The experimenter (on the left) takes notes whilst the 
participant (on the right) enters text. 
Results 
Accuracy 
The Physical keyboard condition had accuracy levels of 
88.25% in the lab and 89.6% in the mobile setting. The 
Tactile condition achieved scores of 82.7% in the lab and 
80% on the train, while the Standard touchscreen keyboard 
produced scores of 69.6% in the lab and 65.8% when mo-
bile (see Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6: Average percentage of phrases entered correctly 
(with standard deviations). 
A two-way ANOVA was performed on the mean number of 
correct phrases entered, comparing the effects of mobility 
(static and mobile) and the three keyboard types (Physical, 
Tactile and Standard). A correct response in this case was 
when the entered phrase (when the ‘submit’/Enter button 
was selected) matched the given phrase completely (regard-
less of whether corrections were made along the way). 
The ANOVA showed a significant main effect for keyboard 
type (F(2,22) = 96.9, p < 0.001). Using post hoc Tukey's 
Pairwise Comparisons, it can be seen that a significantly 
higher number of phrases was entered correctly on both the 
physical keyboard and the tactile touchscreen than on the 
standard touchscreen (p=0.05). There were no significant 
differences in the number of correct phrases entered on the 
physical keyboard and on the tactile touchscreen. The 
scores are, on average, 5.5% lower on the tactile 
touchscreen than the physical keyboard in the lab and 9.6% 
lower when mobile. Only between 1.6 and 2.8 more phrases 
were entered incorrectly in the tactile condition, suggesting 
that the performance is comparable with the real keyboard. 
There was no main effect for mobility (F (1,11)=1.79, 
p=0.18) and no interaction between keyboard type and mo-
bility (F(2,22)=1.58, p=0.21. This suggests that users did 
not type less accurately when on the move. 
These results show that participants were still able to enter 
text accurately when on the move, even with the distur-
bances caused by the train. It also shows the addition of 
tactile feedback can overcome some of the problems caused 
by the Standard touchscreen keyboard and enable people to 
notice and recover from errors they make (which confirms 
the result of Brewster et al. [1]). 
Keystrokes Per Character (KSPC) 
The number of keystrokes per character was recorded for 
each keyboard type. KSPC is the number of keystrokes 
required, on average, to generate a character of text for a 
given text entry technique in a given language with the 
ideal being one per character [17]. Given that accuracy 
scores were based on whether or not the submitted phrase 
matched the given phrase exactly and did not include cor-
rections as errors, KSPC was recorded in order to examine 
how many corrections users had to make before submitting 
a correct phrase. The average number of KSPC for each 
condition is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7: Average KSPC for each setting and keyboard type 
(with standard deviations). 
 
A two-way ANOVA was performed on the KSPC data 
comparing the effects of mobility and the keyboard type. A 
significant main effect for KSPC for keyboard type was 
found (F(2,22) = 6.58, p<0.0001). Tukey tests showed that 
there were significantly more KSPC when typing on the 
tactile touchscreen than the physical or standard keyboards 
(p=0.05). There was no main effect for mobility (F(1,11) = 
2.53, p=0.11) and no interaction between keyboard type and 
mobility (F(2,22) = 0.04, p=0.95). 
The standard touchscreen keyboard had a lower KSPC than 
the tactile one. The reason for this is that participants cor-
rected fewer of the errors they made (as can be seen in Fig-
ure 6). In an experiment like this one this is a reasonable 
tradeoff for participants as they are not penalised for errors 
(they can continue to the next phrase even if the current one 
is incorrect). In a real life setting, this would result in many 
mis-typed email addresses or URLs. The physical keyboard 
was still the best, with the lowest KSPC value. This sug-
gests that the tactile feedback added helps some aspects of 
typing but it is not quite at the level of a real, physical key-
board. Further research into the tactile cues would be 
needed to see if we could improve the results here. 
Time to Enter Phrases 
Figure 8 shows the average time taken to enter a phrase for 
each keyboard condition in the lab and mobile settings. 
Participants using the physical keyboard entered the phrases 
with means of between 13 and 17 seconds (lab and mobile). 
The tactile touchscreen allowed participants to enter a 
phrase of text in 20 seconds (lab) and 22 seconds (mobile) 
while text entry on the standard touchscreen took longer 
with rates of between 25 and 27 seconds. 
 
Figure 8: Average time per phrase entered in seconds (with 
standard deviations). 
A two-way ANOVA on time to enter phrases for they key-
board types and mobility showed a significant main effect 
for keyboard type (F(2,22) = 69.78, p< 0.001). Tukey HSD 
tests showed that that the time taken to enter phrases on the 
physical keyboard and tactile touchscreen were signifi-
cantly lower than on the standard touchscreen keyboard 
(p=0.001). The physical keyboard was significantly faster 
than the tactile one (p=0.05), indicating that the physical 
keyboard allows faster typing speeds than the touchscreen 
even with tactile feedback. This result means that tactile 
additions to the standard keyboard again had a significant 
positive effect on the usability of the device. Combining 
this with the accuracy results suggests that tactile feedback 
can offer some significant advantages for touchscreen de-
vices. 
This time there was a significant main effect for mobility 
(F(1,11)=9.48, p=0.003), with the mobile condition increas-
ing the time taken to enter phrases over the lab (there was 
no interaction, F(2,22)=2.65, p=0.077). This shows that 
being mobile does slow down text entry rates due to the 
movements in the environment even though it did not affect 
accuracy. This may be because participants chose to main-
tain accuracy at the expense of input speed. 
Subjective Workload 
The results of the NASA TLX [5] questionnaires are shown 
in Figure 9. A two-way ANOVA on overall workload 
showed a significant main effect (for the standard six fac-
tors) for keyboard type (F(2,22) = 111.35, p<0.001). There 
was no significant main effect for mobility (F(1, 11) = 0.19, 
p = 0.66) and there was no interaction (F(2, 22) = 0.7, p = 
0.49). Tukey HSD tests showed that overall workload when 
using the standard touchscreen keyboard is significantly 
higher than when using the physical keyboard or the tactile 
touchscreen keyboard (p=0.05). There was no significant 
difference between the Physical and Tactile conditions.  
Figure 9: Average scores from NASA TLX questionnaires. 
Further analysis using a single factor ANOVA on each of 
the workload factors showed a significant difference in all 
seven factors of the workload analysis with p<0.001. A 
Tukey HSD test confirmed that the mental demand, phys-
ical demand, frustration and annoyance levels when using 
the standard touchscreen are significantly higher than when 
using the other keyboard types. It also showed that per-
ceived performance levels are significantly lower on the 
standard touchscreen.  
The analysis of each workload factor also showed that tem-
poral demand and effort is significantly higher when using 
 7 
the standard or tactile touchscreen than when using the 
physical keyboard.  
Some participants commented that the standard touchscreen 
was frustrating as they did not receive feedback when their 
fingertip had moved off the edge of the button. Any visual 
feedback was masked by the fingertip over the button. A 
few also commented that they resorted to using their 
fingernails to tap the button in order to be more accurate but 
that this was uncomfortable. 
Discussion 
Hypothesis 1 can be accepted as it has been shown that 
using the physical keyboard produces significantly fewer 
errors and the greatest input speed with phrases being en-
tered up to 10 seconds faster than the on the standard 
touchscreen. The greatest input speed results apply in both 
the lab and mobile settings. 
Hypotheses 2 and 4 can also be accepted as the results show 
that touchscreen keyboards with tactile feedback produce 
fewer errors and greater speeds of text entry compared to 
standard touchscreen keyboards without tactile feedback 
both in the lab setting and in the mobile setting. This can be 
seen clearly in the mobile setting where phrases were en-
tered up to 6 seconds faster with tactile feedback and accu-
racy scores were as high as 74% compared to the poor ac-
curacy scores on the standard touchscreen keyboard. These 
results indicate that when in a mobile situation on a bumpy 
noisy train, it becomes even more difficult to use a standard 
touchscreen keyboard but tactile touchscreens still perform 
significantly better despite the dynamic environment.  
Given that text entry on the tactile touchscreen only took 4 
seconds longer on average than the physical keyboard and 
the accuracy results between both keyboards are compa-
rable, hypothesis 3 can be partially accepted. These results 
suggest that tactile feedback should be added to touchscreen 
phones as it can significantly improve performance over a 
phone without such feedback. 
EXPERIMENT 2 - TACTILE TOUCHSCREEN VERSION 2 
Given the promising results obtained in the first experiment 
suggesting that tactile feedback could significantly improve 
the usability of fingertip touchscreen text entry, it was de-
cided that this should be further investigated using an alter-
native, higher specification actuator incorporating spatial 
location to see if performance could be improved even fur-
ther. Therefore, the same experiment was run again in the 
lab and mobile environments, but this time using a Dell 
Axim PDA. The Dell PDA was used as the new vibrotactile 
actuators could not be connected to the proprietary audio 
connection in the i718. The aim of this experiment was to 
investigate whether an alternative, more expensive, spe-
cialised actuator providing localisation could increase per-
formance and get closer to that of the real physical key-
board.  
 
Figure 10: A C2 Tactor from Engineering Acoustics Inc. 
Hardware 
The C2 Tactor from EAI (Figure 10) was used for this 
study. It is a small wearable linear vibrotactile actuator, 
which was designed specifically to provide a lightweight 
equivalent to large laboratory-based linear actuators [12]. 
The contactor in the C2 is the moving mass itself, which is 
mounted above the housing and pre-loaded against the skin. 
This provides localised feedback as only the contact point 
(the sliver dot in the centre of (Figure 10) vibrates instead 
of the whole surrounding (which occurs in a typical mobile 
phone like the i718 where the whole device shakes). The 
C2 is resonant at 250Hz but is also designed to be able to 
produce a wide range of frequencies unlike many basic mo-
bile phone actuators which have a limited frequency range. 
In the experiment, a standard Dell Axim PDA was aug-
mented with two C2 actuators attached to the back (Figure 
11) so that they rested under the user’s hand when it was 
held. One pressed against the palm of the hand, the other 
the middle of the fingers. 
 
Figure 11: The Dell Axim PDA with 2 C2 actuators on the 
back. 
Feedback Design 
The tactile feedback used in this experiment was identical 
to that provided in Experiment 1 in that the manipulated 
tactile parameters are the same. However, the feedback felt 
very different due to the higher quality of the actuators: 
they ramp up faster and modulation is clearer. The only 
other difference was that the actuators provide localised 
feedback to the hand holding the device as opposed to shak-
ing the whole device. By placing the two actuators on the 
left and right sides of the device, spatial location could be 
incorporated into the feedback to give some indication of 
which button was giving the feedback. Using multiple ac-
tuators to provide spatial cues has been used successfully in 
a previous study investigating vibrotactile progress bars on 
a PDA [6]. Three actuators were pulsed in turn to give the 
feeling of movement around a circle to indicate the progress 
 
of a download. The design we used here is similar but uses 
only two actuators and applies it to text entry. 
Whenever a fingertip-over, fingertip-click, or fingertip-slip 
event was triggered, the actuator placed nearest the button 
would be used to present the feedback. For instance, if the 
button ‘A’ was pressed, the actuator on the left was acti-
vated, if the button ‘G’ was pressed, both actuators were 
activated and if the button ‘L’ was pressed, the actuator on 
the right was activated. 
Methodology 
The aims and methodology of this experiment were the 
same as the previous experiment with one additional hy-
pothesis: 
5. Vibrotactile feedback from the C2 actuators will pro-
vide better results than the built-in actuator in the mo-
bile device. 
A new set of 12 participants were recruited from the Uni-
versity. They were presented with 30 random phrases from 
the MacKenzie phrase set and asked to enter them as 
quickly and as accurately as possible on the PDA (with and 
without tactile feedback). Participants used the device in the 
lab and then on the subway. They only used this device for 
the tactile touchscreen and standard touchscreen conditions 
as we could compare back to Experiment 1 for performance 
on the physical keyboard condition. Once again, speed, 
accuracy and KSPC were measured. 
Results From Experiment 2 
Accuracy 
The average number of phrases entered correctly is shown 
in Figure 12 alongside the results from Experiment 1 for 
comparison. In the lab condition the PDA with actuators 
scored 23.8 correct answers and mobile 24.5. 
 
Figure 12: Average percentage of phrases entered correctly 
(with standard deviations). 
A two-way ANOVA with replication was performed on the 
mean number of correct phrases entered, comparing the 
effects of mobility (static and mobile) and the four key-
board types (Physical, Tactile and Standard from Experi-
ment 1 and the PDA with 2 C2 actuators). Although par-
ticipants in experiment 2 had less practice (they only did 
PDA with no tactile and PDA with tactile in lab and mo-
bile), the first study was fully counterbalanced so that a 
valid comparison can be made between both sets of data 
from each experiment. The ANOVA showed there was a 
significant main effect for keyboard type (F(3,33) = 84.6, 
p<0.0001). Post hoc Tukey tests showed that significantly 
more phrases were entered correctly on the physical key-
board, PDA with 2 actuators and on the tactile touchscreen 
compared to the standard touchscreen (p=0.05). There were 
no significant differences between the tactile touchscreen, 
PDA and the physical keyboard. The results show that the 
average number of correct phrases on the physical keyboard 
(26.4 in the lab, 26.9 when mobile) and the PDA (25.3 in 
the lab, 24.4 when mobile) were very similar. There was 
again no main effect for mobility (F(1,11)=2.1, p=0.144) 
and no interaction (F(3,33)=1.39, p=0.24). 
Keystrokes per Character (KSPC) 
The KSPC data for Experiment 1 and the PDA with the C2 
actuators is shown in Figure 13. The PDA scored a mean of 
1.20 in the lab and 1.24 when mobile. 
 
Figure 13: Average keystrokes per character (with standard 
deviations). 
A two-way ANOVA showed a significant main effect in 
KSPC for keyboard type (F(3,33)=4.82, p=0.003). Using 
post hoc Tukey's Pairwise Comparison, it can be seen that a 
significantly higher number of KSPC occurred when using 
the tactile touchscreen compared to all three other types of 
keyboard including the PDA with C2 actuators (p=0.05). 
There were no significant differences in the KSPC on the 
physical keyboard and on the PDA with C2 actuators or the 
standard touchscreen. This suggests that the PDA has an 
advantage over the tactile touchscreen in that KSPC is re-
duced, meaning that it is closer to the performance of the 
real keyboard. On the other hand, the KSPC results could 
be seen as an indication that participants corrected more of 
their errors on the tactile touchscreen therefore increasing 
KSPC. Therefore suggesting that the tactile touchscreen 
helps users to identify errors more easily by providing 
fingertip-slip feedback while errors could go unnoticed on 
the standard touchscreen keyboard with no tactile feedback.  
 9 
There was no main effect for mobility (F(1,11)=3.42, 
p=0.07) and no interaction between mobility and keyboard 
type (F(3,33)=0.03, p=0.98). 
Time to Enter Phrases 
The average time to enter a phrase is shown in Figure 14. A 
two-way ANOVA on mobility and keyboard type showed a 
significant main effect for keyboard type (F(3,33)=70.41, 
p<0.001), for mobility (F(1,11) = 10.24, p=0.001), with a 
significant interaction between the two (F(3,33)=2.92, 
p=0.03). 
As before, the average time to enter a phrase was signifi-
cantly affected by keyboard type. Tukey tests showed that 
the time per phrase on the PDA was significantly lower 
than on the tactile touchscreen and the standard touchscreen 
(p=0.05). There was no significant difference between the 
physical keyboard and the PDA. These results suggest that 
the more specialised C2 actuator can improve results over 
the actuator in the Samsung i718 and get closer to the real 
keyboard. The C2's are too large to be incorporated into a 
current mobile device, but it does suggest that manufactur-
ers could improve the capabilities of some of the more basic 
actuators used and gain further performance benefits. 
As in Experiment 1 we found that mobility significantly 
increased the time taken to enter phrases, but this time there 
was a significant interaction between keyboard type and 
mobility. The interaction occurred as there was no change 
in performance in the PDA condition when static and mo-
bile. All other keyboard types performed worse when mo-
bile, but performance with the PDA went from 17.5 to 17.9 
seconds per phrase. It is not clear why this occurred and 
further investigation is needed to see if there is a real effect. 
It does suggest, however, that the performance with that 
virtual tactile keyboard is robust, with performance in the 
mobile condition very close to the real physical keyboard. 
 
Figure 14: Average time per phrase in seconds (with standard 
deviations). 
Subjective Workload 
The results of the NASA TLX questionnaires are shown in 
Figure 15. A two-way ANOVA on overall workload 
showed a significant main effect for keyboard type (F(3,33) 
= 88.62, p<0.001) but no effect for mobility (F = 0.12, p = 
0.72) and no interaction between them. A one-way 
ANOVA performed on each of the seven workload factors 
followed by Tukey tests showed that mental demand, phys-
ical demand, temporal demand, effort, frustration were sig-
nificantly increased and perceived performance was signifi-
cantly decreased when using the standard touchscreen.  
Unlike Experiment 1, the ANOVA and Tukeys showed a 
significantly higher level of annoyance for the PDA with 
C2 actuators than with the physical keyboard or with the 
original tactile touchscreen (F(2,22) = 35.4, p < .0001). It is 
not clear why there should be more annoyance in this case, 
particularly as performance overall was improved. It may 
be due to the stronger forces that the C2 actuators can ap-
ply. We did not allow the users to change the force of the 
actuators, but that could easily be done in the same way as 
the volume of the audio can be changed.  
Figure 15: NASA TLX Scores Compared with Experiment 1. 
Observed Methods of Finger Input  
One interesting observation from these studies was the dif-
ferent ways in which participants chose to use their fingers 
to press the buttons. All but one of the participants used 
both thumbs when entering text on the physical keyboard. 
On the touchscreen, both with and without tactile feedback, 
participants used several different techniques. Some would 
go from using their forefinger to the middle finger to the 
fingernail and back to the forefinger for instance. Two of 
the participants even attempted using their little fingers to 
enter the text. At no time did the participants use their 
thumbs or more than one finger at once on the 
touchscreens. It appeared as though they were uncomfort-
able and could not find an easy way to use their fingers with 
the displays. One participant commented that he felt like he 
was ‘learning to type all over again’. This could simply be 
due to the relative novelty of touchscreen mobile devices 
and participants’ lack of experience with them or, perhaps, 
could indicate that a different keyboard layout is required.  
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The two studies reported here have shown that tactile feed-
back can significantly improve fingertip interaction and 
performance with soft keyboards on touchscreen mobile 
 
devices. With the addition of this extra tactile feedback the 
performance of touchscreen keyboards can be brought close 
to the level of real, physical keyboards. This means that the 
benefits of touchscreen displays (such as the flexibility to 
use the whole screen for games, web pages or photos) do 
not come at the cost of poorer text or number entry. It has 
been demonstrated that tactile feedback can benefit 
touchscreen interaction in both stationary situations and 
more varying, realistic mobile situations.  
Furthermore, a comparison of two different types of tactile 
actuator showed that text entry on can be further improved 
by using multiple, specialised actuators which can provide 
localised feedback as opposed to a single standard actuator 
which vibrates the whole device. However, the results for 
both types of tactile touchscreen show that user perform-
ance is significantly better than when using a touchscreen 
with no tactile feedback. Therefore, given that the C2 actua-
tors used are expensive and not currently found in standard 
devices, it would appear to still be beneficial and easier to 
augment touchscreens with tactile feedback provided by the 
actuator already present in the phone.  
Given these promising results, it is probable that tactile 
feedback will aid in all interactions with touchscreen but-
tons, not just text entry, and future studies will examine 
fingertip interaction with other types of touchscreen widg-
ets such as progress bars, icons, menus and sliders. 
The results of our studies suggest that manufacturers should 
include tactile feedback in new touchscreen devices. There 
were no drawbacks from including it, only benefits. Fur-
thermore, such feedback is likely to be of benefit to stylus 
interaction as well as fingertip interaction (shown also in 
[1]). Our results strongly suggest that using either the built-
in vibrotactile actuator already present in most mobile de-
vices or more specialised actuators to produce tactile feed-
back can improve the usability of touchscreen keyboards.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by Immersion Corp, California 
and EPSRC Advanced Research Fellowship GR/S53244. 
Hoggan is joint funded by Nokia and EPSRC. Many thanks 
to Chris Ullrich, Director of Applied Research, Immersion 
Corp and Strathclyde Passenger Transport for allowing us 
to test our software on their trains. 
REFERENCES 
1. Brewster, S., Chohan, F. and Brown, L. Tactile Feed-
back for Mobile Interactions. In Proc CHI '07, ACM 
Press (2007), 159 - 162. 
2. Brown, L. M. and Brewster, S. A. Multidimensional 
Tactons for Non-Visual Information Display in Mobile 
Devices. In Proc MobileHCI '06, ACM Press (2006), 
231 - 238. 
3. Dvorak, A. There Is a Better Typewriter Keyboard. 
National Business Education Quarterly 11, (1943), 51 - 
58. 
4. Erp, J. B. Tactile Navigation Display. In Proc First 
international Workshop on Haptic Human-Computer 
Interaction, LNCS (2001), 165 - 173. 
5. Hart, S. G. and Staveland, L. E. Development of Nasa-
Tlx (Task Load Index): Results of Empirical and Theo-
retical Research. Human Mental Workload (1988), 139 - 
183. 
6. Hoggan, E., Brewster, S. and Anwar, S. Mobile Multi-
Actuator Tactile Displays. In Proc 2nd International 
Workshop on Haptic and Audio Interaction Design, 
Springer LNCS (2007), 22 - 33. 
7. Kaaresoja, T., Brown, L. M. and Linjama, J. Snap-
Crackle-Pop: Tactile Feedback for Mobile Touch 
Screens. In Proc Eurohaptics '06, (2006), 565 - 566. 
8. Lee, J. C., Dietz, P. H., Leigh, D., Yerazunis, W. S. and 
Hudson, S. E. Haptic Pen: A Tactile Feedback Stylus for 
Touch Screens In Proc 17th annual ACM symposium on 
User interface software and technology ACM Press 
(2004), 291-294. 
9. Luk, J., Pasquero, J., Little, S., MacLean, K., Levesque, 
V. and Hayward, V. A Role for Haptics in Mobile Inter-
action: Initial Design Using a Handheld Tactile Display 
Prototype In Proc CHI '06, ACM Press (2006), 171-180  
10. MacKenzie, I. S. and Soukoreff, R. W. Phrase Sets for 
Evaluating Text Entry Techniques. In Proc CHI '03, 
ACM (2003), 754 - 755. 
11. Mackenzie, I. S., Zhang, S. and Soukoreff, R. W. Text 
Entry Using Soft Keyboards. Behaviour and Informa-
tion Technology 18, 4 (1999), 235 - 244. 
12. Mortimer, B., Zets, G. and Cholewiak, R. W. Vibrotac-
tile Transduction and Transducers. The Journal of the 
Acoustic Society of America 121, (2007), 2970 - 2977. 
13. Parhi, P., Karlson, A. K. and Bederson, B. B. Target 
Size Study for One-Handed Thumb Use on Small 
Touchscreen Devices. In Proc Mobile HCI '06, ACM 
Press (2006), 203 - 210. 
14. Pirhonen, A., Brewster, S. and Holguin, C. Gestural and 
Audio Metaphors as a Means of Control for Mobile De-
vices. In Proc CHI '02, ACM Press (2002), 291 - 298. 
15. Poupyrev, I. and Maruyama, S. Tactile Interfaces for 
Small Touch Screens. In Proc 16th Annual ACM Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology, 
ACM Press (2003), 217 - 220. 
16. Sears, A., Revis, D., Swatski, J., Crittenden, R. and 
Shneiderman, B. Investigating Touchscreen Typing: The 
Effect of Keyboard Size on Typing Speed. Behaviour 
and Information Technology 12, 1 (1993), 17 - 22. 
17. Soukoreff, R. W. and MacKenzie, I. S. Metrics for Text 
Entry Research: An Evaluation of MSD and KSPC, and 
a New Unified Error Metric. In Proc CHI '03, ACM 
(2003), 113 - 120. 

