Computer Literacy 
Hardware & Software Classification 
Hardware Classification 
Hardware is just another word for computer equipment; it is the 
physical parts of the computer that we can see and touch.  All 
computer equipment can be grouped into one of the following  
5 categories of hardware devices: 
 
 Input 
 
 Processing 
 
 Output 
 
 Storage 
 
 Communication 
 
Hardware Classification continued… 
 Input devices 
These devices provide humans with a way to input data into the 
computer, so that the computer can process it into information. 
 
 Keyboard 
The keyboard is still the primary input  
device used with computers. 
 
 Mouse 
The mouse is a pointing device that allows us to interact  
with the computer in a more intuitive and graphical way. 
Hardware Classification continued… 
 Processing devices 
These devices process your data (raw facts)  
into information (something useful to humans). 
 
 CPU (Central Processing Unit) 
This is the heart of the computer, the main chip  
that does all the work 
 
 Motherboard (main circuit board) 
This circuit board connects all the different 
components inside the box (system unit) 
 
Hardware Classification continued… 
 Output devices 
These devices provide the computer with a means of  
outputting what it has processed. 
 
 Monitor (screen copy) 
The monitor, or computer screen provides us  
with immediate output results from the computer. 
 
 Printer (hardcopy) 
The printer provides us with a permanent  
printed copy of the computer’s output. 
 
Hardware Classification continued… 
Storage devices 
These devices provide the computer with a means of  
storing what it has processed. 
 Hard drive (permanent storage) 
A hard drive stores data and information so that  
we can retrieve it at a later date; its content is not  
lost when power is turned off. 
 Memory (temporary storage) 
Random Access Memory (RAM) is a chip inside  
the computer that stores intermediate results of the  
computer’s processing; its content is lost when the computer is 
turned off. 
 USB drive (removable storage) 
Removable media provides a means of copying  
or removing data from the computer, thus protecting  
it from loss. 
Hardware Classification continued… 
Communication devices 
These devices allow computers to communicate with other 
computers via computer networks, such as Local Area Networks 
or the Internet. 
 
 NIC (Network Interface Card) 
This card installed in a computer allows a  
classroom of computer workstations to communicate  
with one another. 
 
 Router  
This piece of hardware assists in connecting  
multiple Network Interface Cards to a single  
computer (network server). 
 
Software Classification 
Software (computer programs) tell the computer what to 
do and how to do it.  Without software a computer is 
completely useless!   
 
Software can be divided into 2 main categories. 
 
 System 
 
 Applications 
Software Classification continued… 
 System 
System software is the software that communicates directly with the 
computer.  It provides the interface between you and the computer.  This 
software can be divided into 3 main categories. 
 
     Operating System (OS) 
     Utilities 
     Language Translators 
 
Software Classification continued… 
 Applications 
Applications software is software written to be “applied” to a particular 
task, such as creating text documents or graphics.  These programs are 
interpreted and run by the Operating System.  Applications software can 
be categorized into many types.  Here are several categories of popular 
software. 
 
     Word Processing 
     Presentation Graphics 
     Spreadsheets 
     Database Management 
  Web Authoring 
  Browsers 
 
Acronym review… 
Here’s a review of the acronyms used in this 
presentation: 
 
 OS   Operating System 
 NIC Network Interface Card 
 CPU   Central Processing Unit 
 RAM   Random Access Memory 

