Flash Memory Cells—An Overview
PAOLO PAVAN, MEMBER, IEEE, ROBERTO BEZ, PIERO OLIVO,
AND ENRICO ZANONI, SENIOR MEMBER, IEEE
The aim of this paper is to give a thorough overview of Flash
memory cells. Basic operations and charge-injection mechanisms
that are most commonly used in actual Flash memory cells are
reviewed to provide an understanding of the underlying physics
and principles in order to appreciate the large number of device
structures, processing technologies, and circuit designs presented
in the literature. New cell structures and architectural solutions
have been surveyed to highlight the evolution of the Flash memory
technology, oriented to both reducing cell size and upgrading
product functions. The subject is of extreme interest: new concepts
involving new materials, structures, principles, or applications
are being continuously introduced. The worldwide semiconductor
memory market seems ready to accept many new applications in
fields that are not specific to traditional nonvolatile memories.
Keywords—Charge carrier processes, read-only memory, semi-
conductor memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
memories can be divided into two main categories: random
access memories (RAM’s), which are volatile, i.e., they lose
stored information once the power supply is switched off,
and read-only memories (ROM’s), which are nonvolatile,
i.e., they keep stored information also when the power
supply is switched off. Nonvolatile memory market share
has been continuously growing in the past few years, and
further growth in the near future is foreseen, especially for
Flash memories (in which a single cell can be electrically
programmable and a large number of cells—called a block,
sector, or page—are electrically erasable at the same
time) due to their enhanced flexibility against electrically
programmable read-only memories (EPROM’s), which are
electrically programmable but erasable via ultraviolet (UV)
Manuscript received January 28, 1997; revised May 8, 1997. This work
was supported in part by the European Commission Standards, Measure-
ment and Testing Programme in the framework of the “PROPHECY”
project, in part by Italian MURST (Ministry of University and Scientific
Research), and in part by CNR (National Council of Research).
P. Pavan is with the Dipartimento di Scienze dell’Ingegneria, Università
di Modena, 41100 Modena Italy.
R. Bez is with Central R&D, SGS-Thomson Microelectronics, 20041
Agrate Brianza (MI) Italy.
P. Olivo is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università di Ferrara,
44100 Ferrara Italy.
E. Zanoni is with the Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informatica, Uni-
versità di Padova, 35131 Padova Italy.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9219(97)05720-4.
exposure. Electrically erasable and programmable read-only
memories (EEPROM’s), which are electrically erasable
and programmable per single byte, will be manufactured
for specific applications only, since they use larger areas
and, therefore, are more expensive. This is a conservative
scenario, since there might be changes due to technology
evolution. For example, at the end of the 1980’s, Flash
memories were supposed to replace EPROM’s rapidly in
every application. This did not happen, mainly due to
early Flash reliability problems. On the other hand, the
realization of new generations of Flash memories that
can be erased by blocks of different sizes, emulating
EEPROM’s in some applications, and with single power
supply widens the field of applicability for Flash memories
and encourages new uses. In 1996, it was forecasted [1]
that the memory market is going to be about half of the
total integrated circuit market by the year 2000. Dynamic
random-access memories (DRAM’s) represent and will
represent the main portion of the memory market (Fig. 1).
Nonvolatile memories (NVM’s) will account for 12% of the
total available market, and Flash memory cells are forecast
to be more than 50% of the year 2000 NVM market.
There are two major applications for Flash memories that
should be pointed out. One application is the possibility of
nonvolatile memory integration in logic systems—mainly,
but not only, microprocessors—to allow software updates,
store identification codes, reconfigure the system on the
field, or simply have smart cards. The other application is
to create storing elements, like memory boards or solid-
state hard disks, made by Flash memory arrays which are
configured to create large-size memories to compete with
miniaturized hard disks. Since 1993, 40-Mbyte solid-state
hard disks have been produced [2]. They are based on 16-
Mb Flash memory boards but are very expensive. This
scenario is not foreseen to change in the next few years
until 64-Mb Flash memories optimized for this specific
application will be available. Solid-state disks are very
useful for portable applications, since they have small
dimensions, low power consumption, and no mobile parts,
therefore being more robust. Flash memories combine
the capability of nonvolatile storage with an access time
comparable to DRAM’s, which allows direct execution of
microcodes. If this is going to happen, Flash memories will
0018–9219/97$10.00  1997 IEEE
1248 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 1. Forecast for year 2000 worldwide memory market and NVM market. (Source:
WSTS/SGS-Thomson, May 1996 [1].)
compete for the same market share with DRAM. More-
over, Flash memories can find interesting applications in
personal computer program management: many programs
can be stored in Flash chips, without being continuously
loaded and unloaded from hard disk partitions, and directly
executed.
In the technical sessions on Flash memory technology at
the 1990–1996 IEEE International Electron Device Meet-
ings, very advanced technical schemes were proposed for
very-high-density Flash memory generations. New concepts
have been disclosed for 256-Mb cell processing, and mul-
tilevel programming techniques have been emphasized to
improve packing density. New operating schemes have
been presented to improve scalability and reliability issues.
This paper is a general review of mainstream Flash
memory cell technologies. The next section will give an
overview on the basic operating principles of a schematic
cell, which is commonly depicted as a standard metal-
oxide-semiconductor (MOS) transistor with a floating gate
(FG) surrounded by a dielectric. Section III reviews the
principles of charge-injection mechanisms, namely, hot-
electron injection and tunneling. The main concepts de-
scribed will be referred to throughout the paper. Section IV
starts with a thorough overview of the industry-standard
Flash cell, which is based on the double-poly stacked-gate
cell, and then gives an overview of basic reliability issues
inherent to the cell structure itself. Scaling issues are also
briefly addressed. Section V gives an overview of the latest
Flash structures presented in the literature.
II. NONVOLATILE MEMORIES
There is a widespread variety of NVM’s, and they all
show different characteristics according to the structure of
the selected cell and the complexity of the array organiza-
tion. They all have performance that can go from those of
ROM memories, which cannot be reconfigured, to those of
information alterability with almost the same flexibility of
RAM memories.
A. Programmable ROM—Information Storage and Access
The need for information alterability always contrasts
with the need for good data retention. Cells with different
characteristics have different applications according to the
relevance that the device functional parameter has (ab-
sorbed power, programming/erasing speed and selectivity,
capacity, and so forth).
To have a memory cell that can commute from one state
to the other and that can store the information indepen-
dently of external conditions, the storing element needs
to be a device whose conductivity can be changed in a
nondestructive way.
One solution is to have a transistor with a threshold
voltage that can change repetitively from a high to a low
state, corresponding to the two states of the memory cell,
i.e., the binary values (“1” and “0”) of the stored bit. Cells
can be “written” into either state “1” or “0” by either
“programming” or “erasing” methods. One of the two states
is called “programmed,” the other “erased.” In some kinds
of cells, the low-threshold state is called “programmed”; in
others, it is called “erased.” Though this may induce some
confusion, the different terms are related to the different
organizations of the memory array. In fact, if a datum has
to be stored in a bit of the memory, there are different
procedures.
1) The whole memory is erased (i.e., all the cells are
driven in the same conductive or nonconductive state)
and, after this, the information is programmed in the
selected bit; the rest of the array is reprogrammed.
2) Only the byte that includes the bit to change is erased
and then reprogrammed with the new information.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1249
3) Only the bit that has to be changed is addressed; the
value to be stored is compared with the already stored
one and written only if different.
When memories are organized as in cases 1) and 2), there is
only one operation that can be performed bit by bit, called
“program.” The other operation, which is performed on the
whole array or on a part of it, is the “erase” operation. When
memories are organized as in case 3), both operations can
be performed bit by bit but “program” needs a much more
complicated array organization.
The “read” operation is performed by applying to the cell
a gate voltage that is between the values of the thresholds
of the erased and programmed cells and senses the current
flowing through the device.
The threshold voltage of a MOS transistor can be
written as
(1)
where is a constant that depends on the gate and substrate
material, doping, and gate oxide thickness, is the charge
weighted with respect to its position in the gate oxide, and
is the gate oxide capacitance.
As can be seen, the threshold voltage of the memory cell
can be altered by changing the amount of charge present
between the gate and the channel, i.e., changing .
There are many ways to obtain the threshold voltage shift.
Two are the most common solutions used to store charge.
1) In traps that are present in the oxide, more precisely
at the interface between two dielectric materials.
The most commonly used interface is the silicon
oxide/nitride interface. Devices obtained in this way
are called metal-nitride-oxide-silicon (MNOS) cells
[3], [4].
2) In a conductive material layer between the gate and
the channel and completely surrounded by insulator.
This is the FG device.
In any case, endurance (capability of maintaining the stored
information after erase/program/read cycling) and retention
(capability of keeping the stored information in time) are
the two parameters that describe how “good” and reliable
a cell is.
MNOS devices are not used anymore in consumer elec-
tronics due to their low endurance and retention. FG devices
are at the basis of every modern NVM, particularly for
Flash applications.
B. FG Device
The basic concepts and the functionality of an FG device
are easily understood if it is possible to determine the FG
potential. The schematic cross section of a generic FG
device is shown in Fig. 2; the upper gate is the control
gate and the lower gate, completely isolated within the gate
dielectric, is the FG. The FG acts as a potential well (see
Fig. 3). If a charge is forced into the well, it cannot move
Fig. 2. Schematic cross section of an FG transistor.
Fig. 3. Energy band diagram of an FG transistor.
from there without applying an external force: the FG stores
charge.
The simple model shown in Fig. 2 helps in understanding
the electrical behavior of an FG device. and
are the capacitances between the FG and control gate,
source, drain, and substrate regions, respectively. Consider
the case when no charge is stored in the FG, i.e.,
(2)
where is the potential on the FG, is the potential
on the control gate, and and are potentials on
source, drain, and bulk, respectively. If we name
the total capacitance of the FG, and
we define the coupling coefficient relative
to the electrode , where can be one among ,
and , the potential on the FG due to capacitive coupling
is given by
(3)
It should be pointed out that (3) shows that the FG potential
does not depend only on the control gate voltage but also
on the source, drain, and bulk potentials. If the source and
bulk are both grounded, (3) can be rearranged as
(4)
where
(5)
Device equations for the FG MOS transistor can be ob-
tained from the conventional MOS transistor equations by
1250 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
replacing MOS gate voltage with FG voltage
and transforming the device parameters, such as threshold
voltage and conductivity factor , to values measured
with respect to the control gate. If we define for
floating gate control gate
(6)
and
floating gate control gate
(7)
it is possible to compare the current–voltage (I–V) equa-
tions of a conventional and an FG MOS transistor in the
triode region (TR) and in the saturation region (SR) [5].
Conventional MOS transistor
TR
SR
FG MOS transistor
TR
(8)
SR
(9)
where and of (8) and (9) are measured with respect
to the control gate rather than with respect to the FG
of the stacked gate structure. They are to be read as
control gate and control gate .
Several effects can be observed from these equations,
many of them due to the capacitive coupling between the
drain and the FG, which modifies the I–V characteristics
of FG MOS transistors with respect to conventional MOS
transistors [5].
1) The FG transistor can go into depletion-mode opera-
tion and can conduct current even when .
This is because the channel can be turned on by the
drain voltage through the term in (8). This
effect is usually referred to as “drain turn-on.”
2) The saturation region for the conventional MOS tran-
sistor is where is essentially independent of the
drain voltage. This is no longer true for the FG
transistor, in which the drain current will continue
to rise as the drain voltage increases and saturation
will not occur.
3) The boundary between the triode and saturation re-
gions for the FG transistor is expressed by
(10)
compared to the conditions valid for the conventional
transistor .
4) The transconductance in SR is given by
(11)
where increases with in the FG transistor
in contrast to the conventional transistor, where
is relatively independent of the drain voltage in the
saturation region.
5) The capacitive coupling ratio depends on and
only , and its value
can be verified by
(12)
in the saturation region.
Many techniques have been presented to extract the
capacitive coupling ratios from simple dc measurements
[6]–[8]. The most widely used methods [9], [10] are 1)
linear threshold voltage technique, 2) subthreshold slope
method, and 3) transconductance technique. These methods
require the measurement of the electrical parameter in
both a memory cell and in a “dummy cell,” i.e., a device
identical to the memory cell, but with floating and control
gates connected. By comparing the results, the coupling
coefficient can be determined. Other methods have been
proposed to extract coupling coefficients directly from the
memory cell without using a “dummy” one, but they need
a more complex extraction procedure [11]–[13].
C. The Reading Operation
Let us consider the case when charge is stored in the FG,
i.e., . All the hypotheses made above hold true, and
the following modifications need to be included.
Equations (4), (6), and (8), respectively, become
(13)
(14)
(15)
Equation (14) shows the dependence on . In particular,
the threshold voltage shift is derived as
(16)
where is the threshold voltage when .
Equation (15) shows that the role of injected charge is
to shift the I–V curves of the cell. If the reading biases
are fixed (usually V, V), the presence of
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1251
Fig. 4. I–V curves of an FG device when there is no charge stored
in the FG (curve A) and when a negative charge Q is stored in
the FG (curve B) [14].
charge greatly affects the current level used to sense the cell
state. Fig. 4 [14] shows two curves: curve A represents the
“1” state and curve B the same cell in the “0” state obtained
with a 3-V threshold shift. In the defined reading condition
(“1”) is approximately 100 A and (“0”) .
III. CHARGE INJECTION MECHANISMS
There are many solutions used to transfer electric charge
from and into the FG. For both erase and program, the
problem is making the charge pass through a layer of
insulating material.
The hot-electron injection (HEI) mechanism generally
is used in Flash memories, where a lateral electric field
(between source and drain) “heats” the electrons and a
transversal electric field (between channel and control gate)
injects the carriers through the oxide.
The Fowler–Nordheim (FN) tunneling mechanism starts
when there is a high electric field through a thin oxide.
In these conditions, the energy band diagram of the oxide
region is very steep; therefore, there is a high probability
of electrons’ passing through the energy barrier itself.
It is interesting to notice how these two mechanisms
have been deeply investigated for MOS transistors in or-
der to avoid their unwanted degradation effects. In Flash
cells, they are exploited to become efficient program/erase
mechanisms.
A. Hot Electron Injection
The physical mechanism of HEI is relatively simple
to understand qualitatively. An electron traveling from
the source to the drain gains energy from the lateral
electric field and loses energy to the lattice vibrations
(acoustic and optical phonons). At low fields, this is a
dynamic equilibrium condition, which holds until the field
strength reaches approximately 100 kV/cm [15]. For fields
exceeding this value, electrons are no longer in equilibrium
with the lattice, and their energy relative to the conduction
band edge begins to increase. Electrons are “heated” by the
high lateral electric field, and a small fraction of them have
enough energy to surmount the barrier between oxide and
Fig. 5. Schematic cross section of a MOSFET. The en-
ergy-distribution function at point X1; Y1 is also shown [16],
[19].
silicon conduction band edges. For an electron to overcome
this potential barrier, three conditions must hold [16].
1) Its kinetic energy has to be higher than the potential
barrier.
2) It must be directed toward the barrier.
3) The field in the oxide should be collecting it.
To evaluate how many electrons will actually cross the
barrier, one should know the energy distribution
as a function of lateral field , the momentum distribution
as a function of electron energy (i.e., how
many electrons are directed toward the oxide), the shape
and height of the potential barrier, and the probability that
an electron with energy , wave vector , and distance
from the Si/SiO interface will cross the barrier. Each of
these functions needs to be specified in each point of the
channel (see Fig. 5). A quantitative model, therefore, is very
heavy to handle. Moreover, when the energy gained by the
electron reaches a threshold, impact ionization becomes a
second important energy-loss mechanism [17], which needs
to be included in models.
Nevertheless, a description of the injection conditions
can be accomplished with two different approaches. The
HEI current is often explained and simulated following the
“lucky electron” model [18]. This model is based on the
probability of an electron’s being lucky enough to travel
ballistically in the field for a distance several times
the mean free path without scattering, eventually acquiring
enough energy to cross the potential barrier if a collision
pushes it toward the Si/SiO interface. Consequently, the
probability of injection is the lumped probability of the
following events [19], which are depicted in Fig. 6.
1) The carrier has to be “lucky” enough to acquire enough
energy from the lateral electric field to overcome the
1252 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 6. A schematic energy band diagram describing the three
processes involved in electron injection [19].
oxide barrier and to retain its energy after the collision
that redirects the electron toward the interface .
2) The carrier follows a collision-free path from the
redirection point to the interface .
3) The carrier can surmount the repulsive oxide field at
the injection point, due to the Schottky barrier lowering
effect, without suffering an energy-robbing collision in
the oxide .
Although this simple model does not fit precisely with
some experiments, it allows a straightforward and quite
successful simulation of the gate current.
A more rigorous model is based on the quasi-thermal
equilibrium approach [20], [21]. It assumes that the electron
can be treated as a gas in quasi-thermal equilibrium with
the electric field. This electron gas is characterized by an
“effective temperature,” which is different from the lattice
temperature. The model establishes a nonlocal relation
between the effective electron temperature and the drift-
field [20]. Thus, the carrier probability to acquire certain
energies depends on the complete profile of the electric
field in the channel region [22].
Both models allow the prediction of the following rela-
tion between the substrate current and the injection
current: (Fig. 7)
(17)
where is the channel current, is the impact-ionization
energy, and is the energy barrier seen by the carriers to
be injected in the oxide [19]. This latter barrier has to be
corrected for the image-force lowering [23] and tunneling
components [24] of the gate current.
The substrate current is composed of holes generated by
impact ionization in the drain region. Holes are always gen-
erated since the energy ionization threshold 1.6 V is
lower than the injection energy barrier 3.2 V . Some
holes can acquire enough energy from the lateral electric
field to be injected into the oxide, thus degrading it. The
ionization process also generates a lot of carriers that can be
injected in regions of the oxide, where they can be trapped
Fig. 7. Channel and substrate currents (continuous measure-
ments) and gate current as a function of FG voltage (device
geometries and experimental setup in legend) [16].
Fig. 8. Gate current as a function of FG voltage with drain
voltage as a parameter [16].
near the interface or generate interface states [22], thus
degrading device performances.
Fig. 8 [16] shows the injected current measured in
an FG device with an indirect technique based on the
relation , where
is the FG charge, is the coupling capacitance between
the control and floating gates, and is the FG potential.
The shape of these curves is correlated to the injection-
mechanism dependence on and . When ,
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1253
Fig. 9. Gate current as a function of FG voltage with effective
channel length as a parameter [16].
there is a point along the channel where the transverse
electric field in the oxide reverses its direction and rejects
electrons rather than collecting them. The pinch-off point
is closer to the source side than the inversion point [16].
Thus, the injection is dominated by hot electrons created
in the relatively low lateral field region near the pinch-off
point. As increases, the average lateral field decreases
[25] but the point of injection is shifted closer to the drain
edge due to the change in the inversion point with . As
a result, part of the distribution of electrons available for
injection is in a higher lateral electric field region, leading
to a rapid increase in . When becomes greater than
, the hot electron distribution is subjected to the average
lateral field near the drain, which decreases on increasing
, thus reducing the gate current.
also depends on channel length, as shown in Fig. 9. A
decrease in the channel length results in an increase of
due to the increased lateral electric field, even at lower
’s. This is due to the coupling between the FG and
drain, which is higher in shorter devices. Note that the gate
current in the injection-limited region exhibits a decreasing
dependence on as the channel length is decreased. This
stems from the considerable increase in the lateral electric
field for shorter channel devices such that the
reduction in this field due to the increase in will be
noticeable only at higher values of gate voltage [16].
B. Fowler–Nordheim Tunneling
In the framework of quantum mechanics, the solutions of
the Schrödinger equation represent a particle. The contin-
uous nonzero nature of these solutions, even in classically
forbidden regions of negative energy, implies an ability
to penetrate these forbidden regions and a probability of
tunneling from one classically allowed region to another
[26]. The concept of tunneling through a potential barrier
applies well to MOS structures with thin oxide. Fig. 10
shows the energy-band diagram of a MOS structure with
negative bias applied to the metal electrode with respect to
Fig. 10. FN tunneling through a potential barrier in a MOS
structure.
the p-doped silicon substrate. The probability of electron
tunneling depends on either the distribution of occupied
states in the injecting material or the shape, height, and
width of the barrier.
Using a free-electron gas model for the metal and the
Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin (WKB) approximation for the
tunneling probability [27], one obtains the following ex-
pression for current density [28]:
(18)
where is the barrier height, is the effective mass
of the electron in the forbidden gap of the dielectric, is
the Planck’s constant, is the electronic charge, and is
the electric field through the oxide.
Fig. 11 [29] shows versus . Since the field is
roughly the applied voltage divided by the oxide thick-
ness, a reduction of oxide thickness without a proportional
reduction of applied voltage produces a rapid increase of
the tunneling current. With a relatively thick oxide (20–30
nm) one must apply a high voltage (20–30 V) to have
an appreciable tunnel current. With thin oxides, the same
current can be obtained by applying a much lower voltage.
An optimum thickness (about 10 nm) is chosen in present
devices, which use the tunneling phenomenon to trade
off between performance constraints (programming speed,
power consumption, etc.), which would require thin oxides,
and reliability concerns, which would require thick oxides.
In fact, in Fig. 11, it is evident that with a field of 7
MV/cm, the current density is about 10 A/cm , while
with a field of 10 MV/cm it is about 10 A/cm . There
is a variation of about seven orders of magnitude in tunnel
current. A slightly greater field range allows a difference of
12 orders of magnitude. The tunneling-injection mechanism
is widely used in NVM, particularly in EEPROM. There are
three main reasons for this choice: first, tunneling is a pure
electrical mechanism; second, the involved current level is
quite low and thus allows the internal generation of supply
voltages needed for all operations; third, it allows one to
obtain the time to program ( 1 ms) 12 orders of magnitude
shorter than retention time ( 10 y), which is a fundamental
request for all NVM technologies.
1254 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 11. FN tunneling current as a function of electric field [29].
On the other hand, the exponential dependence of tunnel
current on the oxide-electric field causes some critical prob-
lems of process control because, for example, a very small
variation of oxide thickness among the cells in a memory
array produces a great difference in programming or erasing
currents, thus spreading the threshold voltage distribution in
both logical states. A very good process control is therefore
required. Moreover, the tunneling currents may become
important in device reliability at low fields either in the
case of bad-quality tunnel oxides or when thin oxides are
stressed many times at high voltages [30]. In fact, bad-
quality oxides are rich of interface and bulk traps, and
trap-assisted tunneling is made possible since the equivalent
barrier height seen by electrons is reduced and tunneling
requires a much lower oxide field than 10 MV/cm.
The oxide defects (whose density increases at decreasing
oxide thickness) must be avoided to control program/erase
characteristics and to have good reliability. In any case,
frequent program and erase operations induce an increase of
trapped charge in the oxide. This affects the barrier height,
which is lower in the case of positive and higher in the
case of negative trapping, respectively, thus increasing or
decreasing the tunnel currents.
Although the simple and classic form of FN current
density [(18)] is in quite good agreement with experimental
data, many features have been still undervalued: the temper-
ature dependence of the phenomenon, the quantum effects
at the silicon interface, the influence of band bending at the
Si/SiO interface, and the voltage drop in silicon, the fact
that the correct statistics for electrons are not Maxwellian
but Fermi–Dirac, and the collision-broadening barrier low-
ering [31]. These features are of great importance in device
simulation either to develop a quite general model of the
tunneling injection to enable the full simulation of novel
structures or to have a deep understanding of the influence
of scaling in device performances.
First of all, the classic theory is based on the assumption
that electrons, as well as holes, at the semiconductor
Fig. 12. Layout of a typical T-shaped double-polysilicon stacked
gate cell.
surface can be treated as a three-dimensional gas of free-
particles with a Boltzmann distribution of energy. But
when the silicon surface is inverted or accumulated (which
are the usual conditions during tunnel injection in MOS
devices), these particles are confined into a narrow potential
well, so the quantum-mechanics laws require their motion
perpendicular to the interface to be quantized. Thus, the
correct treatment is a two-dimensional quantum-mechanical
gas [32]. Briefly, the results of this treatment are as follows
[33].
1) The barrier height is voltage dependent and is lower
than the classical one.
2) The oxide field is lower than the classical one due to
a much greater voltage drop in the silicon substrate.
It is possible to rewrite (18) in the simplest form
(19)
and to use and as functions of the electric field,
which include quantum effects [34]. This approach is quite
satisfactory in a lot of cases but leads to different values
of and depending on the injecting electrode and on
device polarization.
IV. INDUSTRY-STANDARD FLASH CELLS
An EPROM memory cell is programmed via channel
hot electron (CHE) injection and erased via ultraviolet
light. It is composed of only one transistor. The T-shaped
cell (Fig. 12) allows a very tight memory array and then
high density (larger than 16 Mb). On the other hand, the
advantages of this array organization are paid in terms of
versatility: program is by single bit but erase is on the whole
array.
EEPROM memory cells are programmed and erased via
FN tunneling and are composed of two transistors: storage
and select. In this way, they allow byte alterability and good
endurance performances with more than 100 000 cycles. On
the other hand, two transistors per cell require a larger area
and consequently reduce the achievable density (less than
1 Mb).
A Flash memory cell represents the synthesis of EPROM
and EEPROM, since it is programmed and erased electri-
cally but composed by a single transistor.
The first cell based on this concept was presented in 1979
[35]; the first commercial product, a 256-K memory chip,
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1255
Fig. 13. Schematic cross section of a Flash cell along line A-A0
in Fig. 12.
was presented by Toshiba in 1984 [36]. The market did not
take off until this technology was proven to be reliable and
manufacturable [37].
The first Flash prototypes needed an external supply
voltage for programming and external management of the
erasing algorithm. They featured only a bulk-erase capa-
bility and their endurance was very poor (less than 10 000
cycles). As an advantage versus EPROM’s, they offered
just an electrical-erase capability. Modern Flash memories
have an embedded microcontroller to manage the erasing
algorithm and offer sector erase capability and single power
supply.
The growing demand of high-density NVM for the
portable computing and telecommunications market has
encouraged serious interest in Flash memory with the
capability of multilevel storage [38], [39] and low-
voltage operation [40]–[42]. Multilevel storage implies the
capability of storing two bits in a single cell. To do so, four
different threshold voltages need to be correctly identified
in the FG transistor. The program-verify procedure trades
off between the accuracy of and programming speed
and imposes serious limitations to levels possibly stored
in cells. It is therefore mandatory to accept a reduction of
margin among levels [43].
A. Basic Operations
Fig. 13 shows the cross section of an industry-standard
Flash cell. This cell structure was presented for the first
time by INTEL in 1988 and named ETOX1 (EPROM tunnel
oxide) [44]. Though it is derived from an EPROM cell,
there are a few meaningful differences.
First, the oxide between the substrate and FG is very thin
( 10 nm). Therefore, if a high voltage is applied at the
source when the control gate is grounded, a high electric
field exists in the oxide, enabling tunneling effects from the
FG to the source. This bias condition is dangerously close to
the breakdown of the source-substrate junction. Therefore,
the source diffusion is realized differently from the drain
diffusion, which does not undergo such bias conditions. To
do so, a new mask is added to the technological process
to discriminate source and drain implants. The cell is
not symmetrical, but this is the only difference with the
standard EPROM process. It is a great advantage, since all
1 ETOX is a trademark of INTEL.
Table 1 Source, Control Gate, and Drain Biases During
Operations of a Typical Flash Cell. Typical Reference Values Can
Be Vcc = 5 V, Vpp = 12 V, Vdd = 5  7 V, and Vread = 1 V
Fig. 14. Programming curves of Flash cells with different chan-
nel lengths; tox is 12 nm [46].
the accumulated experience in process development can be
used to produce these devices.
Oxide/nitride/oxide (ONO) interpoly dielectrics are used
in Flash memories. Interpoly dielectric thickness heavily
influences program/erase speed and the magnitude of read
current for an industry-standard Flash cell [45]. Low defect
density and long mean time to failure, together with charge
retention capability, are important reliability issues.
Flash-cell read, program, and erase bias configurations
are summarized in Table 1. Special attention needs to be
given to erase, which is the most critical operation.
1) Program: HEI is used to move charge in the FG,
thus changing the threshold voltage of the FG transistor.
Programming is obtained by applying pulses to the control
gate and to the drain simultaneously when the source is
grounded. This operation can be performed selectively by
applying the pulse to the word line (WL), which connects
the control gates, and biasing the bit line (BL), which
connects the drains. Hot electrons are injected in the FG,
and the threshold voltage of the selected transistor becomes
high. The change in threshold voltage depends upon the
width of the programming pulse. To have a voltage shift of
around 3, 3.5 V, a pulse width with typical values in the
1–10 s range must be applied. See the curve corresponding
to m in Fig. 14 [16]. A rapid change in cell
occurs initially. Then, as the FG potential drops below
the drain potential, saturates. At this point, we can
define an intrinsic threshold. The electric field in the tunnel
oxide close to the drain reverses and electron injection
into the FG is much less favorable [47]. Intrinsic threshold
voltage shift roughly does not depend on the channel length
1256 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 15. Programming curves of Flash cells with different cou-
pling ratios and at different VD; Le = 0:7 m, tox = 12 nm
[46].
Fig. 16. Programming curve of a Flash cell at different tempera-
tures; Le = 0:7 m, tox = 12 nm.
of the cell (Fig. 14) but depends on the coupling ratios,
i.e., the overlap between the FG and control gate on field
oxide (Fig. 15, [46]). From the same figure, one can see
that intrinsic threshold voltage shift also depends linearly
on drain voltage. Temperature also has an influence on
programming speed (Fig. 16): a higher temperature reduces
the number of hot electrons available for injection into the
FG, hence retarding the programming characteristics [46].
2) Erase: The erase operation requires a high voltage
pulse to be applied to the source (common to all the
transistors in the array/block) when control gates (WL)
are grounded and drains (BL) floating. Before applying the
erase pulse, all the cells in the array/block are programmed
to start with all the thresholds approximately at the same
value. After that, an erase pulse having a controlled width
is applied. The threshold shift depends on source voltage
(Fig. 17) and, as a rule of thumb, a one-order-of-magnitude
increase in erasing time occurs for each volt reduction in
source voltage [47]. Threshold voltage depends on oxide
thickness (Fig. 18) [48], as explained in Section III-B.
From the same figure, one can infer that after electrical
erase, cells with the same oxide thickness but different
initial values of threshold voltage will reach the same
Fig. 17. Erase curves of a cell with Tox = 12 nm, when different
source voltages are applied [47].
Fig. 18. Erase curves of two Flash cells having different oxide
thicknesses and the same Le [48].
threshold voltage at the end of the erase operation. Since
FG transistors in the array may have slightly different gate
oxide thicknesses, and the erase mechanism is not self-
limiting, after an erase pulse we may have “typical bits”
and “fast erasing bits” (Fig. 19) [49]. Subsequently, the
whole array/block is read to check whether all the cells
are erased or not. If not, another erase pulse is applied and
another read operation follows. This algorithm is applied
until all the cells have threshold voltages lower than the
“erase verify level.” At the end of this procedure, cells will
not have all the same threshold voltages but their thresholds
will be on a Gaussian distribution, except for a tail of bits
that erase faster, which will be analyzed in Section IV-B-4.
Typical erasing times are in the range 100 ms–1 s.
Electrical erase is achieved via FN tunneling of charge
from the FG to the source. To have a junction that can
sustain the high applied voltages without breaking down,
the source junction needs to be carefully designed. A new
mask is added to the process to allow for a lighter and
deeper junction. Details of the source junction are sketched
in Fig. 20. A high electric field through the tunnel oxide
means that even the electric field at the surface of the
silicon is very high, and this can give rise to a leakage
current due to band-to-band tunneling (BBT) or breakdown
of the source/substrate junction.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1257
Fig. 19. Erase curves of a “typical bit” and of a “fast erasing
bit” in a Flash array [49].
Fig. 20. Detail of the n+ source junction in a Flash cell showing
band-to-band tunneling (BBT) and FN currents VS > 0 and
VCG = 0 V [47].
If band bending is higher than the energy gap of the
semiconductor, and the surface electric field is higher than
1 MV/cm, tunneling of electrons from the valence band
to the conduction band becomes significant, and holes
are left in the valence band. Electrons are collected at
the source terminal; holes are injected into the substrate,
thus generating a substrate leakage current. This substrate
current depends only on the vertical electric field in the
oxide, i.e., on the voltage drop between source and gate.
The lateral electric field does not allow the inversion layer
to be generated at the n -Si/SiO interface and leads
the space charge region in deep depletion, sweeping all
the free carriers. When source voltage is high enough,
impact ionization becomes significant and contributes to the
leakage current, thus starting the breakdown mechanism.
The minimum voltage to start BBT decreases on decreasing
the oxide thickness, and this is one of the major scaling
limits. Generated holes can gain enough energy to be
injected in the oxide where they are trapped at the Si/SiO
interface.
Source breakdown is one of the major limiting factors to
erase time reduction, since the higher the voltage applied
to the source, the shorter the erasing time. A solution to
the problem is achieved by optimizing the source junction
profile to a more gradual one in order to reduce the electric
field at the junction and, consequently, the substrate current
of some order of magnitude.
Fig. 21. Programming disturbs.
In a conventional dual-voltage Flash, where besides
(3 or 5 V) a high-voltage (about 12 V) is available,
erasing is obtained by applying a high positive voltage
to the source region while the WL terminal (control
gate of the memory cell) is grounded. In a single-voltage
Flash, the lack of the high voltage implies the on-
chip generation of a negative voltage by means of charge
pumps. In fact, in this case, the necessary voltage drop
between the source and the control gate is obtained by
applying to the source and a negative voltage to
the control gate [50]–[52]. No matter how the voltage drop
is obtained, in both cases the high electric field in the oxide
between the FG and source gives rise to a gate current due
to FN tunneling. Simultaneously, the high electric field in
the silicon is responsible for the source/substrate current due
to BBT tunneling, which is a function of source voltage.
B. Reliability
The reliability issues for EPROM and EEPROM memory
cells are both present in Flash memories. The confidence
in Flash memory reliability has grown together with the
understanding of memory-cell failure mechanisms. Cycling
and retention experiments are performed to investigate
Flash-cell reliability.
The high degree of testability allows the detection at
wafer level of latent defects, which may cause single bit
failures related to programming disturbs, data retention, and
premature oxide breakdown, thus making Flash memories
more reliable than full-featured EEPROM’s at equivalent
density [53]. Flash arrays are verified analyzing array
disturbs and erase-threshold distribution. New architecture
solutions, however, may open new issues on Flash array
reliability.
1) Programming Disturbs: Consider an array as in
Fig. 21. If we want to program the highlighted transistor,
a high voltage ( V) is applied to the WL and a
sufficiently high voltage ( – V) is applied to
the BL to generate hot electrons to program the cell. In
this bias condition, though, there are two major disturbs,
one due to the high voltage applied to the WL and to the
transistors on the same line, the second to the medium-
1258 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 22. Programming disturbs—dc erasing of a programmed
cell. Cell A is programmed, cell C is nonprogrammed.
high voltage applied to the BL and to the transistors on
the same column.
High voltages applied to the WL can stress the gate of
transistors that have their gate connected to the WL but are
not selected. There might be tunneling of electrons from the
FG to the control gate through the interpoly oxide in all the
programmed cells, i.e., in those cells where the FG is filled
with electrons, since they have 12 V applied to the gate
and 0 V on both source and drain. This is the “dc-erasing”
disturb (Fig. 22), which induces charge loss and therefore
reduces the margin for the high level of threshold voltage.
There might be also tunneling of electrons from the
substrate to the FG in all the nonprogrammed cells, i.e.,
in those cells where the FG is “empty.” This is the “dc-
programming” disturb (Fig. 23), which induces charge-gain
and reduces the margin for the low level of threshold
voltage.
Both of these disturbs are called “gate disturbs” and are
present even during reading operations. They are triggered
to test gate-oxide quality.
A relatively high voltage ( – V) applied to the
BL can stress the drains of all FG transistors in the same
column. Namely, in cells which share the BL with cells
which are to be programmed, electrons tunnel from the FG
through the gate oxide to the drain [54]; moreover, holes
can be generated via impact-ionization in the substrate and
then injected in the FG. This disturb, called “drain disturb”
(Fig. 24), causes charge loss and, consequently, a decrease
in the high value of the threshold voltage. The same disturb
can result from extensive reading cycles and can be used
as a gate oxide quality monitor.
Fig. 23. Programming disturbs—dc programming of a nonpro-
grammed cell. Cell A is programmed, cell C is nonprogrammed.
Fig. 24. Programming disturbs—drain disturb. Cell D is pro-
grammed.
These disturbs become important when the same reading
or programming operation needs to be repeated continu-
ously, for example, when a complete row or column is to
be programmed in an array. In a 1-Mb array, this requires
a thousand repetitions. Disturb influence becomes more
and more important on increasing the number of reading-
programming or programming-erasing cycles.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1259
Fig. 25. Threshold voltage window closure as a function of
program/erase cycles on a single cell [53].
2) Retention: Fast program and erase operations require
high voltages and currents through thin oxides, which
in turn are easily degraded. In modern Flash cells, FG
capacitance is approximately 1 fF. A loss of only 1 fC
can cause a 1-V threshold voltage shift. If we consider the
constraints on data retention in ten years, this means that a
loss of less than five electrons per day can be tolerated.
Mechanisms that lead to charge loss or charge gain can
be divided into two categories: extrinsic and intrinsic. The
former are due to defects in the device structure; the latter
are due to the physics mechanisms that are used for program
and erase operations.
a) Intrinsic mechanisms: Intrinsic mechanisms that
contribute to charge variations are field-assisted electron
emission, thermionic emission, and electron detrapping.
The first mechanism, field-assisted electron emission [55]
consists of the motion of electrons stored in the FG of
a programmed cell, which can migrate to the interface
with the oxide and from there tunnel into the substrate,
thus causing charge loss. If the cell is erased, i.e., has a
low threshold voltage, the opposite injection can happen.
Experiments have demonstrated that the leakage current due
to these mechanisms depends on the floating-to-control-gate
coupling coefficient and on the stress level [55]. The
probability of an electron’s passing through the oxide bar-
rier due to tunneling depends upon the voltage drop between
the FG and substrate; FG potential depends on control-gate
potential through . Therefore, the charge induced on the
FG during the program operation depends on .
The charge stored on the FG decreases either on
decreasing (since electron injection during the program
operation is less efficient) or on increasing the stress level,
i.e., the negative charge trapped in the oxide. The leakage
current depends exponentially on the electric field (it is a
tunneling phenomenon), and the electric field around the
FG is
(20)
where is the silicon dioxide dielectric constant and
is the FG area.
The second mechanism of charge loss, thermionic emis-
sion, is a mechanism of emission of carriers above the
potential barrier. At room temperature, the phenomenon
is negligible, but it becomes relevant at high temperatures
[56].
Last, detrapping of electrons in the gate oxide is a charge-
loss mechanism that reduces the program threshold voltage.
b) Extrinsic causes: Extrinsic causes that can influence
the charge storage are oxide defects (which increase on
decreasing oxide thickness) and ionic contamination. Oxide
defects can cause charge loss or gain [56], [57]. In fact, if
the cell is programmed, its FG has a negative potential due
to the stored charge. This potential induces an electric field
in the oxide surrounding the FG itself; in thin oxides, these
electric fields can be as high as some MV/cm. Therefore,
defects can induce conductive paths, which tend to program
the cell. If the cell is overerased and stores a positive charge,
the electric field will induce charge gain.
Ionic contamination is a big issue in every nonvolatile
memory technology [54], [56]–[58]. Ions, usually positive
ones, are attracted to the FG which is negatively charged,
thus shielding its effects and inducing charge loss. Memory
chips can be affected by contaminations, which, during
passivation deposition, can penetrate through defects in
passivation glasses or from chip edges. The quality of
passivation layers has to be increased in order to reduce
this effect.
Retention capability of Flash memories has to be checked
by using accelerated tests, which usually adopt high electric
fields and hostile environments at high temperatures.
3) Endurance: Cycling is known to cause a fairly uni-
form wear-out of cell performance [59], which eventually
limits Flash memory endurance. A typical result of an
endurance test on a single cell is shown in Fig. 25 [53].
As the experiment was performed applying constant pulses,
the variations of program and erase threshold levels give a
measure of oxide aging. In real devices, this corresponds
to longer program/erase times.
The evolution of erase threshold voltage is similar to
that typically observed in EEPROM cells. It reflects the
dynamics of net fixed charge in the tunnel oxide as a
function of the injected charge [60]: the initial lowering
of the erase is due to a pileup of positive charge,
which enhances tunneling efficiency, while the long-term
increase of the erase is due to the generation of negative
traps. The reduction of program threshold voltage at high
cycling numbers has been explained in [61]; it is attributed
to oxide traps and interface state generation at different
locations depending on bias conditions. At the beginning
of programming, there is no charge in the FG, and the FG
transistor is in the linear region. Interface states are created
over the drain region, and their influence is negligible. At
the end of the programming cycle, there is charge stored in
the FG, which is now at a lower voltage than the drain; the
FG transistor is in saturation, and interface states are created
at the drain side of the channel, producing a detectable
degradation of device performance.
4) Erase Distribution: In Flash memory integrated cir-
cuits, the complete erase operation is indeed a sequence of
elementary erase operations. A first erase pulse is generated
1260 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 26. Threshold voltage distribution after different erase pro-
cedures: UV erase (solid curve) after the first cycle (dotted line)
and after 10 K cycles (dots) [53].
internally and sent to the logic circuitry, which controls
the erase operation and is integrated in the same chip with
the memory itself. An algorithm controls whether or not
the erase operation is completed. The verification of the
complete erasure of all the cells in a block, which can be
very large, is one of the biggest issues in Flash technology.
The parameter that is checked after erase is the value of the
threshold voltages of the erased cells; these values have a
distribution that is specific to the process. This distribution
spreads around an average value and needs to be easily
controlled for each process and to have a small variance.
Fig. 26 shows the threshold voltage distribution for a 1-Mb
Flash device [53]. The distribution seems to be Gaussian,
but it is not symmetrical toward lower values. Another way
to plot this kind of data is shown in Fig. 27 [29]. In this
case, the cumulative percentage of erased cells is reported
versus the threshold voltage of the erased cell (data refer
to different devices). As can be seen, a high percentage
(99.9%) of the cells have a very small variation of the
threshold voltage (0.5 V), and only 0.01% show very large
threshold variations. This very small percentage has a great
relevance. It is used as a process monitor since it is the
limiting factor for the whole Flash technology. In fact, if
we have a negative or zero threshold voltage, every single
erased cell would be normally on in the reading condition
since there is not a selection transistor; if we want to read a
single cell, we read all the erased cells in the same column,
causing logic errors.
The exponential tail in threshold voltage distribution (see
Fig. 26) represents a large population of cells that erase
faster than typical bits. This population is too large to
be attributed to extrinsic defects, and it is believed to be
related to statistical fluctuations of oxide charge and to the
structure of the injecting electrode [53]. Positive charges
in the tunnel oxide and irregular polycrystal grains may
induce a local increase of the electric field, thus enhancing
current injection locally and making individual cells erase
faster than average. This explanation is consistent with the
observation of the narrowing of the tail on increasing the
number of program/erase cycles performed on the array
(Fig. 26). In fact, a larger current density corresponds to
a higher negative trap generation rate, resulting in faster
aging. The generated negative charge partially neutralizes
electric field peaks, making the current injection more
uniform and the erasing speed of tail bits closer to that
of typical bits [53].
A relevant mechanism of single bit failure during pro-
gram/erase cycling is the occurrence of an “erratic bit”
[53], [62], [63]. An erratic bit shows an unstable and
unpredictable behavior in erasing since its erase threshold
voltage changes randomly from cycle to cycle, from the
bulk Gaussian distribution to the lower part of the tail.
This behavior is expected to be due to hole trapping
in the tunnel oxide. WKB calculations [62], [63] have
shown that the statistical distribution of hole traps gives
a low but finite probability of having clusters of three or
more positive charges whose combined electric field effect
induces a huge local increase in the tunnel current. In
this condition, trapping/detrapping of an individual positive
charge causes a detectable change in the erasing speed
and threshold level. Since this behavior is due to statistical
fluctuations of intrinsic oxide defects, erratic bit occurrence
can be reduced by process optimization but cannot be
completely eliminated. Therefore, design solutions have
been developed to cope with this problem at the circuit
level.
Other failures are related to the erase mechanism. Since
FN tunneling is not self-limiting, it can lead to overerasing
of the cells, i.e., more electrons than those which have
been trapped are removed from the FG. The device has less
negative charges than in the nonprogrammed case and a net
positive charge is now present, thus transforming the device
from an enhancement to a depletion device. The window
that includes the distribution of erased cells is between the
lower limit set by the overerasing (around 0.5 V) and an
upper limit given by the peak of the Gaussian.
The aforementioned erase algorithm is used to compen-
sate variations and to avoid overerasing. The algorithm is
based on an erase procedure followed by a read procedure
in the whole array. Initially, an erase pulse shorter than
one-tenth of the typical erase time is applied, and all the
bits in the array are checked to verify whether there are
threshold voltages higher than a prefixed value. If there are
cells that are not erased enough, another pulse is applied.
The algorithm is applied until there are no cells with a
threshold voltage higher than the prefixed value. There is
no check on the lower threshold, since it is known that
it is going to be 1.5–2 V lower than the higher one. By
applying many erasing pulses while running the algorithm,
we do not change significantly the threshold of the “already
erased” cells. In fact, erase changes following the
logarithm of the erasing time (Fig. 28). Therefore, all of
the pulses that are applied after the one that erases the cell
do not significantly change the erased threshold voltage
distribution.
The trend of decreasing supply voltages for new Flash
generation imposes a tight erase distribution. Besides
the already mentioned method of iterating the erase algo-
rithm, two self-convergent methods have been proposed,
both relying on reprogramming techniques after erasure:
hot-carrier injection (HCI) reprogramming [64] (i.e., ap-
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1261
Fig. 27. Threshold voltage distribution after electrical erase after different program/erase cyclings
[29].
Fig. 28. Erase threshold voltage profile versus erase time [29].
plying 5 V on drain and grounding word-lines for 0.5 s)
or FN channel reprogramming [65] (i.e., applying 16 V at
the word-lines). The erase scheme proposed in [64] uses
channel-electron-induced avalanche HCI to bring the erase
distribution to convergence after FN tunneling erase.
This scheme does not require either programming all bytes
before erasure by FN tunneling or iterating the erase/verify
sequence. After hot-carrier stress, the self-convergence re-
programming becomes faster [66]; hot-carrier stress would
cause interface degradation and larger gate-induced drain-
leakage current [67], [68]. The reliability issues of using
this technique are a concern.
The erase scheme proposed in [65] is a two-step proce-
dure that starts by applying a negative high voltage to the
control gate to erase the cell, followed by the application
of a positive high voltage to the control gate to inject a few
electrons from the substrate back to the FG to reprogram
the cell to decrease the erase distribution. This tech-
nique is not truly self-convergent, however, since erase
distribution spreads after reaching a minimum. To reach the
minimum spread, several iterations of reprogramming and
reerase may be used [66].
Therefore, for low-voltage high-density Flash memories,
FN channel reprogramming can be used when high relia-
1262 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
bility and cycling are required. When these specifications
are not an issue, the HCI technique has the advantage of
self-convergence and low operating voltage.
C. Scaling Issues
The architecture of an industry-standard Flash-cell array
is typical of a NOR gate array, where every single cell
is addressed by two signals, one for the BL and one for
the WL; the source line and body are common to the
whole array. Moreover, in standard arrays, a contact is
shared between two cells, thus consuming a lot of cell
area. The common issue among the different solutions and
applications is the cost-per-bit reduction, which will be
provided mainly by technology scaling. No consolidated
theory has been developed for Flash-cell scaling [1].
Scaling issues deal then with the single cell layout. The
goal is to reduce the area used for contacts, and layout
issues are contact placement issues. To improve integration,
many new solutions have been proposed, mainly new array
architectures.
A reduction of the area occupied by a Flash memory cell
when fabricated in a double-poly stacked gate structure,
particularly the reduction of the effective channel length
gives many advantages, not only from the density
point of view but also for the performances. In fact, the
efficiency of the carrier injection into the FG increases on
decreasing , thus speeding up the program operation.
On the contrary, decreasing enhances punch-through
and drain turn on, since the capacitive coupling between
the drain and FG increases. The final value of comes
from a tradeoff between performances and disturbs.
Another relevant issue in Flash memories is the need
for high voltages for program and erase. While CMOS
technology scaling requires the reduction of the operating
voltages, the actual program/erase operations are based on
physical mechanisms whose major parameters do not scale
(3.2-eV energy barrier for CHE’s and at least 8–9 MV/cm
for FN data alteration in 0.1–1 s). Moreover, the trend
toward increasing the programming throughput will even
force the internal voltage to rise. Double voltage supply
simplifies memory design and minimizes the area, since
there is no need to generate the high voltage internally.
Therefore, they are preferably used when present in the
circuit, even though internal generation is sometimes pre-
ferred for the correct operation of the memories in the
chip. If internal generation is to be done, many issues need
to be discussed. For example, hot-electron programming
is not efficient if only a 5-V voltage supply is used, and
programming times can become unacceptably slow. On the
other hand, internal charge pumping circuits can be used
only when small currents flow in the channel. Erasing opens
similar issues.
Nonvolatility implies at least ten years of charge re-
tention. Nonvolatility issues affect the scalability of thin
active dielectrics (tunnel and interpoly). A direct tunneling
mechanism fixes the tunnel oxide limit to 6 nm, which
needs to be increased more realistically up to 7–8 nm due
to trap-assisted electron tunneling caused by oxide aging
(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 29. (a) Layout of a T-shaped staked-gate Flash cell. A
contactless (virtual ground) cell is also shown in (b) and (c) [72].
[69]. The scalability limit of the interpoly dielectric (ONO)
has been reported to be around 12–13 nm [70]. These
thicknesses can be combined to give an equivalent memory
cell oxide (defined as tunnel oxide thickness divided by
the coupling coefficient ), which sets the limit for
the memory-cell poly length. Other constraints limit the
minimum poly length.
• CHE injection requires some minimum drain-gate
overlap and abrupt junction to maximize injection
efficiency.
• FN tunneling to the source requires an overlap with
the n region below the gate.
• FN tunneling to the channel requires small
gate/diffusion overlaps.
Moreover, when charge is injected from the polysilicon FG,
the number of poly grains in the tunneling area plays an
important role in determining the distribution width
[71].
In this scenario, the search for higher integration goes
toward new architectural solutions, the reduction of the
number of contacts, and the reduction of alignment tol-
erances. Contactless (virtual ground) configurations have
been proposed and used [72]. Fig. 29 shows the layouts of
a T-shaped staked-gate Flash cell and of a contactless one.
In the second case, a 50% area reduction can be achieved
only by self-aligning every single device, but this induces
a higher complexity.
V. FLASH ARRAY ARCHITECTURES
Other structures alternative to industry-standard Flash
cells have been considered for Flash memories. Differences
mainly are due to the array organization, program/erase
mechanisms, and approaches to overerasing (which is
solved algorithmically in standard structures). Many new
cells and new arrays have been presented in the last five
years and have reached different levels of maturity. This
variety can be related to three main concepts.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1263
Fig. 30. The tree of Flash architectures, split according to array organizations [73].
1) Flash physics is not yet fully understood: dielectric
scaling, program, and erase mechanisms leave open
issues that can be resolved in different ways.
2) A company’s past experience will direct it toward
different attitudes on Flash-cell design and array
organization.
3) The variety of applications (embedded memory,
mass storage, or new concepts) imposes specific
constraints.
New architectures are derived from a combination of these
three different needs.
The actual scenario can be summarized as in the diagram
in Fig. 30 [73]. Another way to catalogue the Flash-array
scenario is to divide the different architectures according
to data access and data write organization. Arrays that
have random access and random program (parallel) are
consistent with embedded applications, while page read
and page program (serial) are consistent with mass storage
applications. The different architectures can be catalogued
by combining these topics with the program and erase
mechanisms, thus obtaining the tree of Flash architectures
shown in Fig. 31 [1].
In the following, we will describe some of the Flash
memories proposed in the recent literature. Cells which
use the CHE program and FN erase can be grouped into
two main categories: 1) one-transistor cells and their array
architectures (NOR common ground and alternate metal
virtual ground [AMG]) and 2) merged cells (split-gate triple
poly, split-gate source injection).
Cells that use FN programming and erase can be grouped
as:
1) NOR arrays (divided bit-line NOR (DINOR), asymmet-
rical contactless transistor (ACT), and EEPROM-like
cells);
2) AND arrays (AND, high capacitive coupling ratio
(HiCR) cells);
3) NAND cells.
The motivation for using FN tunneling to the channel
for both programming and erase comes from the need to
change the programming mechanism to simplify the supply
scaling and to reduce cell sizes. Moreover, it comes from
the experience already accumulated in EEPROM memory
development.
A. Alternate Metal Ground
AMG cells [74] come as an extension of a similar AMG
EPROM cell, and the cell concept is the same as the
industry standard. AMG cell-size scaling is accomplished
by sharing one metal line per two diffusion bit lines; a
new segmentation scheme and fieldless array allow the
achievement of the minimum design rule of the process,
which typically is the pitch of polysilicon. Cross sections
of AMG cells are shown in Fig. 32. The layout is simple
1264 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 31. The tree of Flash architectures, split according to the parallel/serial access to the array [1].
Fig. 32. AMG cross sections along X and Y directions [74].
and overcomes most of the critical issues of standard cells;
nevertheless, it has some critical features, which can be
summarized in double-poly width control and BL side
diffusion. The array architecture adopts the virtual ground
schemes, using one metal line every two BL’s. It is a
general-purpose product, which can have many applica-
tions. It is possible to use it in low-voltage applications, and
it can reach high speed. Moreover, multilevel programming
is possible.
B. Split Gate
Merged cells add new features to the Flash array and
simplify the design since monitoring the erase distribution
is not critical. They improve CHE program by using a
very low program current. Split-gate triple-poly cells [75]
(Fig. 33) use a different approach: there is a MOS transistor
and an FG device fabricated on the same cell. They come
as an extension of self-aligned split-gate EPROM products
Fig. 33. Split-gate triple-poly cell cross section. FG = floating
gate (poly 1), CG = control gate (poly 2), and EG = erase gate
(poly 3) [75].
and use a third poly level along the WL as an erase gate.
This enables positive voltage low power erase, eliminating
the overerase issue but introducing a poly-poly trapping
issue. Since the read current is inherently low, a smaller
diffusion area is used.
The layout has some critical features given by the BL
side diffusion, alignment of the three poly layers, distance
between metal BL’s, and alignment of poly layers to
diffusions. It has the advantage of eliminating the contact
design rule limitations.
The process uses self-aligned drain and poly-poly di-
electrics. It is a single metal process, and cell-size limi-
tations are given by poly layer alignments to diffusions.
Some problems can be introduced by poly etching.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1265
Fig. 34. Split-gate source-injection cell cross section. Vfg is
floating gate potential and Vswg is sidewall gate bias. Electric field
profile along the channel during programming is also shown [76].
The choice of a poly-poly erase split gate gives many
advantages since the erase operation requires only positive
voltages, and the erase distribution is inherently good.
In fact, the FG device can even go into depletion, but the
total transistor will maintain the threshold voltage of the
n-MOS transistor.
Due to the excellent natural segmentation of the array,
this kind of cell can find many applications as dedicated
mass storage. It is possible to go to low voltages, but the low
read current excludes high speeds. Multilevel programming
is possible.
C. Source Injection
The concept behind source injection cells [76] is the
separation of the regions of acceleration and injection of
carriers, thus enabling CHE injection at low current and
voltages (Fig. 34). The cell is composed of a stacked-gate
MOS transistor with a sidewall select gate on its source
side. The array architecture uses a common ground and
has the advantages of low-current CHE, no overerase, and
positive voltages only; it has the disadvantages of increased
cell size and of poly-poly erase cycling.
By using merged cells, dual-bit split-gate (DSG) [77] area
savings can be achieved. The cell consists of three channels
directly connected through a shared select gate (Fig. 35). A
transfer gate in poly-3 is added. The cell has two FG’s,
one control gate, one transfer gate, and one common select
gate. The cell contains two bits, which share one pair of
drain and source. Again, there is no overerase problem, but
the erase distribution becomes an issue and excludes
multilevel operation. Moreover, complex decoding, use of
negative voltages in erase, and high capacitances add to the
disadvantages of this architecture.
D. Divided Bit-Line NOR
DINOR cells [78] (Fig. 36) are common ground cells
fabricated with a triple-well, triple-level polysilicon, a tung-
sten plug, and two layers of metal. They allow scaling of
Fig. 35. Merged split-gate source injection cross section. Transfer
gate and control gate are equal [77].
Fig. 36. DINOR array cross section [78].
cells and a better segmentation, which is related to the
application. This array has blocks of 32 or 64 b and shares
one metal-2 main BL every two sub-BL’s and a metal-1
WL strapping. The cell size is reduced by forming a local
BL in poly-3 and by using poly-plug drain contacts. There
are no double diffused drains.
In DINOR cells, program and erase operations are opposite
to the conventional NOR. Program means set the of
the selected cell to be low state and erase means set the
of the cells of the selected sector to be high state.
Erase is obtained via channel FN tunneling, which requires
200- s programming time and 1-MV/cm or higher electric
field. Program is achieved via FN tunneling through the
gate/drain overlapped area (like in the erase operation in
industry-standard cells).
Disturbs are reduced by the high erase, but there are
some issues in the program/erase characteristics given by
the high programming current from the charge pump and
from the overhead in the circuitry.
DINOR is a general-purpose architecture that makes possi-
ble the low-voltage/high-speed operation, while multilevel
1266 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 37. ACT cell cross section parallel to a word line [79].
Fig. 38. AND cell cross section [80].
programming is very difficult. The small array is shadowed
by the large periphery needed to reduce the programming
time.
E. Asymmetrical Contactless Transistor
The ACT is a new cell structure for subquarter microm-
eter Flash memory (Fig. 37) introduced in 1995 [79]. It
has been proposed for high-density data storage, which
requires low-voltage low-power consumption and fast pro-
gram/erase. The ACT cell is fabricated with a lightly doped
source and heavily doped drain. It realizes a simple virtual
ground array using the FN tunneling mechanism for both
program and erase operations. FN tunneling on the drain
side is used for program, while channel FN tunneling is
used for erase. To achieve a high gate coupling ratio in
the WL direction, a self-aligned FG wing technology has
been used, which does not sacrifice cell area. Therefore,
small cells with a high gate coupling ratio can be obtained.
The low programming current of the ACT cell enables the
use of multiple programming, making it possible to achieve
fast programming times with a low single supply voltage
( 3 V). A good disturb immunity in program, erase, and
read modes is also obtained.
F. AND
The main idea behind AND cells is to increase gate
coupling in the WL direction, thus saving area since there
is no need for coupling wings over the field (Fig. 38) [80].
Contacts between WL’s are eliminated, and a very good
segmentation can be achieved. The architecture shows local
segments with diffused BL’s and source lines and connected
source select devices. Every block is separated from other
blocks. The cell operates like a DINOR, and the key issue
is the small programming margin. It enables small sector
program and erase, thus improving the distribution, with
an excellent row redundancy, but the overhead of the sector
over the cell is as high as 30%. This, in general, would have
been called a virtual ground architecture. It is all separated,
however, thus resulting in a common ground.
Fig. 39. HiCR cell cross section [81].
AND cells can be used as mass storage and in a low-
power high-speed application. Multilevel programming is
very difficult due to the small program window and to
tunneling programming.
This concept emphasizes mass storage applications with-
out significant speed degradation.
G. High Capacitive Coupling Ratio
HiCR cells were first presented in 1993 for 3-V-only 64-
Mb Flash memories [81]. They are contactless cells with a
high capacitive coupling ratio, programmed and erased by
FN tunneling.
They use the same concept as AND cells and are realized
defining a small self-aligned tunneling region underneath
the FG side wall by means of an advanced rapid thermal
process for 7.5-nm-thick tunnel oxinitride (Fig. 39).
The cell is programmed via FN tunneling across the
tunnel oxinitride from the FG to the drain junction; it is
erased via FN tunneling from source/drain junctions to the
FG. The program/erase scheme requires positive voltages
only, and can find applications in the same area as AND
cells. The process is rather complicated, and a tunnel area
has to be grown over an n . But the array architecture,
with its segmentation of both BL and WL, enables effective
block size, better speed, and good redundancy, paying it in
terms of major overhead.
H. NAND
A completely different approach in array organization
can be followed by using a NAND architecture, which
greatly improves the results [82]. The elementary unit is
not composed of the single three-terminal cell, which stores
one single bit, but by more FG transistors connected in a
series (eight or 16), which constitutes a chain connected
to the bit line and ground through two selection transistors
(Fig. 40). This organization allows the elimination of all
contacts between WL’s, which can be separated by their
minimum design rule, thus reducing the occupied area by
40%. Moreover, a kind of memory organization with a unit
element with a dimension of one byte (or one word) is
closer to the ideal memory with parallel access. It allows
even page (256-byte) programming, resulting in a greatly
improved versatility.
Fig. 41 shows the cross section of an 8-b elementary
block for a 4-Mb Flash memory organized as a NAND
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1267
Fig. 40. NAND architecture. Dimensions of a NAND array are
compared to those of a NOR array [82].
array with peripheral circuits [82]. Erase voltages are 20
V to the n-substrate, the p-well2, the drain, and the source,
and 0 V to the control gate of the selected location. This
biasing induces electron tunneling toward p-well2, resulting
in a negative low threshold. There is no voltage drop
between the drain and p-well, so that there is no breakdown
of the junction. Programming voltages are 18 V to the
selected control gate and 10 V to the other gates; p-well2
is grounded. Selection transistors are biased to connect the
chain to the bit line and isolate it from the ground. If a “0”
is to be stored, the bit line is grounded; sources and drains
are grounded, and only the selected transistor has such an
electric field in the oxide to induce electron injection from
the substrate in the FG, increasing the threshold voltage
to the high level. If a “1” is to be stored, the bit line is
biased at 10 V; there is no tunneling and the threshold is
negative. The reading operation is performed by applying
5 V to all the control gates except the selected one, which
is grounded. Selection transistors are now conductive, and
they connect the chain to the ground and bit line. The
bit line is precharged, therefore, if the stored data is “1”
(negative threshold voltage) and the selected transistor is
conductive and discharges the bit line; if the stored data is
“0,” the transistor is off and the bit line holds the charge.
If the memory is organized as a NAND array, threshold
voltage checking becomes critical; only very small vari-
ations on the nominal value are allowed. In NAND arrays,
both program and erase mechanisms are electron tunneling.
Since tunneling is more efficient than HEI, currents are
smaller and different supply voltages can be internally
generated by charge-pumping circuits implemented in the
same die. NAND arrays are preferred for high-density Flash
memories. Page access time is around 80 ns, and even
programming can be by the page, thus reducing program-
ming time to 300 s per page. Erase is fast and takes 6
ms per block and around 10 ms per chip. Therefore, it
is possible to use these memories instead of floppy disks
or hard disks. Moreover, they are more reliable, since the
programming mechanism, i.e., electron tunneling from the
bulk, is uniform through the oxide if compared to HEI in the
drain region or tunneling in the source region to erase the
cell. Therefore, oxide damage is reduced and breakdown is
less probable.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper offers an overview of mainstream Flash mem-
ory cells and the basic principles for the fast development
that Flash memory cells had in the last few years.
We reviewed the physics mechanisms used to store and
remove charge from an FG, thus enabling information
storage. The main reliability aspects have been analyzed,
and their impact on the development of new structures
has been stressed. A proper organization of the cell ar-
chitecture can reduce the impact of intrinsic degradation
mechanisms, which are responsible for the wear-out of
device performances in program/erase cycling.
If we consider the number of bits per memory device as
a function of time, the density of memory circuits doubled
every 1.8 years. Extrapolating to the future with the same
trend needs some breakthrough. In fact, if we consider the
cell size, it has been scaling down at about a factor of two
every four years; the die size almost doubled every two
years [83]. If we extrapolate to the future, in the year 2025,
density will be a little bit higher than 10 , feature size will
be 18 nm, cell size will be 50 50 nm, and die size will
be 64 cm , equivalent to 18 dices on an 8″ wafer. This
will not be a realistic scenario. Industry is already showing
some slowing down. The large economic impact of research
and development has increased both time to production and
product lifetime. Flash technology scaling, as far as both
cell size and voltage are concerned, can proceed through
an evolutionary path until the 1-Gb generation, even if
some major issues must be solved [1], while further scaling
will require a real breakthrough and innovative concepts
[84]. In the near future, the main market is going to be the
embedded application market. In the mass storage market,
cost is the driving factor for increasing density. The use of
the same solutions for the embedded application market is
welcome, but multilevel concepts will be introduced.
Flash memories have been demonstrated to be a reli-
able and flexible integrated circuit to be used in many
new applications that could be covered neither by EEP-
ROM’s, because of their low density and high cost, nor by
EPROM’s, which do not support in-system reprogramming.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Prof. C. Canali of the Univer-
sity of Modena for his constant support and encouragement,
Dr. N. Bovolon and Prof. A. Paccagnella of the University
1268 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
Fig. 41. NAND cells and peripheral circuit cross section [82].
of Padova for many fruitful discussions, and R. Formentini
and S. Gheduzzi of the University of Modena for their help
in figure editing. They are grateful to Dr. B. Eitan (W.S.I.
Israel, Ltd.) for allowing them to use data and forecasts
from his many tutorials on this subject.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Crisenza, R. Annunziata, E. Camerlenghi, and P. Cappelletti,
“Non volatile memories: Issues, challenges and trends for the
2000’s scenario,” in Proc. ESSDERC’96, G. Baccarani and M.
Rudan, Eds. Bologna, Italy: Editions Frontieres, 1996, pp.
121–130.
[2] S. Wells and D. Clay, “Flash solid-state drive with 6 MB/s
read/write channel ABS data compression,” in Proc. ISSCC
Conf., San Francisco, CA, no. WP 3.6, 1993, p. 52.
[3] E. Suzuki, H. Hirashi, K. Ishii, and Y. Hayashi, “A
low-voltage alterable EEPROM with metal-oxide-nitride-oxide-
semiconductor (MONOS) structure,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. ED-30, no. 2, pp. 122–127, 1983.
[4] E. Suzuki, K. Miura, Y. Hayashi, R.-P. Tsay, and D. Schroder,
“Hole and electron current transport in metal-oxide-nitride-
oxide-silicon memory structures,” IEEE Trans. Electron De-
vices, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1145–1149, 1989.
[5] S. T. Wang, “On the I–V characteristics of floating-gate MOS
transistors,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-26, no. 9,
pp. 1292–1294, 1979.
[6] M. Wada, S. Mimura, H. Nihira, and H. Iizuka, “Limiting
factors for programming EPROM of reduced dimensions,”
IEDM Tech. Dig., 1980, pp. 38–41.
[7] A. Kolodny, S. T. K. Nieh, B. Eitan, and J. Shappir, “Analysis
and modeling of floating gate EEPROM cells,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. ED-33, no. 6, pp. 835–844, 1986.
[8] K. Prall, W. I. Kinney, and J. Marco, “Characterization and
suppression of drain coupling in submicrometer EPROM cells,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-34, no. 12, p. 2463,
1987.
[9] M. Wong, D. K.-Y. Liu, and S. S.-W. Huang, “Analysis of the
subthreshold slope and the linear transconductance techniques
for the extraction of the capacitive coupling coefficients of
floating-gate devices,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 13, no.
11, pp. 566–568, 1992.
[10] W. L. Choi and D. M. Kim, “A new technique for measuring
coupling coefficients and 3-D capacitance characterization of
floating gate devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 41,
no. 12, pp. 2337–2342, 1994.
[11] R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, D. Cantarelli, L. Ravazzi, and G.
Crisenza, “A novel method for the experimental determina-
tion of the coupling ratios in submicron EPROM and Flash
EEPROM cells,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1990, pp. 99–102.
[12] K. T. San, C. Kaya, D. K. Y. Liu, T. P. Ma, and P. Shah, “A new
technique for determining the capacitive coupling coefficients
in FLASH EPROM’s,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 13, no.
6, pp. 328–331, 1992.
[13] B. Moison, C. Papadas, G. Ghibaudo, P. Mortini, and G.
Pananakakis, “New method for the extraction of the coupling ra-
tios in FLOTOX EPROM cells,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 1870–1872, 1993.
[14] M. Woods, “An E-PROM’s integrity starts with its cell struc-
ture,” in Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memories: Technologies,
Design, and Application, C. Hu, Ed. New York: IEEE Press,
1991, ch. 3, pp. 59–62.
[15] P. E. Cottrell, R. R. Troutman, and T. H. Ning, “Hot-electron
emission in n-channel IGFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. ED-26, no. 4, pp. 520–532, 1979.
[16] B. Eitan and D. Froham-Bentchkowsky, “Hot-electron injection
into the oxide in n-channel MOS devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. ED-28, no. 3, pp. 328–340, 1981.
[17] G. A. Baraff, “Distribution functions and ionization rates for
hot-electrons in semiconductors,” Phys. Rev., vol. 128, no. 6,
pp. 2507–2517, 1962.
[18] C. Hu, “Lucky-electron model for channel hot-electron emis-
sion,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1979, p. 22.
[19] S. Tam, P. K. Ko, C. Hu, and R. Muller, “Correlation be-
tween substrate and gate currents in MOSFET’s,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. ED-29, no. 11, pp. 1740–1744, 1982.
[20] E. Takeda, H. Kune, T. Toyabe, and S. Asai, “Submicrome-
ter MOSFET structure for minimizing hot-carrier generation,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-29, no. 4, pp. 611–618,
1982.
[21] K. Hess and C. T. Sah, “Hot carriers in Silicon surface inversion
layers,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 45, p. 1254, 1974.
[22] K. R. Hofmann, C. Werner, W. Weber, and G. Dorda, “Hot-
electrons and hole-emission effects in short n-channel MOS-
FET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-32, no. 3, pp.
691–699, 1985.
[23] C. N. Berglund and R. S. Powell, “Photoinjection into SiO2:
Electron scattering in the image-force potential well,” J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 42, p. 573, 1971.
[24] C. Fiegna, E. Sangiorgi, and L. Selmi, “Oxide field dependence
of electron injection from silicon into silicon dioxide,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 2018–2022, 1993.
[25] Y. A. El-Mansy and D. M Coughey, “Characterization of
silicon-on-sapphire IGFET transistors,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. ED-24, no. 9, pp. 1148–1153, 1977.
[26] L. Esaki, “Long journey into tunneling,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 62,
pp. 825–831, June 1974.
[27] J. Moll, Physics of Semiconductors. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1964.
[28] M. Lezlinger and E. H. Snow, “Fowler-Nordheim tunneling
into thermally grown SiO2,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 40, no. 1, pp.
278–283, 1969.
[29] “IEDM 90 short course: Non-volatile memory,” IEEE, San
Francisco, CA, 1990.
[30] P. Olivo, T. Nguyen, and B. Riccò, “High-field-induced degra-
dation in ultra thin SiO2 films,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 2259–2267, 1988.
[31] J. Tang and K. Hess, “Theory of hot electron emission from sili-
con into silicon dioxide,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 54, pp. 5145–5151,
1983.
[32] T. Ando, A. B. Fowler, and F. Stern, “Electronic properties
of two-dimensional systems,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 58, pp.
437–672, 1982.
[33] J. Suné, P. Olivo, and B. Riccò, “Quantum-mechanical mod-
eling of accumulation layers in MOS structures,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1732–1739, 1992.
[34] M. Lanzoni, J. Suné, and B. Riccò, “Advanced electrical-level
modeling of EEPROM,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol.
40, no. 5, pp. 951–957, 1993.
[35] D. C. Guterman, I. H. Rimawi, T. L. Chiu, R. D. Halvorson, and
D. J. McElroy, “An electrically alterable nonvolatile memory
cell using a floating-gate structure,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. ED-26, no. 4, pp. 576–586, 1979.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1269
[36] F. Masuoka, M. Asano, H. Iwahashi, T. Komuro, and S.
Tanaka, “A new Flash E2PROM cell using triple polysilicon
technology,” IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 464–467, 1984.
[37] G. Verma and N. Mielke, “Reliability performance of ETOX
based Flash memories,” in Proc. IRPS, 1988, p. 158.
[38] M. Bauer et al., “A multilevel 32 Mb Flash memory,” in Proc.
ISSCC Conf., San Francisco, CA, 1995, p. 132.
[39] G. J. Hemink, T. Tanaka, T. Endoh, S. Aritome, and R. Shirota,
“Fast and accurate programming method for multilevel NAND
EEPROM’s,” in Dig. VLSI Symp. VLSI Technology, 1995, no.
10B-4, p. 129.
[40] N. Rodjy, “0.85 m double metal CMOS technology for 5 V
Flash EPROM memories with sector erase,” presented at the
12th Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memory Workshop, Monterey,
CA, Aug. 1992.
[41] A. Bergemont, H. Haggag, L. Anderson, E. Shacham, and G.
Woltsenholme, “NOR virtual ground (NVG)—A new scaling
concept for very high density FLASH EEPROM and its imple-
mentation in a 0.5 m process,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1993, pp.
15–18.
[42] A. Bergemont, M. H. Chi, and H. Haggag, “Low voltage
NVG: A new high performance 3 V/5 V Flash technology
for portable computing and telecommunication applications,”
in Proc. ESSDERC’95, H. C. de Graaf and H. v. Kranemburg,
Eds. The Hague, The Netherlands: Editions Frontieres, 1995,
pp. 543–547.
[43] B. Eitan, R. Kazerounian, A. Roy, G. Crisenza, P. Cappelletti,
and A. Modelli, “Multilevel Flash cells and their trade-offs,”
IEDM Tech. Dig., 1996, pp. 169–172.
[44] V. N. Kynett, A. Baker, M. Fandrich, G. Hoekstra, O. Jungroth,
J. Kreifels, and S. Wells, “An in-system reprogrammable 256 K
CMOS Flash memory,” in Proc. ISSCC Conf., San Francisco,
CA, 1988, p. 132.
[45] S. Mori, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Sato, H. Meguro, H. Tsunoda,
E. Kamiya, K. Yoshikawa, and N. Arai, “Thickness scaling
limitation factors of ONO interpoly dielectric for nonvolatile
memory devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 43, no.
1, pp. 47–53, 1996.
[46] R. Bez, D. Cantarelli, and S. Serra, “The channel hot elec-
tron programming of a floating gate MOSFET: An analytical
study,” presented at the 12th Nonvolatile Semiconductor Mem-
ory Workshop, Monterey, CA, Aug. 1992.
[47] S. Keenney, R. Bez, D. Cantarelli, F. Piccinini, A. Mathewson,
and C. Lombardi, “Complete transient simulation of Flash
EEPROM devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 39, no.
12, pp. 2750–2757, 1992.
[48] S. Keenney, F. Piccinini, M. Morelli, A. Mathewson, C. Lom-
bardi, R. Bez, L. Ravazzi, and D. Cantarelli, “Complete tran-
sient simulation of Flash EEPROM devices,” IEDM Tech. Dig.,
no. 8.7.1, 1990, pp. 201–204.
[49] P. Cappelletti, “Non volatile memories,” presented at the 8th
Workshop on Dielectrics in Microelectronics, Venice, Italy,
Nov. 1996, to be published.
[50] S. Cagnina, C. Chang, S. Haddad, J. Lien, N. Radjy, Y.
Sun, Y. Tang, M. Van Buskirk, and A. Wang, “A 0.85 m
double metal CMOS technology for 5 V Flash memories with
sector erase,” presented at the 12th Nonvolatile Semiconductor
Memory Workshop, Monterey, CA, Aug. 1992.
[51] B. Venkatesh, M. Chung, S. Govindachar, V. Santurkar, C. Bill,
R. Gutala, D. Zhou, J. Yu, M. Van Buskirk, S. Kawamura, K.
Kurihara, H. Kawashima, and H. Watanabe, “A 55 ns 0.35 m
3 V-only 16 M Flash memory with deep power-down,” in Proc.
ISSCC Conf., San Francisco, CA, no. TP 2.7, 1996, p. 44.
[52] K. Yoshikawa, S. Yamada, J. Miyamoto, T. Suzuki, M. Oshikiri,
E. Obi, Y. Hiura, K. Yamada, Y. Ohshima, and S. Atsumi,
“Comparison of current Flash EEPROM erasing methods: Sta-
bility and how to control,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1992, pp. 595–598.
[53] P. Cappelletti, R. Bez, D. Cantarelli, and L. Fratin, “Failure
mechanisms of Flash cell in program/erase cycling,” IEDM
Tech. Dig., 1994, pp. 291–294.
[54] S. Aritome, R. Shirota, G. Hemnik, T. Endoh, and F. Masuoka,
“Reliability issues of Flash memory cells,” Proc. IEEE, vol.
81, pp. 776–788, May 1993.
[55] C. Papadas, G. Ghibaudo, G. Pananakakis, C. Riva, P. Ghezzi,
C. Gounelle, and P. Mortini, “Retention characteristics of
single-poly EEPROM cells,” in Proc. European Symp. Reliabil-
ity of Electronic Devices, Failure Physics and Analysis (ESREF),
Bordeaux, France, Oct. 7–10, 1991, pp. 517–522.
[56] A. Watts, “Built-in reliability for 10 FITS performance on
EPROM and Flash memory,” SGS-Thomson Microelectronic,
Agrate Brianza, Italy, Tech. Art. TA 109, Nov. 1991.
[57] N. R. Mielke, “New EPROM data loss mechanisms,” in Proc.
IRPS, 1983, pp. 106–113.
[58] P. L. Hefley and J. W. McPherson, in Proc. IRPS, 1988, p. 176.
[59] S. Haddad, C. Chang, B. Swaminathan, and J. Lien, “Degrada-
tion due to hole trapping in Flash memory cells,” IEEE Electron
Device Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 117–119, 1989.
[60] P. Olivo, B. Riccò, and E. Sangiorgi, “High field induced
voltage dependent oxide charge,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 48, pp.
1135–1137, 1986.
[61] S. Yamada, Y. Hiura, T. Yamane, K. Amemiya, Y. Oshima,
and K. Yoshikawa, “Degradation mechanism of Flash EEPROM
programming after program/erase cycles,” IEDM Tech. Dig.,
1993, pp. 23–26.
[62] T. C. Ong, A. Fazio, N. Mielke, S. Pan, N. Righos, G. Atwood,
and S. Lai, “Erratic erase in ETOX Flash memory array,” in
VLSI Symp. Technology, 1993, pp. 82–83.
[63] C. Dunn, C. Kaya, T. Lewis, T. Strauss, J. Schreck, P. Hefley,
M. Middendorf, and T. San, “Flash EPROM disturb mecha-
nism,” in Proc. IRPS, 1994, pp. 299–308.
[64] S. Yamada, T. Suzuki, E. Obi, M. Oshikiri, K. Naruke, and M.
Wada, “A self-convergence erasing scheme for a simple stacked
gate Flash EEPROM,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1991, pp. 307–310.
[65] K. Oyama, H. Shirai, N. Kodama, K. Kanamori, K. Saitoh, Y.
S. Hisamune, and T. Okazawa, “A novel erasing technology for
3.3 V Flash memory with 64 Mb capacity and beyond,” IEDM
Tech. Dig., 1992, pp. 607–610.
[66] A. Bergemont, M. Chi, and H. Haggag, “Low voltage NVG: A
new high performance 3 V/5 V Flash technology for portable
computing and telecommunications applications,” IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 1510–1517, 1996.
[67] I. C. Chen, C. Tencg, D. Coleman, and A. Nishimura,
“Interface-trap enhanced gate-induced leakage current in
MOSFET,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 10, no. 5, pp.
216–218, 1989.
[68] T. Chang, C. Huang, and T. Wang, “Mechanisms of interface
trap-induced drain leakage current in off-state n-MOSFET,”
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 738–743,
1995.
[69] R. Moazzami and C. Hu, “Stress-induced current in thin silicon
dioxide films,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1992, pp. 139–142.
[70] S. Mori, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Sato, H. Meguro, H. Tsunoda, E.
Kamiya, K. Yoshikawa, N. Arai, and E. Sakagami, “Thickness
scaling limitation factors of ONO interpoly dielectric for non-
volatile memory devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol.
43, no. 1, pp. 47–53, 1996.
[71] S. Maramatsu, T. Kubota, N. Nishio, H. Shirai, M. Matsuo,
N. Kodama, M. Horikawa, S. Saito, K. Arai, and T. Okazawa,
“The solution of over-erase problem controlling poly-Si grain
size modified principles for Flash memories,” IEDM Tech. Dig.,
1994, pp. 847–850.
[72] A. T. Mitchell, C. Huffman, and A. L. Esquivel, “A new self-
aligned planar array cell for ultra high density EPROM’s,”
IEDM Tech. Dig., 1987, pp. 548–553.
[73] B. Eitan, “Cell concepts and array architectures,” presented at
the Flash Memory Tutorial, 14th Nonvolatile Semiconductor
Memory Workshop, Monterey, CA, Aug. 1995.
[74] R. Kazerounian, A. Bergemont, A. Roy, G. Wolsteholme, R.
Irani, M. Shamay, H. Gaffur, G. A. Rezvani, L. Anderson, H.
Haggag, E. Shacham, P. Kauk, P. Nielson, A. Kablanian, K.
Chhor, J. Perry, R. Sethi, and B. Eitan, “Alternate Metal virtual
Ground EPROM array implemented in a 0.8 m process for
very high density applications,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1991, pp.
311–314.
[75] J. VanHoudt, L. Haspeslagh, D. Wellekens, L. Deferm, G.
Groeseneken, and H. E. Maes, “HIMOS—A high efficiency
Flash EEPROM cell for embedded memory applications,” IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2255–2263, 1993.
[76] K. Naruke, S. Yamada, E. Obi, S. Taguchi, and M. Wada, “A
new Flash-erase EEPROM cell with a sidewall select-gate on
its source side,” in Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memories: Tech-
nologies, Design, and Applications, C. Hu, Ed. New York:
IEEE Press, 1991, ch. 5, pp. 183–186.
[77] Y. Ma, C. S. Pang, K. T. Chang, S. C. Tsao, J. E. Frayer, T.
Kim, K. Jo, J. Kim, I. Choi, and H. Park, “A dual-bit split-gate
EEPROM (DSG) cell in contactless array for single-Vcc high
1270 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 85, NO. 8, AUGUST 1997
density Flash memories,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1994, pp. 57–60.
[78] H. Onoda, Y. Kunori, S. Kobayashi, M. Ohi, A. Fukumoto, N.
Ajika, and H. Miyoshi, “A novel cell structure suitable for a 3
V operation, sector erase FLASH memory,” IEDM Tech. Dig.,
1992, pp. 599–602.
[79] Y. Yamauchi, M. Yoshimi, S. Sato, H. Tabuchi, N. Takenada,
and K. Sakiyam, “A new cell structure for sub-quarter micron
high density Flash memory,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1995, pp.
267–270.
[80] H. Kume, M. Kato, T. Adachi, T. Tanaka, T. Sasaki, T. Okazaki,
N. Miyamoto, S. Saeki, Y. Ohji, M. Ushiyama, J. Yugami, T.
Morimoto, and T. Nishida, “A 1.28 m2 contactless memory
cell technology for a 3 V-only 64 Mbit EEPROM,” IEDM Tech.
Dig., 1992, pp. 991–993.
[81] Y. S. Hisamune, K. Kanamori, T. Kubota, Y. Suzuki, M.
Tsukiji, E. Hasegawa, A. Ishitani, and T. Okazawa, “A high
capacitive-coupling ratio (HiCR) cell for 3 V-only 64 Mbit and
future Flash memories,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1993, pp. 19–22.
[82] F. Masuoka, M. Momodami, Y. Iwata, and R. Shirota, “New
ultra high density EPROM and Flash EEPROM cell with
NAND structure cell,” IEDM Tech. Dig., 1987, pp. 552–555.
[83] B. Eitan, “Flash cells future trends,” presented at the 8th
Workshop on Dielectrics in Microelectronics, Venice, Italy,
Nov. 1996.
[84] K. Yano, I. Ishii, T. Sano, T. Mine, F. Murai, and K. Seki,
“Single-electron-memory integrated circuits for Giga-to-Tera bit
storage,” in Proc. ISSCC Conf., San Francisco, CA, 1996, p.
266.
Paolo Pavan (Member, IEEE) was born in
Mirano, Venezia, Italy in 1964. He graduated in
electronics engineering and received the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Padova, Italy,
in 1990 and 1994, respectively. From 1992 to
1993, he was a graduate student at the University
of California, Berkeley.
From 1993 to 1994, he was with the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, as a Visiting
Research Engineer. In 1994, he joined the Uni-
versity of Modena, Italy, where he is now a
Senior Researcher. His research interests are in the fields of solid-state
devices. He has studied breakdown phenomena. In particular, he has
studied and modeled latch-up, hot-electron degradation, radiation effects
in MOS devices, and impact ionization phenomena in bipolar transistors.
His interests currently are also in Flash-cell reliability, were he studies
dielectric properties, and in the development of new memory cells.
Roberto Bez was born in Milan, Italy, in 1961.
He received the doctoral degree in physics from
the University of Milan, Italy in 1985.
Since 1986, he has been working in the VLSI
Process Development Group of SGS-Thomson
Microelectronics, Agrate Brianza, Italy, in par-
ticular researching nonvolatile memories process
architectures. Until 1989, he was engaged in
the electrical characterization and modeling of
EEPROM cells, contributing to the development
of an original SPICE model of this device.
From 1989 to 1993, his work focused on the development of very-high-
density Flash memory devices, following the basic device architecture
and studying the transient performances by the characterization of the
programming and erasing physical mechanism. Since 1994, he has been
Project Leader of the development of a single power supply Flash
memory device. Currently, he is working in the Non-Volatile Memory
Process Development Group of the Central Research and Development.
His research interests have covered many aspects of microelectronics,
from silicon planar technology through process architecture to the physics
of electron devices, with particular attention to device modeling and
reliability. He was a Lecturer in electron device physics at the University
of Milan and in nonvolatile memory devices at the University of Padova
and Polytechnic of Milan.
Piero Olivo was born in Bologna, Italy, in
1956. He received the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Bologna in 1987.
In 1983, he joined the Department of Elec-
tronics and Computer Systems, University of
Bologna. In 1991, he became Associate Profes-
sor of electronic instrumentation and measure-
ments. In 1993, he became Full Professor of
electronics at the University of Catania, Italy. In
1995, he joined the University of Ferrara, Italy.
In 1986–87 and autumn 1989, he was a Visiting
Scientist at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY.
His scientific interests are in the areas of solid-state devices and integrated
circuit (IC) design and testing. In the field of solid-state devices, he has
worked on SiO2 physics, quantum effects, charge transport through thin
SiO2 structures, charge trapping in SiO2, oxide breakdown and reliability,
MOS measurement techniques, thin oxide properties, and nonvolatile
memories characterization. In the field of IC design and testing, he has
worked on signature analysis testing, design for testability techniques, fault
modeling and fault simulation, IDDQ testing, self-checking circuits, and
nonvolatile memory testing.
Enrico Zanoni (Senior Member, IEEE) was
born in Legnago, Verona, Italy in 1956. He
received the doctoral degree in physics from the
University of Modena, Italy, in 1982.
He has worked on the characterization of
electronic components for telecommunication
systems and automotive electronics systems. His
research interests include the study of the relia-
bility of Si electron devices and of nonvolatile
memories, the characterization of hot-electron
phenomena in III–V devices. On these (and
related) subjects, he has coauthored approximately 150 papers published
in international journals and conference proceedings, ten invited papers,
and five book chapters. He has collaborated with several electronics
companies, including Alcatel, AT&T Bell Labs (now Lucent Technolo-
gies), CNET-France Telecom, Hughes Research Laboratories, IBM T. J.
Watson Research Center, Marelli Autronica, NECSY, Siemens, and TRW.
Since 1993, he has been a full Professor of Electronics at the Univeristy
of Padova, Italy. He has participated in the past in the establishment
of a laboratory devoted to the evaluation of quality and reliability of
electronic components in Bari, Italy. At the University of Padova, he has
been and is currently responsible for of the following European projects:
EUREKA project PROMETHEUS-PROCHIP (Prometheus subprogram
on Custom Hardware for Intelligent Processing) for reliability testing
activities, ESPRIT III project MANPOWER, “Manufacturable Power
MMIC’s for Microwave Systems Applications,” and Human Capital and
Mobility projects. He is the Project Leader of the Standards, Measurements
and Testing program “‘PROPHECY’ Procedures for the Early Phase
Evaluation of Reliability of Electronic Components by Development
of CECC Rules,” a research project involving Alcatel, Siemens, ST
Microelectronics, and several research laboratories.
PAVAN et al.: FLASH MEMORY CELLS—AN OVERVIEW 1271

