Improving NAND Flash Based Disk Caches
Taeho Kgil∗ David Roberts Trevor Mudge
University of Michigan
Advanced Computer Architecture Laboratory
2260 Hayward Street Ann Arbor, MI 48109
E-mail: {tkgil,daverobe,tnm}@eecs.umich.edu
Abstract
Flash is a widely used storage device that provides
high density and low power, appealing properties for gen-
eral purpose computing. Today, its usual application is
in portable special purpose devices such as MP3 players.
In this paper we examine its use in the server domain—
a more general purpose environment. Aggressive process
scaling and the use of multi-level cells continues to improve
density ahead of Moore’s Law predictions, making Flash
even more attractive as a general purpose memory solu-
tion. Unfortunately, reliability limits the use of Flash. To
seriously consider Flash in the server domain, architectural
support must exist to address this concern. This paper first
shows how Flash can be used in today’s server platforms
as a disk cache. It then proposes two improvements. The
first improves performance and reliability by splitting Flash
based disk caches into separate read and write regions. The
second improves reliability by employing a programmable
Flash memory controller. It can change the error code
strength (number of correctable bits) and the number of
bits that a memory cell can store (cell density) according
to the demands of the application. Our studies show that
Flash reduces overall power consumed by the system mem-
ory and hard disk drive up to 3 times while maintaining
performance. We also show that Flash lifetime can be im-
proved by a factor of 20 when using a programmable Flash
memory controller, if some performance degradation (be-
low 5%) is acceptable.
1 Introduction
Today, NAND Flash can be found in handheld devices
like cell phones, digital cameras and MP3 players. This
has been made possible because of its high density and low
power properties. These result from the simple structure of
∗Currently at Intel
Flash cells and its nonvolatility. Its popularity has meant
that it is the focus of aggressive process scaling and innova-
tion.
The rapid rate of improvement in density has suggested
other usage models for Flash besides handheld devices, and
in recent years, Flash has also emerged as an attractive
memory device to integrate into other computing platforms.
Flash is used in solid state disks and hybrid disk drives to re-
duce power consumption and improve performance [1, 3].
Flash is even being considered inside data centers where
system memory power and disk drive power are critical con-
cerns. With appropriate support, Flash could dramatically
reduce the cost of powering and cooling data centers.
However, Flash manageability and reliability are chal-
lenging problems that need to be addressed to fully integrate
Flash into data centers. Flash wears out as we increase the
number of writes/erases. A combined software/hardware
effort is required to mitigate these problems. Reliability
is especially important in servers deployed in data centers.
This paper proposes a hardware assisted software managed
disk cache for NAND Flash. We address the shortcomings
due to reliability and manageability. Our contributions are
as follows:
1. We extend the power and performance analysis for us-
ing Flash based disk caches on server platforms de-
scribed in [16]. We also show that there is negligi-
ble overhead in complexity and performance to using
Flash.
2. We show that by splitting Flash based disk caches into
read and write regions, overall performance and relia-
bility can be improved.
3. We show that a programmable Flash memory con-
troller can improve Flash cell reliability and extend
memory lifetime. The first programmable parameter is
error correction code strength. The second is the Flash
cell density—changing from multi-level cells to single
level cells.
International Symposium on Computer Architecture
1063-6897/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ISCA.2008.32
327
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section pro-
vides background on Flash and makes the case for using
Flash as a disk cache. Section 3 presents the architec-
ture of a Flash based disk cache. Section 4 explains the
Flash memory controller architecture that improves relia-
bility. Section 5 describes how our proposed architecture
works. Section 6 describes the methodology used to ex-
plore the design space and evaluate our proposed architec-
ture. Section 7 presents the results of that exploration. Sec-
tion 8 presents concluding remarks.
2 Background and the case for Flash based
disk caches
2.1 Using NAND Flash to reduce system
memory power
Prior work on Flash has been proposed to save power and
improve performance in memory systems. It has been pro-
posed as a disk cache [16] and a replacement for disk [26].
Tables 1 and 2 show why Flash is attractive as a compo-
nent in servers. Table 1 shows the 2007 ITRS roadmap for
NAND Flash compared to other types of memory devices.
Table 2 shows the density, performance and power con-
sumption of NAND Flash compared to other types of mem-
ory and storage devices. It can be seen that the cell size for
NAND Flash is much smaller than other memory devices.
This is primarily due to the NAND cell structure and the
adoption of multi-level cell (MLC) technology. MLC Flash
today provides 2 bits per cell, and 4 bit per cell MLC Flash
is expected by 2011. Given the trends shown in the ITRS
roadmap, it is reasonable to expect NAND Flash to be as
much as 8× denser than DRAM by 2015.
Table 2 also shows that NAND Flash consumes much
less power than DRAM, but its latency is much greater
[25, 18]. On the other hand, compared to a hard disk drive,
a NAND Flash has significantly lower access latency and
power consumption.
Table 1 shows that Flash is limited in the number of
write/erase cycles that a data block can reliably tolerate.
There also exists a clear trade-off between Flash density
and reliability, since today’s SLC Flash tolerates 10 times
as many writes as MLC. The limited Flash endurance is due
to Flash cell wear out [24, 23, 14].
NAND Flash is organized in units of pages and blocks.
A typical Flash page is 2KB in size and a Flash block is
made up of 64 Flash pages (128KB). Random Flash reads
and writes are performed on a page basis and Flash era-
sures are performed per block. A Flash must perform an
erase on a block before it can write to a page belonging to
that block. Each additional write must be preceded by an
erase. Therefore out-of-place writes are commonly used to
mitigate wear out. They treat Flash as a log and append new
2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
NAND Flash-
SLC∗(μm2/bit) 0.0130 0.0081 0.0052 0.0031 0.0021
NAND Flash-
MLC∗(μm2/bit) 0.0065 0.0041 0.0013 0.0008 0.0005
DRAM Cell
density(μm2/bit) 0.0324 0.0153 0.0096 0.0061 0.0038
Flash write/erase
cycles—SLC/MLC†
1E+05/
1E+04
1E+05/
1E+04
1E+06/
1E+04
1E+06/
1E+04
1E+06/
1E+04
Flash data retention
(years) 10-20 10-20 10-20 20 20
∗ SLC - Single level Cell, MLC - Multi Level Cell
† write/erase cycles for MLC Flash estimated from prior work[17]
Table 1. ITRS 2007 roadmap for memory tech-
nology.
Active
Power
Idle
Power
Read
Latency
Write
Latency
Erase
Latency
1Gb DDR2
DRAM 878mW 80mW
† 55ns 55ns N/A
1Gb
NAND-SLC 27mW 6μW 25μs 200μs 1.5ms
4Gb NAND-
MLC N/A N/A 50μs 680μs 3.3ms
HDD‡ 13.0W 9.3W 8.5ms 9.5ms N/A
† DRAM Idle power in active mode. Idle power in powerdown mode is 18mW
‡ Data for 750GB Hard disk drive [5]
Table 2. Performance, power consumption
and cost for DRAM, NAND-based SLC/MLC
Flash and HDD.
data to the end of the log while old data is invalidated. This
is done on a per page basis. Figure 1(a) illustrates the or-
ganization of the SLC/MLC dual mode Flash used in this
study. A similar design with different page and block sizes
was published by Cho et al. [11]. Pages in SLC mode con-
sist of 2048 bytes of data area and 64 bytes of ‘spare’ data
for error correction code (ECC) bits. When in MLC mode,
a single SLC page can be split into two 2048 byte MLC
pages. Pages are erased together in blocks of 64 SLC pages
or 128 MLC pages.
Server applications typically use a large amount of sys-
tem memory for caching contents in disk. Traditionally
part of DRAM is used as a cache to reduce the high ac-
cess latency to hard disk drives. The disk cache, or page
cache, is managed by the OS. Assuming that reliability can
be guaranteed through software and hardware techniques,
Flash can be used as a way to address the wide latency gap
between the hard disk drive and DRAM while saving power.
In fact, it has been shown that system memory consumes an
appreciable amount of total power—more than 1/4 of the
power consumption in a data center platform [20].
328
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
	

	

 

	
 
 
(a) Flash block diagram
0
10
20
30
40
50
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Used Flash Space
N
o
rm
al
iz
ed
 g
ar
b
ag
e 
co
lle
ct
io
n
 o
ve
rh
ea
d
 
1
(b) Garbage collection
Figure 1. (a) Example dual mode SLC/MLC
Flash bank organization (b) Garbage collec-
tion (GC) overhead in time versus occupied
Flash space in a 2GB Flash.
2.2 Using NAND Flash based disk caches
In addition to using Flash as a disk cache, there has been
a proposal to use it as an auxiliary disk using NOR cells
[26]. When that study was performed the now dominant
NAND Flash had not been introduced. However, the ar-
chitecture in [26] could easily be modified to incorporate
NAND.
The biggest difficulty with using Flash as a solid-state
disk (SSD) in place of a conventional disk is the garbage
collection overhead. Flash based file systems require a ded-
icated software layer that executes file system primitives
customized for Flash to emulate FAT32, EXT2 or dedi-
cated Flash file systems like JFFS. These implementations
are slow because of the garbage collection that is necessary
with the out-of-place write policy in Flash.
The overhead in garbage collection increases as less free
space is available on Flash. This becomes a significant
problem, because garbage collection generates extra writes
and erases in Flash, reducing performance and endurance as
the occupancy of the Flash increases. The garbage collec-
tion overhead is a product of garbage collection frequency
and garbage collection latency. Figure 1(b) shows how the
time spent garbage collecting increases as more Flash space
is used. It is normalized to an overhead of 10%. It can be
seen that GC becomes overwhelming well before all of the
memory is used. In fact, the study in [26] was only able to
use 80% of its storage capacity to suppress garbage collec-
tion overhead.
Another difficulty is the memory overhead in maintain-
ing the Flash file system data structures. File systems store
file data along with meta-data to manage the file. The size
of these structures are appreciable and take up a consider-
able percentage of memory for small files. Managing the
entire file system meta-data in DRAM incurs an apprecia-
ble memory overhead. Thus, conventional file systems load
only a portion of the file system meta-data in DRAM. This
method is similar to demand based paging. Wear out ef-
Figure 2. 1GB DRAM is replaced with a
smaller 256MB DRAM and 1GB NAND-based
Flash. Additional components are added to
control Flash.
fects and higher access latency mean Flash is less appropri-
ate for storing this meta-data at runtime. File system meta-
data structures are frequently updated and result in frequent
Flash writes and erases. As a result, the meta-data used in
a Flash based file system should be kept in DRAM at run-
time. If Flash is used as a full file system rather than as a
disk cache, more DRAM is required for meta-data.
A disk cache is much simpler and requires less storage
overhead. By managing the contents of a disk at the granu-
larity of pages and using a single item of meta-data to locate
each page, the meta-data size is bounded and independent
of the size of the underlying file system.
3 Architecture of the Flash based disk cache
The right side of Figure 2 shows the Flash based disk
cache architecture. It is an extension of [16]. Compared to
a conventional DRAM-only architecture shown on the left
side of Figure 2, our proposed architecture uses a two level
disk cache, composed of a relatively small DRAM in front
of a dense Flash. The much lower access time of DRAM
allows it to act as a cache for the Flash without significantly
increasing power consumption. A Flash memory controller
is also required, for reliability management. We will pro-
vide a detailed description of our Flash memory controller
in later sections.
Our design uses a NAND Flash that stores 2 bits per cell
(MLC) and is capable of switching from MLC to SLC mode
using techniques proposed in [11, 19]. Finally, our design
uses variable-strength error correction code (ECC) to im-
prove reliability. We will discuss ECC and density control
in later sections.
329
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
Next, we explain the data structures used in our Flash
block and page management. These tables are read from
the hard disk drive and stored in DRAM at run-time to re-
duce access latency and mitigate wear out. The Primary
Disk Cache (PDC) also resides in DRAM and caches the
most frequently accessed disk pages. Adding Flash allows
us to greatly reduce the size of the PDC. The tables are as
follows;
• FlashCache hash table (FCHT) - stores the mapping
between addresses on disk and Flash. The FCHT was
first introduced in [16].
• Flash page status table (FPST) - stores error correction
code (ECC) strength, SLC/MLC mode and a saturating
access counter. It also stores a valid bit field.
• Flash block status table (FBST) - records the number
of erase operations performed on each block as well as
the degree of wear out.
• Flash global status table (FGST) - tracks average la-
tency and miss rate of the Flash based disk cache.
We augmented the data structures described in [16]. Addi-
tional data structures (FPST, FBST, FGST) are required to
support our programmable Flash memory controller. The
overhead of the four tables described above are less than
2% of the Flash size. The FCHT and FPST are the primary
contributors because we need them for each Flash page. For
example, the memory overhead for a 32GB Flash is approx-
imately 360MB of DRAM. Our Flash based disk cache is
managed in software (OS code) using the tables described
above. We found the performance overhead in executing
this code to be minimal.
3.1 FlashCache hash table (FCHT)
The FCHT is a memory structure that holds tags asso-
ciated with the Flash pages. A tag is made up of a logi-
cal block address (LBA) field and a Flash memory address
field. The LBA field points to the location in the hard disk
drive and is used to determine whether Flash has cached this
data. The corresponding Flash memory address field is used
to access Flash.
The FCHT is organized as a fully associative table ac-
cessed quickly by performing a hash. Increasing the num-
ber of entries that can be indexed in the hash table can in-
crease performance We found that around 100 entries pro-
vide close to the maximum system throughput.
3.2 Flash page status table (FPST)
The FPST contains the configuration of each page in
Flash. The ECC strength and the SLC/MLC mode fields
are used to interface with the Flash memory controller. The
saturating access counter is used to address frequent access
behavior. We also keep track of valid page data by setting
and resetting the valid bit field (see [15] for details). Its
usage is explained in section 5.2.
3.3 Flash block status table (FBST)
The FBST is used to profile the number of erases per-
formed on a particular block. This information is used to
perform wear-leveling (section 3.6), which increases the
lifetime of the Flash by attempting to erase all blocks uni-
formly. The FBST maintains the current status of a Flash
block. It holds the degree of wear out of a Flash block, and
the number of erases performed on this block (see [15] for
details). The degree of wear out is a cost function gener-
ated from observing the erase count as well as the status of
all Flash pages belonging to a Flash block. We defined the
degree of wear out for Flash block i as follows. It is a met-
ric used to compare the relative wear out of Flash blocks to
make allocation decisions.
wear outi = Nerase,i + k1 × TotalECC,i
+k2 × TotalSLC MLC,i
where Nerase,i is the number of erases to block i,
TotalECC,i is the total ECC strength of block i (which is
increased as the block wears out). This is the sum of ECC
strengths across all pages in a block. The TotalSLC MLC,i
is the total number of pages in block i that are converted
to SLC mode due to wear out. The constants k1, k2 are
positive weight factors. Constant k2 is larger than k1 be-
cause a mode switch (from MLC to SLC) impacts wear
out a lot more than increasing ECC strength. Essentially,
TotalECC,i and TotalSLC MLC,i are the sum of the ECC
strength and the SLC/MLC mode fields for all pages in the
FPST that belong to block i.
The number of erases is related to the number of Flash
based disk cache evictions and writes. Section 3.6 explains
the usage of the FBST. The wear out field of the FBST
determines whether a block is old or new.
3.4 Flash global status table (FGST)
The FGST contains summary information regarding how
well the entire Flash based disk cache is working. This in-
cludes statistics such as miss rate and average access laten-
cies across all Flash blocks. The fields in the FGST are used
to address the increase in faults due to wear out (see [15] for
details). Its usage is explained in section 5.2.
3.5 Splitting Flash into a read cache and
a write cache
Naively managed out-of-place writes degrade the per-
formance of a Flash based disk cache. They tend to in-
330
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
crease the garbage collection (GC) overhead which in turn
increases the number of overall disk cache misses incurring
a significant performance overhead. The increase in over-
all Flash based disk cache miss rate is due to invalid Flash
pages that are generated from out-of-place writes.
It is desirable to limit GC and maintain a reasonable ac-
cess latency to Flash, because the read access latency to a
Flash based disk cache is important for overall system per-
formance. To that end we divide the Flash into a read disk
cache and a write disk cache. Read caches are less sus-
ceptible to out-of-place writes, which reduce the read cache
capacity and increase the risk of garbage collection. Read
critical Flash blocks are located in the read disk cache that
may only evict Flash blocks and pages on read misses. The
write disk cache captures all writes to the Flash based disk
cache and performs out-of-place writes. Wear-leveling is
applied globally to all regions in the Flash based disk cache.
By separating the Flash based disk cache into a read
and write disk cache, we are able to reduce the number
of blocks that have to be considered when doing write
triggered garbage collection. Figure 3 shows an example
that highlights the benefits of splitting the Flash based disk
cache into a read and write cache. The left side shows the
behavior of a unified Flash based disk cache and the right
side shows the behavior of splitting the Flash based disk
cache into a read and write cache. Figure 3 assumes we have
5 pages per block and 5 total blocks in a Flash based disk
cache. Garbage collection proceeds by reading all valid data
from blocks containing invalid pages, erasing those blocks
and then sequentially re-writing the valid data. In this ex-
ample, when the Flash based disk cache is split into a read
and write cache, only 2 blocks are candidates for garbage
collection. This dramatically reduces Flash reads, writes
and erases compared to a unified Flash based disk cache
that considers all 5 Flash blocks.
Each read and write cache manages its own set of Flash
blocks and its own LRU policy. Section 5.1 provides more
detail for how Flash based disk cache hits, misses and writes
are handled. Figure 4 shows the miss rate improvement
obtained by splitting into a read and write disk cache. Based
on the observed write behavior, 90% of Flash is dedicated
to the read cache and 10% write cache. The reduced miss
rate results in improved performance and shows the benefit
of splitting the Flash based disk cache, particularly as disk
caches get larger.
3.6 Wear-level aware Flash based disk
cache replacement policy
Unlike DRAM, Flash wears out. To mitigate wear out,
wear-level management is performed on Flash erases for the
Flash based disk cache. Wear-leveling is a commonly used
technique in Flash [6, 9]. We adopt a modification of con-
		
 !"

#$ !"

%$&	"
!"	$  $'(	$
)	"*(	"
+,
!"

-!"	(.!"
/(.
!"
(
!"	(.-!"
/(.
-!"
(
0&('(	$ 0&('(	$
1&('(	$ 1&('(	$
Figure 3. Diagram illustrating the benefits of
splitting the Flash based disk cache.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
128MB 256MB 384MB 512MB 640MB
Flash Size
F
la
sh
 M
is
s 
ra
te
RW unified : shared disk cache
RW separate : separate read and write disk cache
Figure 4. A miss rate comparison executing
a dbt2 (OLTP) disk trace for a unified Flash
based disk cache and a split read and write
Flash based disk cache.
ventional wear-leveling techniques that is customized for a
disk cache usage model. For both the read and write cache,
we initially select a block to be evicted using an LRU pol-
icy on disk cache capacity misses (for the read cache) or
capacity writes (out-of-place writes that need to first erase
blocks, for the write cache). However, if this block wear out
exceeds that of the newest block by a predetermined thresh-
old, then the block corresponding to the minimum wear out
(newest block) is evicted to balance the wear-level. Newest
blocks are chosen from the entire set of Flash blocks. Be-
fore we evict the newest block, its content is migrated to
the old block. The degree of wear out of a Flash block is
determined by observing the entries in the FBST.
4 Architecture of the Flash memory con-
troller
Flash needs architectural support to improve reliability
and lifetime when used as a cache. Figure 5 shows a high-
level block diagram of a programmable Flash memory con-
331
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
02.)$	 02.)	
02
+$	
3	
!"
3$
$(
4143!"
!56$(
+7($
#$(&	#$(&	
!"(
89/(:
5(,,!",,(	$((
)
+$	
3	
0+(((9;4:
!"9(:
'$(
$(,
0(,

1(",
"$
(	"
'$(
5(0
)<
)< 
)(((
)$(((
Figure 5. High-level block diagram of a pro-
grammable Flash memory controller.
troller that addresses this need. It is composed of 2 main
components;
• An encoder and decoder for error correction and detec-
tion. Unlike conventional Flash logic, we use a vari-
able error correction strength.
• A density controller for SLC/MLC mode selection.
This dynamically trades block storage capacity for re-
liability as the Flash ages, or lower latency for fre-
quently accessed pages.
We use a typical device driver interface to access the Flash
memory controller. The device driver reads the error correc-
tion code (ECC) strength and SLC/MLC mode fields from
the FPST and generates a descriptor (control messages) to
access a page in Flash. We describe the details of our Flash
memory controller in the following subsections.
4.1 Hardware assisted error correction
code support
A common way to recover from errors in Flash is to use
an error correction code (ECC). This section describes the
error correction and detection scheme in our Flash memory
controller. We also show how error correction can extend
Flash lifetime, and that the time penalty for the correction
process need not impact performance.
ECCs are widely employed in digital storage devices
to mitigate the effects of hard (permanent) and soft (tran-
sient) errors. Flash typically uses linear block codes like
the Bose, Ray-Chaudhuri, Hocquenghem (BCH) code due
to its strength and acceptable decode/encode latency. To
reduce the false positives that can occur with BCH codes,
CRC codes are also employed.
Our architecture shown in Figure 5 uses a BCH encoder
and decoder to perform error correction and a 32 bit CRC
0
40
80
120
160
200
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
number of correctable errors
d
ec
o
d
e 
la
te
n
cy
 -
 u
s
syndrome chien
(a)
0.E+00
2.E+06
4.E+06
6.E+06
8.E+06
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
number of correctable errors
m
ax
. t
o
le
ra
b
le
 W
/E
 c
yc
le
s
stdev = 0 stdev = 5% of mean
stdev = 10% of mean stdev = 20% of mean
1.E+05
(b)
Figure 6. (a) BCH decode latency (b) Maxi-
mum tolerable Flash write/erase (W/E) cycles
for varying code strength.
checker to perform error detection. The BCH check bit stor-
age overhead is small considering the high capacity of to-
day’s Flash. Devices typically include 64 bytes per page for
ECC support bits. The CRC32 code needs 4 bytes, leaving
60 bytes for BCH. Because we limited the number of cor-
rectable errors to 12, a maximum of 23 bytes are needed for
check bits, per page.
4.1.1 BCH encoder and decoder
Given a message of k bits, we can construct a t-error-
correcting BCH code with block length of n bits, such that
the number of parity check bits is given by n − k ≥ mt.
Furthermore, the block length n should satisfy n = 2m− 1.
We need to append approximately log(n) bits for each er-
ror we wish to correct, and the number of parity check bits
increase linearly with the number of correctable errors for a
fixed code length.
Figure 5 shows an implementation of our BCH encoder
and decoder. The Berlekamp and Chien search algorithms
in the decoder are widely used due to their simplicity, and
they have been proven to be an effective iterative technique
in decoding BCH codes [21]. In addition to that, Chien
search can be parallelized in a straightforward manner.
We implemented the BCH encoder and decoder in C and
measured the amount of time spent encoding and decod-
ing BCH code on a 3.4 GHz Pentium 4 system. Laten-
cies ranging from a tenth of a second to nearly a second,
were observed for correcting 2-10 errors. Clearly an ac-
celerator is necessary. In response, we designed one based
on ideas in [22]. A Berlekamp acceleration engine and a
highly parallelized Chien search engine improve the modu-
lar arithmetic and memory alignment found in BCH codes
and takes advantage of the parallelism inherent in BCH de-
coders. The resulting decode latencies are shown in Figure
6(a). These latencies are obtained using a 100 MHz in-order
embedded processor with parallelized modular arithmetic
332
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
support. Berlekamp algorithm overhead is insignificant and
was omitted from the figure.
We developed a design to estimate the cost in area. Our
implementation used a 215 entry finite field lookup table as
well as 16 finite field adders and multipliers as accelerators
to implement the Berlekamp and Chien search algorithm
(16 instances of the Chien search engines). BCH codes use
finite field operators, which are sufficiently different from
standard arithmetic operators to cause a bottleneck in a gen-
eral purpose CPU without an accelerator. We limit the pro-
grammability to a fixed block size (2KB) to avoid memory
alignment with different block sizes and limit the maximum
number of correctable errors to 12. Our design required
about 1 mm2.
4.1.2 CRC checksum
One of the drawbacks of BCH codes is that they cannot al-
ways detect when more errors occur than they have been
designed to correct. In some cases the Chien search can
find no roots, indicating that more errors occurred. In other
cases roots are found creating a false positive. The usual so-
lution to this is to augment them with CRC codes to improve
error detection. CRC codes are capable of covering a wide
range of error patterns. We used an optimized hardware
implementation of a CRC32 functional block. Our design
compiler results showed it occupied a negligible amount of
die area and added negligible performance overhead (tens
of nanoseconds). This agrees with other implementations
such as [13].
4.1.3 Impact of BCH code strength on Flash lifetime
Flash cell lifetime displays an exponential relationship with
oxide thickness [24]. In this exponential model Flash cell
lifetime W can be defined as:
W = 10C1·tox
where C1 is a constant. Most Flash specifications refer to
the probability of a cell failing after 100,000 write/erase
(W/E) cycles. This probability is usually of the order of
10−4, and allows us to calculate the constant in the cell life-
time formula above. We further assume, in common with
other studies, that oxide thickness is normally distributed
with three standard deviations equal to 15% of the mean ox-
ide thickness. Combining these facts with number of cells
in a page and the code strength (the number of errors that
can be corrected) allows us to derive a distribution for the
lifetime in W/E cycles. An exponential analytical model is
employed. We assume Flash page size to be 2KB and first
point of failure to occur at 100,000 W/E cycles. See [15]
for details of the derivation.
Using the exponential model, we plotted the Flash W/E
cycles versus ECC code strength in Figure 6(b). As can
Financial2: working set size 443.8MB
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
0 50 100
Flash die area (mm^2)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
S
L
C
 p
er
ce
n
ta
g
e
Latency (us) Optimal SLC fraction
(a) Financial2
Websearch1: working set size 5116.7MB
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
0 500 1,000
Flash die area (mm^2)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
S
L
C
 p
er
ce
n
ta
g
e
Latency (us) Optimal SLC fraction
(b) Websearch1
Figure 7. Optimal access latency and
SLC/MLC partition for various multimode
MLC Flash sizes.
be seen, ECC code strength extends lifetime. We also note
that we see diminishing return from increasing ECC code
strength for both models. Spatial variation negatively im-
pacts code strength because our assumptions in plotting Fig-
ure 6(b) assumed all Flash pages had to be recoverable for
a certain ECC code. As bad Flash cells display a higher
spatial correlation, bad cells cluster in groups on a page re-
sulting in an increasing number of pages that cannot recover
using a particular ECC.
4.2 Hardware assisted density control
MLC Flash cells take longer to read and write. Multiple
levels imply a narrower gap between different logical values
and this is the main cause of reduced endurance. To reduce
this drawback, there has been work on enabling MLC to
operate in SLC mode to improve Flash endurance and la-
tency [11, 19]. Samsung has recently also announced One-
FlexNAND that dynamically controls the SLC to MLC mul-
timode operation. Our programmable Flash memory con-
troller assumes that one can dynamically control the den-
sity of a Flash at the page level by slightly modifying the
sense amplifier circuitry found in a MLC [11, 19]. There-
fore, the primary role of a density controller is to indicate
the mode of the requested page. The density configuration
of the requested page can be found in the density descrip-
tor generated from the SLC/MLC mode field in the FPST.
Density control benefits Flash performance and endurance,
because we are able to reduce access latency for frequently
accessed pages and possibly improve endurance for aging
Flash pages by changing MLC pages into SLC pages as
needed.
To show the potential improvement of Flash perfor-
mance by controlling density, we present a study using real
disk traces. Using disk activity traces from [8] for financial
and web search applications, we analyzed the average ac-
cess latency for different SLC/MLC partitions, for several
Flash sizes.
333
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
We show that a hybrid allocation of SLC and MLC pro-
vides minimum access latency. Figure 7 shows the average
access latencies (left y-axis) achieved for an optimal parti-
tion (right y-axis) between SLC and MLC. The x-axis varies
the Flash size (die area) based on a recent MLC Flash imple-
mentation [12]. Although the total chip capacity in [12] is
fixed at 1GB, we assumed their implementation could scale
and further assumed that the control circuitry area scales
linearly with the number of Flash cells. The x-axis extends
to the entire working set size, given in Figure 7 (see graph
title). As expected, when the size of the cache approaches
the working set size, latency reaches a minimum using only
SLC. The optimal SLC/MLC partition is dependent on the
nature of the workload and Flash size, thus programmabil-
ity is important. In the two benchmarks of Figure 7, it can
be seen that in (a) 70% can be SLC while in (b) almost all
the cells are MLC for a Flash size that is approximately half
the working set size.
5 Putting it all together
5.1 Accessing the Flash based disk cache
In this section we discuss how hits, misses and writes are
handled in a Flash based disk cache with respect to the en-
tire system. When a file read is performed at the application
level, the OS searches for the file in the primary disk cache
located in DRAM. On a primary disk cache hit in DRAM,
the file content is accessed directly from the primary disk
cache (no access to Flash related data structures). On a pri-
mary disk cache miss in DRAM, the OS searches the FCHT
to determine whether the requested file currently exists in
the secondary disk cache. Because it is a file read, the OS
searches the FCHT. If the requested file is found, then a
Flash read is performed and a DMA transaction is scheduled
to transfer Flash content to DRAM. The requested address
to Flash is obtained from the FCHT.
If a read miss occurs in the FCHT search process, we
first look for an empty Flash page in the read cache. If there
is no empty Flash page available, we first select a block for
eviction to generate empty Flash pages. We enforce our
wear-level aware replacement policy to select the block to
evict. Wear-level aware replacement is performed based on
section 3.6. Concurrently, a hard disk drive access is sched-
uled using the device driver interface. The hard disk drive
content is copied to the primary disk cache in DRAM and
the read cache in Flash. The corresponding tag in the FCHT
belonging to the read disk cache is also updated.
File writes are more complicated. If we write to a file, we
typically update/access the page in the primary disk cache
and this page is periodically scheduled to be written back to
the secondary disk cache and later periodically written back
to the disk drive. When writing back to Flash, we first de-
	
	
	
	
0&(
'(
	$
1&(
'(
	$


 
	",.
!"	
(
!"
/(
=&=
	
/(>?
(
!"*(
'(	$

		
 !"

*($&>?(
#$ !"

!")
+,
!"

=&=
	
/(>?
(
Figure 8. Flash based disk cache handling
read cache misses, writes and garbage col-
lection.
termine whether it exists on Flash by searching the FCHT.
If it is found in the write cache, we update the page by do-
ing an out-of-place write to the write cache. If it is found in
the read cache, then we invalidate this page (reset the valid
bit field in the FPST) and allocate a page in the write cache.
Garbage collection (GC) may also be triggered in the read
cache when the read cache capacity goes below 90%. If it
is not found in the Flash, we allocate a page in the write
cache. When we have no empty pages in the write cache,
we either trigger GC (common case) or we select a block
for eviction to generate empty Flash pages. We only evict
blocks when the total number of invalid pages is less than
the total number of pages in a Flash block. The disk is even-
tually updated by flushing the write disk cache. All GCs are
performed in the background. When erasing a block during
GC, wear-level management is performed.
Figure 8 shows several examples of how our Flash based
disk cache handles misses, writes and garbage collection.
The left side of the diagram shows how Flash is accessed
when a read miss occurs. Because there are no empty Flash
pages available, a block is evicted and erased, making room
for the new page of data. The write region is illustrated
in the right side. Three existing pages labeled ’S’ have their
values updated. The new data is placed in three empty pages
and the old pages are invalidated ready for garbage collec-
tion (out-of-place write). Writing those three pages for a
second time causes three new pages to be written and the
three previous pages are invalidated.
5.2 Reconfiguring the Flash memory con-
troller
This section describes how the Flash descriptors (control
messages) are generated and how we update the Flash data
structures (FPST) used to generate these descriptors. Before
334
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
we schedule a Flash access to a certain page, descriptors for
that page are generated and sent to our programmable Flash
memory controller. These page descriptors are generated
by looking up the FPST. Based on the observed behavior
of a Flash page, the FPST is updated accordingly to max-
imize the fields found in the FGST (overall performance).
The updated page settings are applied on the next erase and
write access. In addition, whenever we access a valid Flash
page, we update the field that keeps track of the number of
accesses (saturating counter) in the FPST, and all the fields
in FGST accordingly.
There are two main triggers for an error correction code
(ECC) or density mode change. These are 1) an increase
in the number of faulty bits, 2) a change in access (read)
frequency. Each trigger is explained below. If a Flash page
reaches the ECC code strength limit and density limit (SLC
mode), the block is removed permanently and never consid-
ered when looking for pages to allocate in a disk cache.
5.2.1 Response to increase in faults
When new bit errors are observed and fail consistently due
to wear out, we reconfigure the page. This is achieved
by enforcing a stronger ECC or reducing cell density from
MLC to SLC mode. The change in overall latency caused
by each of these options are denoted by Δtcs (stronger
ECC) and Δtd (reducing cell density) respectively. We
choose the option with the minimum latency increase by
comparing heuristic approximations. The heuristics are de-
rived as follows;
Δtcs = freqi ×Δcode delay
t1 = tmiss ×miss rate + thit × (1−miss rate)
t2 = tmiss × (miss rate + Δmiss) +
(thit −Δthit)× (1− (miss rate + Δmiss))
Δtd = t1 − t2
≈ Δmiss× (tmiss + thit) + freqi ×ΔSLC
The parameter freqi is the relative access frequency of
the current page i and tmiss is the average miss penalty
for accessing disk. thit is the average hit latency for our
Flash based disk cache. The latency increase for enforcing
a stronger ECC is Δcode delay, the reduction in average
hit latency is Δthit, the increase in miss rate is Δmiss and
the reduction in Flash page read latency due to switching
from MLC to SLC is ΔSLC. t1 and t2 represent the over-
all average latency before and after a density mode change.
Δcode delay and ΔSLC are constants. freqi, thit, tmiss
and Δmiss are measured during run-time and derived from
the FPST and FGST. The decision to select Δtcs versus Δtd
is influenced by workload behavior and Flash age.
Configuration parameters
Processor type 8 cores, each core single issue in-order
Clock frequency 1GHz
Cache size L1: 4 way 16KB each, L2: 8 way 2MB
DRAM 128∼ 512MB (1∼ 4 DIMMs), tRC = 50ns
NAND Flash
256MB∼ 2GB
random read latency: 25μs(SLC), 50μs(MLC)
write latency: 200μs(SLC), 680μs(MLC)
erase latency: 1.5ms(SLC), 3.3ms(MLC)
BCH code latency 58μs∼ 400μs
IDE disk average access latency: 4.2ms[2]
Table 3. Configuration Parameters
Name Type Description
uniform micro uniform distribution of size 512MB
alpha1,
alpha2,
alpha3
micro zipf distribution of size 512MB α=0.8, 1.2, 1.6,
x−0.8, x−1.2, x−1.6
exp1,
exp2 micro
exponential distribution of size 512MB with λ =
0.01, 0.1, e−0.01x, e−0.1x
dbt2 macro OLTP 2GB database
SPECWeb99 macro 1.8GB SPECWeb99 disk image
WebSearch1,
WebSearch2 macro Search Engine disk access pattern 1 and 2 from [8]
Financial1,
Financial2 macro Financial application access pattern 1 and 2 from [8]
Table 4. Benchmark descriptions
5.2.2 Response to increase in access frequency
If a page is in MLC mode and the entry in the FPST field
that keeps track of the number of read accesses to a page
saturates, we migrate that Flash page to a new empty page
in SLC mode. If there is no empty page available, a Flash
block is evicted and erased using our wear-level aware re-
placement policy. The FPST field that keeps track of the
number of accesses for the new Flash page in SLC mode is
set to a saturated value. One cannot reduce density at all if
a page is already in SLC mode. The SLC/MLC mode field
in the FPST is updated to reflect this change.
Reassigning a frequently accessed page from MLC mode
to SLC mode improves performance by improving hit la-
tency. Because many accesses to files in a server platform
are spatially and temporally a tailed distribution (Zipf), im-
proving the hit latency to frequently accessed Flash pages
improves overall performance despite the minor reduction
in Flash capacity. We note this analysis was presented in
section 4.2.
6 Methodology
6.1 Modeling the Flash and the Flash
memory controller
Our proof of concept Flash memory controller and Flash
device are implemented on top of a full system simulator
called M5 [10]. The M5 simulation infrastructure is used to
generate access profiles for estimating system memory and
335
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
0
2
4
6
8
10
DDR2 512MB
+ 60GB HDD
DDR2 256MB + Flash
1GB + 60GB HDD
O
ve
ra
ll 
P
o
w
er
-W
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
n
o
rm
. n
et
w
o
rk
 b
an
d
w
id
th
 
mem RD power mem WR power
mem IDLE power disk power
network bandwidth
(a) dbt2
0
2
4
6
8
10
DDR2 512MB
+ 60GB HDD
DDR2 128MB + Flash
2GB + 60GB HDD
O
ve
ra
ll 
P
o
w
er
-W
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
n
o
rm
. n
et
w
o
rk
 b
an
d
w
id
th
mem RD power mem WR power
mem IDLE power disk power
network bandwidth
(b) SPECWeb99
Figure 9. Breakdown in system memory and
disk power and network bandwidth for ar-
chitecture with/without a Flash based disk
cache.
disk drive power consumption. We used the Micron DRAM
power calculator [7], NAND Flash datasheet [4] and Hi-
tachi disk specification guide [2] to estimate power. Our
die area estimates are derived from the 2007 ITRS roadmap
and recently published DRAM and Flash implementations
[12]. M5 is also used to generate some of the disk access
traces used in this study. Because full system simulators
are slow, for reliability and disk cache miss rate experi-
ments where very long traces are necessary, we developed
a light weight trace based Flash disk cache simulator. We
note that our performance evaluations still use full-system
simulation. Given the limitations in our simulation infras-
tructure, a server workload that uses a large working set of
100’s∼1000’s of gigabytes is not supportable. We scaled
our benchmarks, system memory size, Flash size and disk
drive size accordingly to run on our simulation infrastruc-
ture. Because our disk drive size is small we used power
numbers for a typical laptop disk drive [2]. Our configura-
tion is shown in Table 3.
To model wear out behavior we used our exponential
model described in section 4.1.3, which models the vari-
ation of Flash lifetime. This method is sufficient to un-
derstand the impact of a programmable Flash memory con-
troller. Latency values for BCH and CRC codes were taken
from the data we presented in section 4.1.
6.2 Benchmarks
As noted previously, we use two different simulators
in our experiments. Our disk traces were extracted from
micro-benchmarks and macro-benchmarks. These were fed
into the Flash disk cache simulator. The binaries were exe-
cuted on M5. Table 4 summarizes the benchmarks.
We generated micro-benchmark disk traces to model
synthetic disk access behavior. It is well known that disk
access behavior is often found to follow a power law.
Thus we generated disk traces for a Zipf distribution with
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0 10 20 30 40 50
BCH strength
R
el
at
iv
e 
B
an
d
w
id
th
(a) SPECWeb99
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0 10 20 30 40 50
BCH strength
R
el
at
iv
e 
B
an
d
w
id
th
(b) dbt2
Figure 10. Average throughput as a function
of ECC strength. The system used 256MB of
DRAM and 1GB of Flash.
varying alpha values. Additionally for comparison rea-
sons, disk access behaviors that modeled an exponential
distribution with a variable exponential coefficient and a
uniform distribution were generated. The intent of these
micro-benchmarks was to show that many of the macro-
benchmarks displayed similar behavior.
For macro-benchmark disk traces, we used disk traces
from [8]. These disk traces were intended to model the disk
behavior on enterprise level applications like web servers,
database servers and web search. To measure performance
and power, we used dbt2 (OLTP) and SPECWeb99 which
generated representative disk/disk cache traffic.
7 Results
7.1 Overall Flash energy efficiency
Figure 9 shows a breakdown of power consumption in
the system memory and disk drive (left y-axis). Figure 9
also shows the measured network bandwidth (right y-axis).
We calculated power for a DRAM-only system memory and
a heterogenous (DRAM+Flash) system memory that uses a
Flash as a secondary disk cache with hard disk drive sup-
port. We assume equal die area for a DRAM-only system
memory and a DRAM+Flash system memory. Figure 9
shows the reduction in disk drive power and system mem-
ory power that results from adopting Flash. Our primary
power savings for system memory come from using Flash
instead of DRAM for a large amount of the disk cache. The
power savings for disk come from reducing the accesses to
disk due to a bigger overall disk cache made possible by
adopting a Flash. We also see improved throughput with
Flash because it displays lower access latency than disk.
7.2 Impact of BCH code strength on sys-
tem performance
We have shown in Figure 6 that BCH latency incurs an
additional delay over the initial access latency. We simu-
336
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
un
ifo
rm
al
ph
a1
al
ph
a2
al
ph
a3
ex
p1
ex
p2
W
eb
Se
ar
ch
1
W
eb
Se
ar
ch
2
Fi
na
nc
ial
1
Fi
na
nc
ial
2
%
 o
f 
to
ta
l d
es
cr
ip
to
r 
u
p
d
at
es
code strength density
Figure 11. Breakdown of page reconfigura-
tion events.
lated the performance of the SPECWeb99 and dbt2 bench-
marks to observe the effect of increasing code strength that
would occur as Flash wears out. It is assumed that all Flash
blocks have the same error correction code (ECC) strength
applied. We also measured performance for code strengths
(more than 12 bits per page) that are beyond our Flash mem-
ory controller’s capabilities to fully capture the performance
trends.
From Figure 10 we can see that throughput degrades
slowly with ECC strength. dbt2 suffers a greater perfor-
mance loss than SPECWeb99 after 15 bits per page. The
disk bound property of dbt2 makes it more sensitive to ECC
strength.
7.3 Flash memory controller sensitivity
analysis
Figure 11 shows the breakdown of page reconfigura-
tion events. This can either be a decision to increase ECC
strength or switch the block from MLC to SLC mode. The
objective is to minimize the latency cost function explained
in section 5. The size of Flash was set to half the working
set size of the application. These simulations were mea-
sured near the point where the Flash cells start to fail due
to programs and erases. The results confirm the benefits
of a programmable Flash memory controller, because the
response to each benchmark is significantly different. The
figure also suggests that as the tail length of a workload in-
creases, we see fewer transitions from MLC to SLC, be-
cause Flash based disk cache capacity is more important
for long tailed distributions. In fact, for a uniform distri-
bution which is an extreme case of a long tailed distribution
(α = 0), we found almost all descriptor updates are changes
in ECC strength and not transitions from MLC to SLC.
For exponential distributions, which are an extreme case of
short tailed distributions, we see that density (MLC to SLC)
changes dominate, because the increased miss rate due to a
reduction in density is small. For the macro-benchmarks,
0.00001
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
un
ifo
rm
al
ph
a1
al
ph
a2
al
ph
a3
ex
p1
W
eb
Se
ar
ch
1
W
eb
Se
ar
ch
2
Fi
na
nc
ial
1
Fi
na
nc
ial
2
N
o
rm
al
iz
ed
 li
fe
ti
m
e
programmable Flash memory controller  BCH1 error correcting controller
Figure 12. Normalized expected lifetime for a
given access rate and the point of total Flash
failure.
we see a behavior that is fairly high variance, like the micro-
benchmarks.
7.4 Improved Flash lifetime with relia-
bility support in Flash memory con-
troller
Figure 12 shows a comparison of the normalized num-
ber of accesses required to reach the point of total Flash
failure where none of the Flash pages can be recovered. We
compare our programmable Flash memory controller with a
BCH 1 error correcting controller. Our studies show that for
typical workloads, our programmable Flash memory con-
troller extends lifetime by a factor of 20 on average. For
a workload that would previously limit Flash lifetime to 6
months, we show it can now operate for more than 10 years
using our programmable Flash memory controller. This
was accompanied by a graceful increase in overall access
latency as Flash wore out.
8 Conclusions
This paper presents an architecture that integrates Flash
into a server platform. Flash is an attractive candidate for
integration because it reduces power consumption in sys-
tem memories and disk drives. This in turn can reduce the
operating cost of a server platform. By carefully manag-
ing the Flash and using it as a secondary disk cache and
by also splitting the disk cache into a separate read cache
and write cache, we observed a dramatic improvement in
power consumption and performance. We also showed that
a Flash memory controller with reliability support greatly
improves Flash lifetime. We found that the best configura-
tion of a Flash memory controller is largely dependent upon
the access patterns resulting from the application. For ex-
ample, we found that the typical workload with Zipf access
behavior was best served by a Flash configured such that the
337
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
heavily accessed contents would be located in regions com-
posed of reliable low latency single level cells. In general,
we found that variable error correction code strength (ECC)
gracefully extended Flash lifetime, and that the overhead of
ECC is minimized with configurable density.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for providing feed-
back. This work is supported in part by the National Science
Foundation, Intel and ARM Ltd.
References
[1] Flash Solid State Drive. http://www.samsung.com/
Products/Semiconductor/FlashSSD/index.
htm.
[2] Hard Disk Drive Specification Hitachi Travelstar
7K60 2.5 inch ATA/IDE Hard Disk Drive Model:
HTS726060M9AT00. http://www.hitachigst.
com/tech/techlib.nsf/techdocs/
53989D390D44D88F86256D1F0058368D/$file/
T7K60_sp2.0.pdf.
[3] Hybrid Hard Drives with Non-Volatile Flash and
Longhorn. http://www.samsung.com/Products/
HardDiskDrive/news/HardDiskDrive_
20050425_0000117556.htm.
[4] Samsung NAND Flash Memory Datasheet.
http://www.samsung.com/products/
semiconductor/NANDFlash/SLC_LargeBlock/
8Gbit/K9K8G08U0A/K9K8G08U0A.htm.
[5] Seagate Barracuda. http://www.seagate.com/
products/personal/index.html.
[6] Technical Note: TrueFFS Wear-Leveling Mechanism(TN-
DOC-017). http://www.embeddedfreebsd.
org/Documents/TrueFFS_Wear_Leveling_
Mechanism.pdf.
[7] The Micron System-Power Calculator. http://www.
micron.com/products/dram/syscalc.html.
[8] University of Massachusetts Trace Repository.
http://traces.cs.umass.edu/index.php/
Storage/Storage.
[9] Wear Leveling in Single Level Cell NAND Flash Memo-
ries. http://www.st.com/stonline/products/
literature/an/10122.pdf.
[10] N. Binkert, R. Dreslinski, L. Hsu, K. Lim, A. Saidi, and
S. Reinhardt. The M5 simulator: Modeling networked sys-
tems. IEEE Micro, 26(4):52–60, Jul/Aug 2006.
[11] T. Cho, Y. Lee, E. Kim, J. Lee, S. Choi, S. Lee, D. Kim,
W. Han, Y. Lim, J. Lee, J. Choi, and K. Suh. A dual-
mode NAND flash memory: 1-Gb multilevel and high-
performance 512-mb single-level modes. IEEE Journal of
Solid State Circuits, 36(11), Nov 2001.
[12] T. Hara, K. Fukuda, K. Kanazawa, N. Shibata, K. Hosono,
H. Maejima, M. Nakagawa, T. Abe, M. Kojima, M. Fujiu,
Y. Takeuchi, K. Amemiya, M. Morooka, T. Kamei, H. Nasu,
C. Wang, K. Sakurai, N. Tokiwa, H. Waki, T. Maruyama,
S. Yoshikawa, M. Higashitani, T. D. Pham, Y. Fong, and
T. Watanabe. A 146mm2 8Gb Multi-Level NAND Flash
Memory With 70-nm CMOS Technology. IEEE Journal of
Solid State Circuits, 41(1), Jan 2006.
[13] R. Hobson and K. Cheung. A High-Performance CMOS
32-Bit Parallel CRC Engine. IEEE Journal of Solid State
Circuits, 34(2), Feb 1999.
[14] D. Ielmini, A. S. Spinelli, A. L. Lacaita, and M. J. van Du-
uren. A Comparative Study of Characterization Techniques
for Oxide Reliability in Flash Memories. IEEE trans. on
device and materials and reliability, 4(3), Sep 2004.
[15] T. Kgil. Architecting Energy Efficient Servers. PhD thesis,
University of Michigan, 2007.
[16] T. Kgil and T. Mudge. FlashCache: a NAND flash memory
file cache for low power web servers. In Proc. Int’l Conf. on
Compilers, Architecture and Synthesis for Embedded Sys-
tems, 2006.
[17] K. Kim and J. Choi. Future Outlook of NAND Flash Tech-
nology for 40nm Node and Beyond. In Workshop on Non-
Volatile Semiconductor Memory, pages 9–11, Feb 2006.
[18] J. Lee, S. Lee, O. Kwon, K. Lee, D. Byeon, I. Kim, K. Lee,
Y. Lim, B. Choi, J. Lee, W. Shin, J. Choi, and K. Suh. A
90-nm CMOS 1.8-V 2-Gb NAND Flash Memory for Mass
Storage Applications. IEEE Journal of solid-state circuits,
38(11), Nov 2003.
[19] S. Lee, Y. Lee, W. Han, D. Kim, M. Kim, S. Moon, H. Cho,
J. Lee, D. Byeon, Y. Lim, H. Kim, S. Hur, and K. Suh.
A 3.3V 4Gb Four-Level NAND Flash Memory with 90nm
CMOS Technology. In Proc. Int’l Solid-State Circuits Con-
ference, pages 52–53, 2004.
[20] C. Lefurgy, K. Rajamani, F. Rawson, W. Felter, M. Kistler,
and T. Keller. Energy management for commercial servers.
IEEE Computer, 36(12):39–48, 2003.
[21] S. Lin and D. Costello. Error Control Coding, Second Edi-
tion. 2004.
[22] R. Micheloni, R. Ravasio, A. Marelli, E. Alice, V. Al-
tieri, A. Bovino, L. Crippa, E. D. Martino, L. D. Onofrio,
A. Gambardella, E. Grillea, G. Guerra, D. Kim, C. Missiroli,
I. Motta, A. Prisco, G. Ragone, M. Romano, M. Sangalli,
P. Sauro, M. Scotti, and S. Won. A 4Gb 2b/cell NAND
Flash Memory with Embedded 5b BCH ECC for 36MB/s
System Read Throughput. In Proc. Int’l Solid-State Circuits
Conference, pages 497–506, Feb 2006.
[23] N. Mielke, H. Belgal, I. Kalastirsky, P. Kalavade, A. Kurtz,
Q. Meng, N. Righos, and J. Wu. Flash EEPROM Threshold
Instabilities due to Charge Trapping During Program/Erase
Cycling. IEEE trans. on device and materials and reliability,
4(3), Sep 2004.
[24] A. Modelli, A. Visconti, and R. Bez. Advanced Flash Mem-
ory Reliability. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Integrated Circuit
Design and Technology, pages 211–218, 2004.
[25] C. Park, J. Seo, S. Bae, H. Kim, S. Kim, and B. Kim. A
Low-cost Memory Architecture With NAND XIP for Mo-
bile Embedded Systems. In Proc. Int’l Conf. on HW-SW
Codesign and System Synthesis(CODES+ISSS), Oct 2003.
[26] M. Wu and W. Zwaenepoel. eNVy: A Non-Volatile, Main
Memory Storage System. In Proc. Int’l Conf. on Arch. Sup-
port for Prog. Lang. and Oper. Sys., Oct. 1994.
338
Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on January 21, 2009 at 19:52 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

