 1 
 
 
 
 
Speaker Identification in the Shouted Environment Using Suprasegmental Hidden 
Markov Models 
 
 
Ismail Shahin
 
 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
University of Sharjah 
P. O. Box  27272 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates 
Tel: (971) 6 5050967, Fax: (971) 6 5050877 
E-mail: ismail@sharjah.ac.ae 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
Abstract 
In this paper, Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (SPHMMs) have been 
used to enhance the recognition performance of text-dependent speaker 
identification in the shouted environment. Our speech database consists of two 
databases: our collected database and the Speech Under Simulated and Actual 
Stress (SUSAS) database. Our results show that SPHMMs significantly enhance 
speaker identification performance compared to Second-Order Circular Hidden 
Markov Models (CHMM2s) in the shouted environment. Using our collected 
database, speaker identification performance in this environment is 68% and 75% 
based on CHMM2s and SPHMMs respectively. Using the SUSAS database, 
speaker identification performance in the same environment is 71% and 79% 
based on CHMM2s and SPHMMs respectively. 
 
Keywords: hidden Markov models; second-order circular hidden Markov 
models; shouted environment; speaker identification; suprasegemental hidden 
Markov models. 
 
1.  Introduction 
Speaker recognition is the process of automatically recognizing who is speaking 
on the basis of individuality information in speech waves. Speaker recognition 
systems come in two flavors: speaker identification systems and speaker 
authentication (verification) systems. 
 
Speaker identification is the process of determining from which of the registered 
speakers a given utterance comes. Speaker identification systems can be used in 
 3 
criminal investigations to determine the suspected persons produced the voice 
recorded at the scene of the crime [1]. Speaker identification systems can also be 
used in civil cases or for the media. These cases include calls to radio stations, 
local or other government authorities, insurance companies, or recorded 
conversations, and many other applications. 
 
Speaker authentication is the process of determining whether a speaker 
corresponds to a particular known voice or to some other unknown voice. The 
applications of speaker authentication systems involve the use of voice as a key to 
confirm the identity claim of a speaker. Such services include banking 
transactions using a telephone network, database access services, security control 
for confidential information areas, remote access to computers, tracking speakers 
in a conversation or broadcast, and many other areas. 
 
Speaker recognition systems typically operate in one of two cases: text-dependent 
(fixed text) case or text-independent (free-text) case. In the text-dependent case, 
utterances of the same text are used for both training and testing (recognition). On 
the other hand, in the text-independent case, training and testing involve 
utterances from different texts. 
 
The process of speaker recognition can be divided into two categories: “open set” 
and “closed set”. In the “open set” category, a reference model for the unknown 
speaker may not exist; whereas, in the “closed set” category, a reference model for 
the unknown speaker should be available to the system. 
 
 4 
2.  Motivation 
The majority of researchers who work in the areas of speech recognition and 
speaker recognition focus their work on speech under the neutral talking condition 
and the minority of the researchers focus their work on speech under the stressful 
talking conditions. The neutral talking condition is defined as the talking 
condition in which speech is produced assuming that speakers are in a “quiet 
room” with no task obligations. The Stressful talking conditions can be defined as 
the talking conditions that cause speakers to vary their production of speech from 
the neutral talking condition. 
 
Some talking conditions are designed to simulate speech produced by different 
speakers under real stressful talking conditions. Hansen, Cummings, Clements, 
Bou-Ghazale, Zhou, and Kaiser used SUSAS database in which eight talking 
conditions are used to simulate speech produced under real stressful talking 
conditions and three real talking conditions [2], [3], [4]. The eight talking 
conditions are: neutral, loud, soft, angry, fast, slow, clear, and question. The three 
real talking conditions are: 50% task (cond50), 70% task (cond70), and Lombard. 
The 50% task and the 70% task comprise utterances recorded from subjects 
engaged in tracking tasks under different levels of workload (the level of 
workload is higher in 70% than that in 50%). The Lombard effect occurs when 
speakers vary their speech characteristics in order to increase intelligibility when 
speaking in a noisy environment. Chen used six talking conditions to simulate 
speech under real stressful talking conditions [5]. These conditions are: neutral, 
fast, loud, Lombard, soft, and shouted. 
 
 5 
Very few researchers who focus their work on speech under stressful talking 
conditions consider studying speech under the shouted talking condition [5], [6], 
[7], [8]. Therefore, the number of publications in the areas of speech recognition 
and speaker recognition under this talking condition is very limited. The shouted 
talking condition can be defined as when speakers shout, their intention is to 
produce a very loud acoustic signal, either to increase its range (distance) of 
transmission or its ratio to background noise. 
 
Speaker identification systems under the shouted talking condition can be used in 
the applications of talking condition identification systems. Such systems can be 
used in medical applications where computerized stress classification and 
assessment techniques can be employed by psychiatrists to aid in quantitative 
objective assessment of patients who undergo evaluation. These systems can also 
be used in the applications of talking condition intelligent automated systems in 
call-centers. It is very important for call-centers to take note of customers' 
disputes using talking condition intelligent automated systems and successfully 
respond to these disputes to obtain the customers' satisfaction. 
 
It is well known that the recognition performance of speech recognition and 
speaker recognition systems is almost perfect under the neutral talking condition. 
However, the performance is degraded sharply under the shouted talking 
condition. Many publications show that the performance of speech recognition 
and speaker recognition systems under this talking condition is deteriorated 
significantly [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. 
 
 6 
Speaker identification performance under the shouted talking condition is very 
low based on HMMs [5], [7], [8]. In previous work, Shahin focused on enhancing 
the recognition performance of text-dependent speaker identification systems 
under the shouted talking condition based on each of second-order hidden Markov 
models (HMM2s) and CHMM2s [7], [8]. 
 
Our work in this research differs from the work in [8] is that our work in this 
research focuses on enhancing the recognition performance of text-dependent 
speaker identification in the shouted environment based on SPHMMs using each 
of our collected speech database and SUSAS database. On the other hand, the 
work in [8] focused on enhancing speaker identification performance in the same 
environment based on CHMM2s. We can claim that this is the first time to use 
SPHMMs for speaker identification in such an environment. 
 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 3 overviews: Hidden Markov Models 
(HMMs), First-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM1s), Second-Order Hidden 
Markov Models (HMM2s), Circular Hidden Markov Models (CHMMs), and 
Second-Order Circular Hidden Markov Models (CHMM2s). Section 4 discusses 
the details of SPHMMs. Section 5 describes the collected speech database used. 
The algorithm of speaker identification based on each of CHMM2s and SPHMMs 
is given in Section 6. Section 7 discusses the results that are obtained in this work. 
Concluding remarks are drawn in Section 8. 
 
 
 
 7 
3.  Overview of HMMs, HMM1s, HMM2s, CHMMs, and CHMM2s 
 
3.1.  Hidden Markov Models 
The use of HMMs in the fields of speech recognition, speaker recognition, and 
emotion recognition has become popular in the last three decades. HMMs have 
become one of the most successful and broadly used modeling techniques in the 
three fields [3], [4], [5], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. 
 
Bou-Ghazale and Hansen used HMMs in the study of evaluating the effectiveness 
of traditional features in recognition of speech under stress and formulating new 
features which are shown to enhance stressed speech recognition [3]. Zhou et al. 
applied HMMs in the study of nonlinear feature based classification of speech 
under stress [4]. Chen studied talker-stress-induced intraword variability and an 
algorithm that compensates for the systematic changes observed based on HMMs 
trained by speech tokens in various talking styles [5]. Nwe et al. exploited HMMs 
in the text independent method of emotion classification of speech [11]. 
Ververidis and Kotropoulos made use of HMMs in the classification techniques 
that classify speech into emotional states [12]. Bosch used HMMs to recognize 
emotion from the speech signal, from the viewpoint of automatic speech 
recognition (ASR) [13]. 
 
HMMs use Markov chain to model the changing statistical characteristics that 
exist in the actual observations of speech signals. HMMs are double stochastic 
processes where there is an unobservable Markov chain defined by a state 
transition matrix, and where each state of the Markov chain is associated with 
 8 
either a discrete output probability distribution (discrete HMMs) or a continuous 
output probability density function (continuous HMMs) [9]. HMMs are powerful 
models in optimizing the parameters that are used in modeling speech signals. 
This optimization decreases the computational complexity in the decoding 
procedure and improves the recognition accuracy [9]. This topic is widely covered 
in many references [9], [10]. 
 
3.2.  First-Order Hidden Markov Models 
HMM1s have been used in the training and testing phases of the vast majority of 
the work in the areas of speech recognition, speaker recognition, and emotion 
recognition [4], [5], [11], [12], [13]. The recognition performance of speech and 
speaker recognition systems based on HMM1s is high under the neutral talking 
condition; however, the performance is degraded sharply under the shouted 
talking condition [5], [7], [8]. 
 
In HMM1s, the underlying state sequence is a first-order Markov chain where the 
stochastic process is specified by a 2-D matrix of a priori transition probabilities 
(aij) between states si and sj where aij are given as [9], 
 
  (1)sqsqProba i1tjtij    
 
More details about HMM1s can be found in many references [9], [10]. 
 
 
 
 9 
3.3.  Second-Order Hidden Markov Models 
New models called HMM2s were introduced and implemented under the neutral 
talking condition by Mari et al. [14]. These models have shown to enhance the 
performance of speaker identification systems under the shouted talking condition 
[7]. 
 
The underlying state sequence in HMM2s is a second-order Markov chain where 
the stochastic process is specified by a 3-D matrix (aijk). Therefore, the transition 
probabilities in HMM2s are given as [14], 
 
  (2)sq,sqsqProba i2tj1tktijk    
with the constraints, 
1ji,N1a
N
1k
ijk 

 
 
The reader can obtain more details about HMM2s from references [7], [14]. 
 
3.4.  Circular Hidden Markov Models 
Most of the work performed in the fields of speech recognition, speaker 
recognition, and emotion recognition using HMMs has been done using Left-to-
Right Hidden Markov Models (LTRHMMs) [5], [11], [12], [13]. LTRHMMs 
yield high speaker identification performance under the neutral talking condition; 
however, the performance is deteriorated sharply under the shouted talking 
condition [8]. 
 
 10 
CHMMs were introduced and used by Zheng and Yuan under the neutral talking 
condition [15]. These models yield high speaker identification performance under 
the neutral talking condition [16]. CHMMs have the following properties: 
 
1. The underlying Markov chain has no final or absorbing state. Therefore, 
the corresponding HMMs can be trained by as long training sequence as 
desired. 
 
2. Once the Markov chain leaves any state, that state can be revisited only at 
the next time. 
 
In CHMMs, the state transition coefficients have the property of [8], 
 
 aij = aji   i, j = 1,2,…,N         (3) 
Therefore, the state transition probability matrix A possesses symmetry. More 
information about CHMMs can be found in [15], [16]. 
 
3.5.  Second-Order Circular Hidden Markov Models 
New models called CHMM2s have been proposed and implemented by Shahin to 
enhance the performance of text-dependent speaker identification under the 
shouted talking condition [8]. CHMM2s possess the characteristics of both 
CHMMs and HMM2s: 
 
1. The underlying state sequence in HMM2s is a second-order Markov chain 
where the stochastic process is specified by a 3-D matrix because in these 
 11 
models the state-transition probability at time t+1 depends on the states of 
the Markov chain at two times t and t-1. On the other hand, the underlying 
state sequence in HMM1s is a first-order Markov chain where the 
stochastic process is specified by a 2-D matrix because in these models it 
is assumed that the state-transition probability at time t+1 depends only on 
the state of the Markov chain at one time t. Hence, the stochastic process 
that is specified by a 3-D matrix gives better speaker identification 
performance than that specified by a 2-D matrix [7]. 
 
2. The Markov chain in CHMMs is more powerful in modeling the changing 
statistical characteristics that exist in the actual observations of speech 
signals than that in LTRHMMs. 
 
3. In LTRHMMs, the absorbing state governs the fact that the rest of a single 
observation sequence provides no further information about earlier states 
once the underlying Markov chain reaches the absorbing state. In speaker 
identification, it is true that the Markov chain should be able to revisit the 
earlier states because the states of HMMs reflect the vocal organic 
configuration of the speaker. Therefore, the vocal organic configuration of 
the speaker is reflected to states more conveniently using CHMMs than 
using LTRHMMs. 
 
In the training phase of CHMM2s, the initial elements of the parameters are 
chosen to be [8], 
 12 
(4)1ki,N
N
1
(i)
k
v 
 
where, vk(i) is the initial element of the probability of an initial state distribution 
and N is the number of states. 
 
(5)1ki,N)
1
(O
ki
b(i)
k
vk)(i,
1
α   
where, 1(i,k) is the initial element of the forward probability of producing the 
observation vector O1. 
 



















otherwise0
N2,...,1,kj,N,i
3
1
(6)1kN1,ij1i2,i1N
3
1
N2,...,1,kj,1,i
3
1
1
ijk
a  
where, a
1
ijk is the initial element of aijk. aijk is the state transition coefficient from 
state Si to state Sk. 
 
(7)1iM1,kj,N
M
11
ijk
b   
where, b
1
ijk is the initial element of the observation symbol probability and M is 
the number of observation symbols. 
 
(8)1kj,N
N
1
k),j(
T
β   
 13 
where T(j,k) is the initial element of the backward probability of producing the 
observation vector OT. 
 
The probability of the observation vector O given the CHMM2s model , can be 
calculated by, 
  


N
1i
T
N
1k
k)(i,α OP           (9) 
 
4.  Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models 
A suprasegmental is a vocal effect that extends over more than one sound 
segment in an utterance, such as pitch, stress, or juncture pattern. Suprasegmental 
is often used for tone, vowel length, and features like nasalization and aspiration. 
 
SPHMMs possess the ability and the capability to summarize several states of 
HMMs into what is called a suprasegmental state. Suprasegmental state can look 
at the observation sequence through a larger window. Such a state allows 
observations at rates appropriate for the situation of modeling. For example, 
prosodic information can not be observed at a rate that is used for acoustic 
modeling. The fundamental frequency, intensity, and duration of speech signals 
are the main acoustic parameters that describe prosody [17]. The prosodic 
features of a unit of speech are called suprasegmental features because they affect 
all the segments of the unit. Therefore, prosodic events at the levels of: phone, 
syllable, word, and utterance are modeled using suprasegmental states; on the 
other hand, acoustic events are modeled using conventional hidden Markov 
states. 
 14 
Prosodic information can be combined and integrated with acoustic information 
within HMMs [18]. This combination and integration can be performed as given 
by the following formula, 
 
  (10)O  P.O  P.1 P 











 vΨlogαvλlogαlog O    Ψ,λ vv  
where, 
 is a weighting factor that is chosen to be equal to 0.5 (so no biasing towards 
any model). 
v: is the acoustic model for the vth speaker. 
 v: is the suprasegmental model for the vth speaker. 
O: is the observation vector or sequence of an utterance. 
 
Equation 10 demonstrates that leaving a suprasegmental requires adding the log 
probability of this suprasegmental state given the respective suprasegmental 
observations within the speech signal to the log probability of the current acoustic 
model given the respective acoustic observations within the speech signal. 
 




 O  P vλ  and 



 O  P v  can be calculated using Bayes theorem as given in 
equation 11 and equation 12 respectively [10], 
  
 
(11)
OP
λP λO P
O λ P
0
















vv
v  
 
 15 
 
(12)
OP
P O P
O  P
0
















vv
v  
 
where, P0(
v
) and P0(
v
) are the priori distribution of the acoustic model and the 
suprasegmental model respectively. The parameter priori distribution 
characterizes the statistics of the parameters of interest before any measurement is 
made. 
 
Yegnanarayana et al. used suprasegmental and source features, besides spectral 
features in their proposed method for text-dependent speaker verification systems. 
The combination of suprasegmental, source, and spectral features significantly 
enhances the performance of speaker verification system [19]. 
 
In the last three decades, the majority of the work performed in the fields of 
speech recognition and speaker recognition on HMMs has been done using 
LTRHMMs because phonemes follow strictly the left to right (LTR) sequence [5], 
[11], [12], [13]. In this work, LTRSPHHMs is obtained and derived from 
LTRHMMs. Therefore, the relationship between HMMs states and SPHMMs 
states is codified (HMMs and SPHMMs are evolved dependently). Fig. 1 shows 
an example of a basic structure of LTRSPHMMs that is derived from LTRHMMs. 
In this figure, q1, q2, …,q6 are hidden Markov states. p1 is a suprasegmental state 
(e.g. phone) that consists of q1, q2, and q3. p2 is a suprasegmental state (e.g. phone) 
that is made up of q4, q5, and q6. p3 is a suprasegmental state (e.g. syllable) that is 
composed of p1 and p2. aij is the transition probability between the ith hidden 
 16 
Markov state and the jth hidden Markov state, while bij is the transition probability 
between the ith suprasegmental state and the jth suprasegmental state. 
 
Since the stressful cues contained in an utterance can not be assumed as specific 
sequential events in the signal, an ergodic or fully connected HMMs structure 
becomes more appropriate than LTR structure because every state in the ergodic 
structure can be reached in a single step from every other state. An ergodic or fully 
connected SPHMMs that are derived from ergodic or fully connected HMMs have 
been used in this work. 
 
5.  Speech Database 
Our speech database was collected from 30 (15 males and 15 females) healthy 
adult Native American speakers. Each speaker uttered 8 sentences where each 
sentence was uttered 5 times in one session (training session) and 4 times in 
another separate session (testing session) under each of the neutral and shouted 
talking conditions. These sentences were: 
1) He works five days a week. 
2) The sun is shining. 
3) The weather is fair. 
4) The students study hard. 
5) Assistant professors are looking for promotion. 
6) University of Sharjah. 
7) Electrical and Computer Engineering Department. 
8) He has two sons and two daughters. 
 
Our speech database was captured by a speech acquisition board using a 12-bit 
linear coding A/D converter and sampled at a sampling rate of 12 kHz. Our 
database was a 12-bit per sample linear data. Each speech signal under each of the 
neutral and shouted talking conditions was applied every 5 ms to a 30 ms 
 17 
Hamming window. 12th order linear prediction coefficients (LPCs) were extracted 
from each frame by the autocorrelation method. The 12th order LPCs were then 
transformed into 12th order linear prediction cepstral coefficients (LPCCs). The 
LPCC feature analysis was used to form the observation vectors in each of 
CHMM2s and SPHMMs. 
 
In CHMM2s, the number of states, N, was 9. The number of mixture components, 
M, was 5 per state, with a continuous mixture observation density was selected for 
these models. In ergodic SPHMMs, the number of suprasegmental states was 3 
(p1, p2, and p3). p1 was composed of 3 hidden Markov states: q1, q2, and q3, p2 was 
made up of 3 hidden Markov states: q4, q5, and q6, while p3 consisted of 3 hidden 
Markov states: q7, q8, and q9. Therefore, each three states of HMMs in this 
research are summarized into one suprasegmental state. The number of mixture 
components was 10 per state, with a continuous mixture observation density was 
selected for ergodic SPHMMs. Fig. 2 shows our adopted 3-state ergodic 
suprasegmental hidden Markov model. The transition matrix, A, of this structure 
can be written in terms of the bij coefficients (positive coefficients) as, 
  











333231
232221
131211
bbb
bbb
bbb
A   
 
Our database in each of CHMM2s and SPHMMs was divided into training data 
under the neutral talking condition and test data under each of the neutral and 
shouted talking conditions. Our speech database in this work was a “closed set”. 
 
 18 
6.  The Algorithm of Speaker Identification Based on Each of CHMM2s and 
SPHMMs 
 
6.1  The Algorithm Based on CHMM2s 
In the training session of CHMM2s, a reference model was derived using 5 of the 
9 utterances per the same speaker per the same sentence under the neutral talking 
condition. Therefore, each speaker per sentence under the neutral talking 
condition was represented by one reference model. This session was composed of 
1,200 utterance. 
 
In the testing (identification) session (completely separate from the training 
session), each one of the 30 speakers used 4 of the 9 utterances per the same 
sentence (text-dependent) under each of the neutral and shouted talking 
conditions. This session consisted of 1,920 utterance. The probability of 
generating every utterance was computed (there were 30 probabilities per 
utterance for each talking condition), the model with the highest probability was 
chosen as the output of speaker identification as given in the following formula, 
(13)OP
103
maxarg*V














 v
v
 
where V
*
 is the index of the identified speaker, O is the observation vector or 
sequence that belongs to the unknown speaker, and  vΦOP  is the probability of 
the observation sequence O given the vth CHMM2s model v. A block diagram 
of speaker identification based on CHMM2s is shown in Figure 3. 
 
 19 
6.2  The Algorithm Based on SPHMMs 
The training session of SPHMMs was very similar to the training phase of the 
conventional HMMs. In the training phase of SPHMMs, suprasegmental models 
were trained on top of acoustic models of HMMs. In this phase, a reference model 
was derived using 5 of the 9 utterances per the same speaker per the same 
sentence under the neutral talking condition. Hence, each speaker per sentence 
was represented by one reference model under the neutral talking condition. 
 
In the testing session (completely separate from the training session), each one of 
the 30 speakers used 4 of the 9 utterances per the same sentence under each of the 
neutral and shouted talking conditions. The probability of generating every 
utterance was computed, the model with the highest probability was chosen as the 
output of speaker identification as given in the following formula, 
 
(14) ,  OP
130
maxarg*V














 vv
v
  
where, O is the observation vector or sequence that belongs to the unknown 
speaker. A block diagram of speaker identification based on SPHMMs is shown 
in Figure 4. 
 
7.  Results and Discussion 
Our work in this research focused on using SPHMMs in the training and testing 
phases of text-dependent speaker identification in the shouted environment. This 
is the first known investigation into SPHMMs evaluated in such an environment 
for speaker identification. 
 20 
Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the results of speaker identification performance 
under each of the neutral and shouted talking conditions using our collected 
speech database based on SPHMMs and CHMM2s respectively. We compare our 
results obtained based on SPHMMs with that obtained based on CHMM2s. The 
average improvement rate of using SPHMMs over CHMM2s under the shouted 
talking condition is significant (10.3%). Therefore, SPHMMs are superior models 
over CHMM2s under such a talking condition. This  may be attributed to the 
following reasons: 
 
1) SPHMMs are suitable models to integrate observations from the 
shouted modality because such models allow for observation at a 
rate appropriate for the shouted modality. 
 
2) Suprasegmental states are used to capture the prosodic properties 
of words and utterances because they allow us to make 
observations at a time scale suitable for prosodic phenomena. 
 
On the other hand, CHMM2s are not efficient models as SPHMMs to integrate 
observations from the shouted modality because observations within the 
conventional CHMM2s have to be at a constant rate. 
 
In this work, speaker identification performance under the neutral talking 
condition has been slightly improved based on SPHMMs compared to that based 
on CHMM2s. Our results show that speaker identification performance has been 
improved from 98% based on CHMM2s to 99% based on SPHMMs. The average 
 21 
improvement rate of using SPHMMs over CHMM2s under such a talking 
condition is 1.02%. This insignificant improvement resulted from the fact that 
CHMM2s have proven to be powerful and efficient models under the neutral 
talking condition [8]. 
 
To verify that SPHMMs yield better speaker identification performance than 
CHMM2s in the shouted environment, we use SUSAS database. Since this 
database does not contain utterances under the shouted talking condition, we 
decided to use the angry talking condition as an alternative talking condition to 
the shouted talking condition (since the shouted talking condition can not be 
entirely separated from the angry talking condition in real life). SUSAS database 
has been used in the training and testing phases of speaker identification under 
each of the neutral and angry talking conditions (part of this database consists of 9 
male speakers uttering speech signals under each of the two talking conditions). 
Table 3 summarizes the results of speaker identification performance based on 
each of SPHMMs and CHMM2s under each of the neutral and angry talking 
conditions using SUSAS database. It is evident from Table 3 that SPHMMs 
significantly enhance speaker identification performance under the angry talking 
condition compared to that using CHMM2s. The improvement rate is 11.3%. 
 
8. Concluding Remarks 
The performance of speaker identification in the shouted environment is degraded 
sharply compared to that in the neutral environment. Our work shows that 
SPHMMs are superior models over CHMM2s in the shouted environment using 
each of our collected speech database and SUSAS database. However, the 
 22 
improvement based on SPHMMs is limited. A thorough study and work using 
new algorithms and models are needed to achieve better speaker identification 
improvement in the shouted environment. 
 
There are some limitations in our work. First, the number of speakers in SUSAS 
database is limited to 9. Second, all the 9 speakers in SUSAS database are of the 
same gender (male). Finally, the angry talking condition in SUSAS database is 
used as an alternative talking condition to the shouted talking condition. 
 
References 
[1] S. Furui, “Speaker-dependent-feature-extraction, recognition, and processing 
techniques,” Speech Communication, Vol. 10, pp. 505-520, March 1991. 
 
[2]  K. E. Cummings and M. A. Clements, “Analysis of the glottal excitation of 
emotionally styled and stressed speech,” Journal Acoustical Society of America, 
Vol. 98, No. 1, pp. 88-98, July 1995. 
 
[3]  S. E. Bou-Ghazale and J. H. L. Hansen, “A comparative study of traditional 
and newly proposed features for recognition of speech under stress,” IEEE 
Transaction on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 429-442, July 
2000. 
 
[4] G. Zhou, J. H. L. Hansen, and J. F. Kaiser, “Nonlinear feature based 
classification of speech under stress,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and Audio 
Processing, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 201-216, March 2001. 
 23 
[5] Y. Chen, “Cepstral domain talker stress compensation for robust speech 
recognition,” IEEE Transaction on ASSP, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 433-439, April 1988. 
 
[6]  J. H. L. Hansen, “Analysis and compensation of speech under stress and noise 
for environmental robustness in speech recognition,” Speech Communication, 
Special Issue on Speech Under Stress, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 151-170, November 
1996. 
 
[7]  I. Shahin, “Improving speaker identification performance under the shouted 
talking condition using the second-order hidden Markov models,” EURASIP 
Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Vol. 5, issue 4, pp. 482-486, March 2005. 
 
[8] I. Shahin, “Enhancing speaker identification performance under the shouted 
talking condition using second-order circular hidden Markov models,” Speech 
Communication, Vol. 48, issue 8, pp. 1047-1055, August 2006. 
 
[9]  X. D. Huang, Y. Ariki, and M. A. Jack, Hidden Markov Models for Speech 
Recognition, Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1990. 
 
[10] L. R. Rabiner, and B. H. Juang, Fundamentals of Speech Recognition, 
Prentice Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1993. 
 
[11] T. L. Nwe, S. W. Foo, L. C. De Silva, "Speech emotion recognition using 
hidden Markov models," Speech Communication, Vol. 41, issue 4, pp. 603-623, 
November 2003. 
 24 
[12] D. Ververidis and C. Kotropoulos, "Emotional speech recognition: resources, 
features, and methods," Speech Communication, Vol. 48, issue 9, pp. 1162-1181, 
September 2006. 
 
[13] L. T. Bosch, "Emotions, speech and the ASR framework," Speech 
Communication, Vol. 40, issues 1-2, pp. 213-225, April 2003. 
 
[14] J. F. Mari, J. P. Haton, and A. Kriouile, “Automatic word recognition based 
on second-order hidden Markov models,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and Audio 
Processing, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 22-25, January 1997. 
 
[15] C. Zheng and B. Z. Yuan, “Text-dependent speaker identification using 
circular hidden Markov models”, Proc. IEEE International Conference on 
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, S13.3, pp. 580-582, 1988. 
 
[16] I. Shahin, “Enhancing speaker identification performance using circular 
hidden Markov model,” 1
st
 International Conference on Information & 
Communication Technologies: from Theory to Applications (ICTTA’04, 
IEEE Section France), Damascus, Syria, April 2004. 
 
[17] J. Adell, A. Benafonte, and D. Escudero, “Analysis of prosodic features: 
towards modeling of emotional and pragmatic attributes of speech,” XXI 
Congreso de la Sociedad Española para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 
SEPLN, Granada, Spain, September 2005. 
 
 25 
[18] T. S. Polzin and A. H. Waibel, “Detecting emotions in Speech,” Cooperative 
Multimodal Communication, Second International Conference 1998, CMC 1998. 
 
[19]  B. Yegnanarayana, S. R. M. Prasanna, J. M. Zachariah, and C. S. Gupta, 
“Combining evidence from source, suprasegmental and spectral features for a 
fixed-text speaker verification system,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and Audio 
Processing, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 575-582, July 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Basic structure of LTRSPHMMs derived from LTRHMMs 
 
 
b12 
 
 
 
p3 
 
 
 
b22 
P2 
 
 
 
b11 
p1 
q1 
a 11 
q2 
a22 
22 
q3 
a 33 
q4 
a 44 
q5 
a 55 
q6 
a 66 
a12 a23 a34 a45 a56 
 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  3-state ergodic SPHMMs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P1 
 
 
P2 
 
 
P3 
 
b33 
b23                                                                                                           
b32 
b22 
b21 
b12 
b11 
b13 
b31 
 28 
 
Figure 3.  Block diagram of speaker identification based on CHMM2s 
 
 
 
 
 
   Probability    
   computation 
Probability 
computation 
 
Probability 
computation 
 
 
       Select 
     maximum 
   Feature 
   analysis 


 


 

V
 
Digitized speech 
signal of the 
unknown speaker 
Index of recognized 
speaker 
V* 
 1OP 
 1λOP  
 2OP   
O 
 
 VOP   
 
 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Block diagram of speaker identification based on SPHMMs 
 
 
 
 
   Probability    
   computation 
Probability 
computation 
 
Probability 
computation 
 
 
       Select 
     maximum 
   Feature 
   analysis 
 
 

V
,

 V 
Digitized speech 
signal of the 
unknown speaker 
 
Index of recognized 
speaker 
V* 
 11 ,λOP 
 
 22 ,λOP   
O 
 
 VV ,λOP 
 
 
 30 
 
Table 1 
Speaker identification performance under each of the neutral and shouted talking 
conditions based on SPHMMs using our collected speech database  
Gender Neutral talking condition 
(%) 
Shouted talking condition 
(%) 
Male 99 74 
Female 99 76 
Average 99 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 
 
Table 2 
Speaker identification performance under each of the neutral and shouted talking 
conditions based on CHMM2s using our collected speech database  
Gender Neutral talking condition 
(%) 
Shouted talking condition 
(%) 
Male 98 68 
Female 98 68 
Average 98 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 
Table 3 
Speaker identification performance based on each of SPHMMs and CHMM2s 
under each of the neutral and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database 
Models Neutral talking condition 
(%) 
Angry talking condition 
(%) 
SPHMMs 99 79 
CHMM2s 99 71 
 

