1 
 
 
 
Employing Second-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models to 
Enhance Speaker Identification Performance in Shouted Talking Environments 
 
Ismail Shahin
 
 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
University of Sharjah 
P. O. Box  27272 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates 
Tel: (971) 6 5050967 
Fax: (971) 6 5050877 
E-mail: ismail@sharjah.ac.ae 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Abstract 
Speaker identification performance is almost perfect in neutral talking 
environments; however, the performance is deteriorated significantly in shouted 
talking environments. This work is devoted to proposing, implementing and 
evaluating new models called Second-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden 
Markov Models (CSPHMM2s) to alleviate the deteriorated performance in the 
shouted talking environments. These proposed models possess the characteristics 
of both Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMMs) and 
Second-Order Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (SPHMM2s). The results 
of this work show that CSPHMM2s outperform each of: First-Order Left-to-Right 
Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM1s), Second-Order Left-to-
Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM2s) and First-Order 
Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMM1s) in the shouted 
talking environments. In such talking environments and using our collected 
speech database, average speaker identification performance based on 
LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s is 74.6%, 
78.4%, 78.7% and 83.4%, respectively. Speaker identification performance 
obtained based on CSPHMM2s is close to that obtained based on subjective 
assessment by human listeners. 
 
Keywords: first-order circular suprasegmental hidden Markov models; first-order 
left-to-right suprasegmental hidden Markov models; second-order circular 
suprasegmental hidden Markov models; second-order left-to-right suprasegmental 
hidden Markov models; shouted talking environments; speaker identification. 
 
3 
1.  Introduction 
Speaker recognition is the process of automatically recognizing who is speaking 
on the basis of individual information embedded in speech signals. Speaker 
recognition involves two applications: speaker identification and speaker 
verification (authentication). Speaker identification is the process of finding the 
identity of the unknown speaker by comparing his/her voice with voices of 
registered speakers in the database. The comparison results are measures of the 
similarity from which the maximal quality is chosen. Speaker identification can 
be used in criminal investigations to determine the suspected persons who 
generated the voice recorded at the scene of the crime. Speaker identification can 
also be used in civil cases or for the media. These cases include calls to radio 
stations, local or other government authorities, insurance companies, monitoring 
people by their voices and many other applications. 
 
Speaker verification is the process of determining whether the speaker identity is 
who the person claims to be. In this type of speaker recognition, the voiceprint is 
compared with the speaker voice model registered in the speech data corpus that 
is required to be verified. The result of comparison is a measure of the similarity 
from which acceptance or rejection of the verified speaker follows. The 
applications of speaker verification include using the voice as a key to confirm 
the identity claim of a speaker. Such services include banking transactions using a 
telephone network, database access services, security control for confidential 
information areas, remote access to computers, tracking speakers in a 
conversation or broadcast and many other applications. 
 
4 
Speaker recognition is often classified into closed-set recognition and open-set 
recognition. The closed-set refers to the cases that the unknown voice must come 
from a set of known speakers, while the open-set refers to the cases that the 
unknown voice may come from unregistered speakers. Speaker recognition 
systems could also be divided according to the speech modalities: text-dependent 
(fixed-text) recognition and text-independent (free-text) recognition. In the text-
dependent recognition, the text spoken by the speaker is known; however, in the 
text-independent recognition, the system should be able to identify the unknown 
speaker from any text. 
 
2.  Motivation and Literature Review 
Speaker recognition systems perform extremely well in neutral talking 
environments [1-4]; however, such systems perform poorly in stressful talking 
environments [5-13]. Neutral talking environments are defined as the talking 
environments in which speech is generated assuming that speakers are not 
suffering from any stressful or emotional talking conditions. Stressful talking 
environments are defined as the talking environments that cause speakers to vary 
their generation of speech from neutral talking condition to other stressful talking 
conditions such as shouted, loud and fast. 
 
 
In literature, there are many studies that focus on speech recognition and speaker 
recognition fields in stressful talking environments [5-13]. Specifically, these two 
fields are investigated by very few researchers in shouted talking environments. 
Therefore, the number of studies that focus on the two fields in such talking 
5 
environments is limited [7-11]. Shouted talking environments are defined as the 
talking environments in which when speakers shout, their aim is to produce a very 
loud acoustic signal, either to increase its range of transmission or its ratio to 
background noise [8-11]. Speaker recognition systems in shouted talking 
environments can be used in criminal investigations to identify the suspected 
persons who uttered voice in a shouted talking condition and in the applications of 
talking condition recognition systems. Talking condition recognition systems can 
be used in: medical applications, telecommunications, law enforcement and 
military applications [12]. 
 
Chen studied talker-stress-induced intraword variability and an algorithm that 
compensates for the systematic changes observed based on hidden Markov 
models (HMMs) trained by speech tokens in different talking conditions [7]. In 
four of his earlier studies, Shahin focused on enhancing speaker identification 
performance in shouted talking environments based on each of Second-Order 
Hidden Markov Models (HMM2s) [8], Second-Order Circular Hidden Markov 
Models (CHMM2s) [9], Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (SPHMMs) [10] 
and gender-dependent approach using SPHMMs [11]. He achieved speaker 
identification performance in such talking environments of 59.0%, 72.0%, 75.0% 
and 79.2% based on HMM2s, CHMM2s, SPHMM2s and gender-dependent 
approach using SPHMMs, respectively [8-11]. 
 
This paper aims at proposing, implementing and testing new models to enhance 
text-dependent speaker identification performance in shouted talking 
environments. The new proposed models are called Second-Order Circular 
6 
Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMM2s). This work is a 
continuation to the work of the four previous studies in [8-11]. Specifically, the 
main goal of this work is to further improve speaker identification performance in 
such talking environments based on a combination of each of: HMM2s, CHMM2s 
and SPHMMs. This combination is called CSPHMM2s. We believe that 
CSPHMM2s are superior models to each of: First-Order Left-to-Right 
Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM1s), Second-Order Left-to-
Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM2s) and First-Order 
Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMM1s). This is because 
CSPHMM2s possess the combined characteristics of each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s. In this work, speaker identification 
performance in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments based on 
CSPHMM2s is compared separately with that based on each of: LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section overviews the 
fundamentals of SPHMMs. Section 4 summarizes LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s. The details of CSPHMM2s are discussed in 
Section 5. Section 6 describes the collected speech data corpus adopted for the 
experiments. Section 7 is committed to discussing speaker identification algorithm 
and the experiments based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, 
CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. Section 8 discusses the results obtained in this 
work. Concluding remarks are given in Section 9. 
 
3.  Fundamentals of Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models 
7 
SPHMMs have been developed, used and tested by Shahin in the fields of: 
speaker recognition [10, 11, 14] and emotion recognition [15]. SPHMMs have 
demonstrated to be superior models over HMMs for speaker recognition in each 
of the shouted [10, 11] and emotional talking environments [14]. SPHMMs have 
the ability to condense several states of HMMs into a new state called 
suprasegmental state. Suprasegmental state has the capability to look at the 
observation sequence through a larger window. Such a state allows observations 
at rates appropriate for the situation of modeling. For example, prosodic 
information can not be detected at a rate that is used for acoustic modeling. 
Fundamental frequency, intensity and duration of speech signals are the main 
acoustic parameters that describe prosody [16]. Suprasegmental observations 
encompass information about the pitch of the speech signal, information about the 
intensity of the uttered utterance and information about the duration of the 
relevant segment. These three parameters in addition to the speaking style feature 
have been adopted and used in the current work. Prosodic features of a unit of 
speech are called suprasegmental features since they affect all the segments of the 
unit. Therefore, prosodic events at the levels of: phone, syllable, word and 
utterance are modeled using suprasegmental states; on the other hand, acoustic 
events are modeled using conventional states. 
 
Prosodic and acoustic information can be combined and integrated within HMMs 
as given by the following formula [17], 
  











 O  P.O  P.1 P vΨlogαvλlogαlog O    Ψ,λ vv       (1) 
where is a weighting factor. When: 
 
8 




















model acoustic  ofimpact  no
and model prosodic towards completely biased1α  
modelany      towardsbiasing  no0.5α  
model prosodicofeffect  no
and model acoustic towards completely biased0α  
model prosodictowardsbiased0.5α1  
model acoustictowardsbiased0α0.5 
 
v: is the acoustic model of the vth speaker. 
 v: is the suprasegmental model of the vth speaker. 
O: is the observation vector or sequence of an utterance. 




 O vλ P : is the probability of the vth HMM speaker model given the 
observation vector O. 




 O v P : is the probability of the vth SPHMM speaker model given the 
observation vector O. The reader can obtain more details about suprasegmental 
hidden Markov models from the references: [10, 11, 14, 15].  
 
4.  Overview of: LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s 
4.1.  First-order left-to-right suprasegmental hidden Markov models 
First-Order Left-to-Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models have been 
derived from acoustic First-Order Left-to-Right Hidden Markov Models 
(LTRHMM1s). LTRHMM1s have been adopted in many studies in the areas of: 
speech, speaker and emotion recognition in the last three decades because 
phonemes follow strictly the left to right sequence [18-20]. Fig. 1 shows an 
example of a basic structure of LTRSPHMM1s that has been derived from 
LTRHMM1s. This figure shows an example of six first-order acoustic hidden 
9 
Markov states (q1, q2, …,q6) with a left-to-right transition, p1 is a first-order 
suprasegmental state consisting of q1, q2 and q3, p2 is a first-order suprasegmental 
state composing of q4, q5 and q6. The suprasegmental states p1 and p2 are arranged 
in a left-to-right form. p3 is a first-order suprasegmental state which is made up of 
p1 and p2. aij is the transition probability between the ith and the jth acoustic 
hidden Markov states, while bij is the transition probability between the ith and the 
jth suprasegmental states. 
 
In LTRHMM1s, the state sequence is a first-order Markov chain where the 
stochastic process is expressed in a 2-D matrix of a priori transition probabilities 
(aij) between states si and sj where aij are given as: 
 
i1tjtij sqsqProba        (2) 
 
In these acoustic models, it is assumed that the state-transition probability at time 
t+1 depends only on the state of the Markov chain at time t. More information 
about acoustic first-order left-to-right hidden Markov models can be found in the 
references: [21, 22]. 
 
4.2.  Second-order left-to-right suprasegmental hidden Markov models 
Second-Order Left-to-Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models have been 
obtained from acoustic Second-Order Left-to-Right Hidden Markov Models 
(LTRHMM2s). As an example of such models, the six first-order acoustic left-to-
right hidden Markov states of Fig. 1 are replaced by six second-order acoustic 
hidden Markov states arranged in the left-to-right form. The suprasegmental 
second-order states p1 and p2 are arranged in the left-to-right form. The 
10 
suprasegmental state p3 in such models becomes a second-order suprasegmental 
state. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Basic structure of LTRSPHMM1s derived from LTRHMM1s 
 
b12 
 
 
 
p3 
 
 
 
b22 
P2 
 
 
 
b11 
p1 
q1 
a 11 
q2 
a22 
22 
q3 
a 33 
q4 
a 44 
q5 
a 55 
q6 
a 66 
a12 a23 a34 a45 a56 
11 
In LTRHMM2s, the state sequence is a second-order Markov chain where the 
stochastic process is specified by a 3-D matrix (aijk). Therefore, the transition 
probabilities in LTRHMM2s are given as [23]: 
 i2tj1tktijk sq,sqsqProba      (3) 
with the constraints, 
1ji,N1a
N
1k
ijk 

 
 
The state-transition probability in LTRHMM2s at time t+1 depends on the states 
of the Markov chain at times t and t-1. The reader can find more information about 
acoustic second-order left-to-right hidden Markov models in the references: [8, 9, 
23]. 
 
4.3.  First-order circular suprasegmental hidden Markov models 
First-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models have been 
constructed from acoustic First-Order Circular Hidden Markov Models 
(CHMM1s). CHMM1s were proposed and used by Zheng and Yuan for speaker 
identification systems in neutral talking environments [24]. Shahin showed that 
these models outperform LTRHMM1s for speaker identification in shouted talking 
environments [9]. More details about CHMM1s can be obtained from the 
references: [9, 24]. 
 
Fig. 2 shows an example of a basic structure of CSPHMM1s that has been 
obtained from CHMM1s. This figure consists of six first-order acoustic hidden 
Markov states: q1, q2 ,…, q6 arranged in a circular form. p1 is a first-order 
12 
suprasegmental state consisting of q4, q5 and q6. p2 is a first-order suprasegmental 
state composing of q1, q2 and q3. The suprasegmental states: p1 and p2 are arranged 
in a circular form. p3 is a first-order suprasegmental state which is made up of p1 
and p2. 
 
5.  Second-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models 
Second-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMM2s) 
have been formed from acoustic Second-Order Circular Hidden Markov Models 
(CHMM2s). CHMM2s were proposed, used and examined by Shahin for speaker 
identification in each of the shouted and emotional talking environments [9, 14]. 
CHMM2s have shown to be superior models over each of LTRHMM1s, 
LTRHMM2s and CHMM1s because CHMM2s contain the characteristics of both 
CHMMs and HMM2s [9]. 
 
As an example of CSPHMM2s, the six first-order acoustic circular hidden Markov 
states of Fig. 2 are replaced by six second-order acoustic circular hidden Markov 
states arranged in the same form. p1 and p2 become second-order suprasegmental 
states arranged in a circular form. p3 is a second-order suprasegmental state which 
is composed of p1 and p2. 
 
Prosodic and acoustic information within CHMM2s can be merged into 
CSPHMM2s as given by the following formula, 
 














O Ψ P.α
O λ P.α1O  Ψ ,λ P
CSPHMM2s
CHMM2sCSPHMM2sCHMM2s
v
vvv
log
loglog
  (4) 
13 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Basic structure of CSPHMM1s obtained from CHMM1s 
 
 
14 
where, 
v
CHMM2s
λ : is the acoustic second-order circular hidden Markov model of the vth 
speaker. 
v
CSPHMM2s
  Ψ : is the suprasegmental second-order circular hidden Markov model of 
the vth speaker. 
 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first known investigation into 
CSPHMM2s evaluated for speaker identification in each of the neutral and 
shouted talking environments. CSPHMM2s are superior models over each of 
LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s. This is because the 
characteristics of both CSPHMMs and SPHMM2s are combined and integrated 
into CSPHMM2s: 
1. In SPHMM2s, the state sequence is a second-order suprasegmental chain 
where the stochastic process is specified by a 3-D matrix since the state-
transition probability at time t+1 depends on the states of the 
suprasegmental chain at times t and t-1. On the other hand, the state 
sequence in SPHMM1s is a first-order suprasegmental chain where the 
stochastic process is specified by a 2-D matrix since the state-transition 
probability at time t+1 depends only on the suprasegmental state at time t. 
Therefore, the stochastic process that is specified by a 3-D matrix yields 
higher speaker identification performance than that specified by a 2-D 
matrix. 
2. Suprasegmental chain in CSPHMMs is more powerful and more efficient 
than that possessed in LTRSPHMMs to model the changing statistical 
15 
characteristics that are available in the actual observations of speech 
signals. 
 
6.  Collected Speech Data Corpus 
The proposed models in the current work have been evaluated using the collected 
speech data corpus. In this corpus, eight sentences were generated under each of 
the neutral and shouted talking conditions. These sentences were: 
1) He works five days a week. 
2) The sun is shining. 
3) The weather is fair. 
4) The students study hard. 
5) Assistant professors are looking for promotion. 
6) University of Sharjah. 
7) Electrical and Computer Engineering Department. 
8) He has two sons and two daughters. 
 
Fifty (twenty five males and twenty five females) healthy adult native speakers of 
American English were asked to utter the eight sentences. The fifty speakers were 
untrained to avoid exaggerated expressions. Each speaker was separately asked to 
utter each sentence five times in one session (training session) and four times in 
another separate session (test session) under the neutral talking condition. Each 
speaker was also asked to generate each sentence nine times under the shouted 
talking condition for testing purposes. The total number of utterances in both 
sessions under both talking conditions was 7200. 
 
The collected data corpus was captured by a speech acquisition board using a 16-
bit linear coding A/D converter and sampled at a sampling rate of 16 kHz. The 
16 
data corpus was a 16-bit per sample linear data. The speech signals were applied 
every 5 ms to a 30 ms Hamming window. 
 
In this work, the features that have been adopted to represent the phonetic content 
of speech signals are called the Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (static 
MFCCs) and delta Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (delta MFCCs). These 
coefficients have been used in the stressful speech and speaker recognition fields 
because such coefficients outperform other features in the two fields and because 
they provide a high-level approximation of human auditory perception [25, 26, 
27]. These spectral features have also been found to be useful in the classification 
of stress in speech [28, 29]. A 16-dimension feature analysis of both static MFCC 
and delta MFCC was used to form the observation vectors in each of 
LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. The number of 
conventional states, N, was nine and the number of suprasegmental states was 
three (each suprasegmental state was composed of three conventional states) in 
each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s with a 
continuous mixture observation density was selected for each model. 
 
7.  Speaker Identification Algorithm Based on Each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s and the Experiments 
The training session of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and 
CSPHMM2s was very similar to the training session of the conventional 
LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s, CHMM1s and CHMM2s, respectively. In the 
training session of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and 
CSPHMM2s (completely four separate training sessions), suprasegmental: first-
17 
order left-to-right, second-order left-to-right, first-order circular and second-order 
circular models were trained on top of acoustic: first-order left-to-right, second-
order left-to-right, first-order circular and second-order circular models, 
respectively. For each model of this session, each speaker per sentence was 
represented by one reference model where each reference model was derived 
using five of the nine utterances per the same sentence per the same speaker under 
the neutral talking condition. The total number of utterances in each session was 
2000. 
 
In the test (identification) session for each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, 
CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s (completely four separate test sessions), each one 
of the fifty speakers used separately four of the nine utterances per the same 
sentence (text-dependent) under the neutral talking condition. In another separate 
test session for each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and 
CSPHMM2s (completely four separate test sessions), each one of the fifty 
speakers used separately nine utterances per the same sentence under the shouted 
talking condition. The total number of utterances in each session was 5200. The 
probability of generating every utterance per speaker was separately computed 
based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and 
CSPHMM2s. For each one of these four suprasegmental models, the model with 
the highest probability was chosen as the output of speaker identification as given 
in the following formula per sentence per talking environment: 
 
a. In LTRSPHMM1s, 
18 














 vv
v
LTRSPHMM1sLTRHMM1s
 ,  OP
150
maxarg*V    (5) 
where, 
O: is the observation vector or sequence that belongs to the unknown speaker. 
v
LTRHMM1s
 : is the acoustic first-order left-to-right model of the vth speaker. 
v
LTRSPHMM1s
 : is the suprasegmental first-order left-to-right model of the vth 
speaker. 
 
b. In LTRSPHMM2s, 














 vv
v
LTRSPHMM2sLTRHMM2s
 ,  OP
150
maxarg*V    (6) 
where, 
v
LTRHMM2s
 : is the acoustic second-order left-to-right model of the vth speaker. 
v
LTRSPHMM2s
 : is the suprasegmental second-order left-to-right model of the vth 
speaker. 
 
c. In CSPHMM1s, 














 vv
v
CSPHMM1sCHMM1s
 ,  OP
150
maxarg*V     (7) 
where, 
v
CHMM1s
 : is the acoustic first-order circular model of the vth speaker. 
v
CSPHMM1s
 : is the suprasegmental first-order circular model of the vth speaker. 
 
19 
d. In CSPHMM2s, 














 vv
v
CSPHMM2sCHMM2s
 ,  OP
150
maxarg*V     (8) 
 
8.  Results and Discussion 
In the current work, CSPHMM2s have been proposed, implemented and 
evaluated for speaker identification systems in each of the neutral and shouted 
talking environments. To evaluate the proposed models, speaker identification 
performance based on such models is compared separately with that based on 
each of: LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s in the two talking 
environments. In this work, the weighting factor has been chosen to be equal 
to 0.5 to avoid biasing towards any acoustic or prosodic model. 
 
Table 1 shows speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and 
shouted talking environments using the collected database based on each of 
LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. It is evident 
from this table that each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and 
CSPHMM2s perform almost perfect in the neutral talking environments. This is 
because each of the acoustic models: LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s, CHMM1s and 
CHMM2s yield high speaker identification performance in such talking 
environments as shown in Table 2. 
 
 
 
 
20 
Table 1 
Speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and shouted talking 
environments using the collected database based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s 
 
Models 
 
 
Gender 
Speaker identification performance (%) 
Neutral talking 
environments 
Shouted talking 
environments 
 
LTRSPHMM1s 
Male 96.6 73.5 
Female 96.8 75.7 
Average 96.7 74.6 
 
LTRSPHMM2s 
Male 97.5 78.9 
Female 97.5 77.9 
Average 97.5 78.4 
 
CSPHMM1s 
Male 97.4 78.3 
Female 98.4 79.1 
Average 97.9 78.7 
 
CSPHMM2s 
Male 98.9 82.9 
Female 98.7 83.9 
Average 98.8 83.4 
 
A statistical significance test has been performed to show whether speaker 
identification performance differences (speaker identification performance based 
on CSPHMM2s and that based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and 
CSPHMM1s in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments) are real or 
simply due to statistical fluctuations. The statistical significance test has been 
carried out based on the Student t Distribution test as given by the following 
formula, 
 
 
 
21 
Table 2 
Speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and shouted talking 
environments using the collected database based on each of LTRHMM1s, 
LTRHMM2s, CHMM1s and CHMM2s 
 
Models 
 
 
 
Gender 
 
Speaker identification performance (%) 
Neutral talking 
environments 
Shouted talking 
environments 
 
LTRHMM1s 
Male 92.3 28.5 
Female 93.3 29.3 
Average 92.8 28.9 
 
LTRHMM2s 
Male 94.4 59.4 
Female 94.6 58.6 
Average 94.5 59.0 
 
CHMM1s 
Male 94.8 58.5 
Female 94.2 59.5 
Average 94.5 59.0 
 
CHMM2s 
Male 96.6 72.8 
Female 96.8 74.6 
Average 96.7 73.7 
 
  
pooled
2 model1 model
2  model 1, model
SD
xx
t

    (9) 
where, 
1  modelx : is the mean of the first sample (model 1) of size n. 
2  modelx : is the mean of the second sample (model 2) of the same size. 
SD pooled: is the pooled standard deviation of the two samples (models) given as, 
  
n
SDSD
SD
2
2  model
2
1  model
pooled

    (10) 
where, 
SD model 1: is the standard deviation of the first sample (model 1) of size n. 
22 
SD model 2: is the standard deviation of the second sample (model 2) of the same 
size. 
 
In this work, the calculated t values in each of the neutral and shouted talking 
environments using the collected database between CSPHMM2s and each of 
LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s are given in Table 3. In the 
neutral talking environments, each calculated t value is less than the tabulated 
critical value at 0.05 significant level t0.05 = 1.645. On the other hand, in the 
shouted talking environments, each calculated t value is greater than the tabulated 
critical value t0.05 = 1.645. Therefore, CSPHMM2s are superior models over each 
of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s in the shouted talking 
environments. This is because CSPHMM2s possess the combined characteristics 
of each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s as was discussed in 
Section 5. This superiority becomes less in the neutral talking environments 
because the acoustic models: LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s and CHMM1s perform 
well in such talking environments as shown in Table 2. 
 
In one of his previous studies, Shahin showed that CHMM2s contain the 
characteristics of each of LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s and CHMM1s. Therefore, 
the enhanced speaker identification performance based on CHMM2s is the 
resultant of speaker identification performance based on the combination of each 
of the three acoustic models as shown in Table 2. Since CSPHMM2s are derived 
from CHMM2s, the improved speaker identification performance in shouted 
talking environments based on CSPHMM2s is the resultant of the enhanced 
23 
speaker identification performance based on each of the three suprasegmental 
models as shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 3 
The calculated t values in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments 
using the collected database between CSPHMM2s and each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s 
 
t model 1, model 2 
Calculated t value 
Neutral environments Shouted environments 
t CSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM1s 1.231 1.874 
t CSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM2s 1.347 1.755 
t CSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s 1.452 1.701 
 
Table 2 yields speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and 
shouted talking environments based on each of the acoustic models: LTRHMM1s, 
LTRHMM2s, CHMM1s and CHMM2s. Speaker identification performance 
achieved in this work in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments is 
consistent with that obtained in Ref. [9] using a different speech database (forty 
speakers uttering ten isolated words in each of the neutral and shouted talking 
environments) [9]. 
 
Table 4 gives the calculated t values between each suprasegmental model and its 
corresponding acoustic model in each of the neutral and shouted talking 
environments using the collected database. This table shows evidently that each 
suprasegmental model outperforms its corresponding acoustic model in each 
24 
talking environment since each calculated t value in this table is greater than the 
tabulated critical value t0.05 = 1.645. 
 
Table 4 
The calculated t values between each suprasegmental model and its corresponding 
acoustic model in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments using the 
collected database  
 
t sup. model, acoustic model 
Calculated t value 
Neutral environments Shouted environments 
t LTRSPHMM1s, LTRHMM1s 1.677 1.785 
t LTRSPHMM2s, LTRHMM2s 1.686 1.793 
t CSPHMM1s, CHMM1s 1.697 1.887 
t CSPHMM2s, CHMM2s 1.702 1.896 
 
 
Four more experiments have been separately conducted in this work to evaluate 
the results achieved based on CSPHMM2s. The four experiments are: 
1. The new proposed models have been tested using a well-known speech 
database called Speech Under Simulated and Actual Stress (SUSAS). 
SUSAS database was designed originally for speech recognition under 
neutral and stressful talking conditions [30]. In the present work, isolated 
words recorded at 8 kHz sampling rate were used under each of the neutral 
and angry talking conditions. Angry talking condition has been used as an 
alternative to the shouted talking condition since the shouted talking 
condition can not be entirely separated from the angry talking condition in 
our real life [8]. Thirty different utterances uttered by seven speakers (four 
25 
males and three females) in each of the neutral and angry talking 
conditions have been chosen to assess the proposed models. This number 
of speakers is very limited compared to the number of speakers used in the 
collected speech database. 
 
Fig. 3 illustrates speaker identification performance in each of the neutral 
and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database based on each of 
LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. This 
figure shows apparently that speaker identification performance based on 
each model is almost ideal in the neutral talking condition. Based on each 
model, speaker identification performance using the collected database is 
very close to that using SUSAS database. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and angry 
talking conditions using SUSAS database based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s 
26 
Table 5 yields the calculated t values in each of the neutral and angry 
talking conditions using SUSAS database between CSPHMM2s and each 
of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s. This table 
demonstrates that CSPHMM2s lead each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s in the angry talking condition. 
 
Table 5 
The calculated t values in each of the neutral and angry talking conditions using 
SUSAS database between CSPHMM2s and each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s 
 
t model 1, model 2 
Calculated t value 
Neutral condition Angry condition 
t CSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM1s 1.345 1.783 
t CSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM2s 1.398 1.805 
t CSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s 1.499 1.795 
 
Shahin reported in one of his previous studies speaker identification 
performance of 99.0% and 97.8% based on LTRSPHMM1s and gender-
dependent approach using LTRSPHMM1s, respectively, in the neutral 
talking condition using SUSAS database [10, 11]. In the angry talking 
condition using the same database, Shahin achieved speaker identification 
performance of 79.0% and 79.2% based on LTRSPHMM1s and gender-
dependent approach using LTRSPHMM1s, respectively [10, 11]. Based on 
using SUSAS database in each of the neutral and angry talking conditions, 
27 
the results obtained in this experiment are consistent with those reported in 
some previous studies [10, 11]. 
 
2. The new proposed models have been tested for different values of the 
weighting factor (. Fig. 4 shows speaker identification performance in 
each of the neutral and shouted talking environments based on 
CSPHMM2s using the collected database for different values of  (0.0, 
0.1, 0.2, …, 0.9, 1.0). This figure indicates that increasing the value of  
has a significant impact on enhancing speaker identification performance 
in the shouted talking environments. On the other hand, increasing the 
value of  has a less effect on improving the performance in the neutral 
talking environments. Therefore, suprasegmental hidden Markov models 
have more influence on speaker identification performance in the shouted 
talking environments than acoustic hidden Markov models. 
 
3. A statistical cross-validation technique has been carried out to estimate the 
standard deviation of the recognition rates in each of the neutral and 
shouted talking environments based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. Cross-validation 
technique has been performed separately for each model as follows: the 
entire collected database (7200 utterance per model) is partitioned at 
random into five subsets per model. Each subset is composed of 1440 
utterance (400 utterance are used in the training session and the remaining 
are used in the evaluation session). Based on these five subsets per model, 
the standard deviation per model is calculated. The values are summarized 
28 
in Fig. 5. Based on this figure, cross-validation technique shows that the 
calculated values of standard deviation are very low. Therefore, it is 
apparent that speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and 
shouted talking environments based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, 
LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s using the five subsets per 
model is very close to that using the entire database (very slight 
fluctuations). 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Speaker identification performance in each of the neutral and shouted 
talking environments based on CSPHMM2s using the collected database for 
different values of  
 
4. An informal subjective assessment of the new proposed models using the 
collected speech database has been performed with ten nonprofessional 
listeners (human judges). A total of 800 utterance (fifty speakers, two 
talking environments and eight sentences) was used in this assessment. 
During the evaluation, each listener was asked to identify the unknown 
29 
speaker in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments 
(completely two separate talking environments) for every test utterance. 
The average speaker identification performance in the neutral and shouted 
talking environments was 94.7% and 79.3%, respectively. These averages 
are very close to the achieved averages in the present work based on 
CSPHMM2s. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The calculated standard deviation values using statistical cross-
validation technique in each of the neutral and shouted talking environments 
based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s and 
CSPHMM2s 
 
9.  Concluding Remarks 
In this work, CSPHMM2s have been proposed, implemented and evaluated to 
enhance speaker identification performance in the shouted/angry talking 
environments. Several experiments have been separately conducted in such 
talking environments using different databases based on the new proposed 
30 
models. The current work shows that CSPHHM2s are superior models over each 
of: LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and CSPHMM1s in each of the neutral and 
shouted/angry talking environments. This is because CSPHHM2s possess the 
combined characteristics of each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s and 
CSPHMM1s. This superiority is significant in the shouted/angry talking 
environments; however, it is less significant in the neutral talking environments. 
This is because the conventional HMMs perform extremely well in the neutral 
talking environments. Using CSPHMM2s for speaker identification systems 
increases nonlinearly the computational cost and the training requirements needed 
compared to using each of LTRSPHMM1s and CSPHMM1s for the same 
systems. 
 
For future work, we plan to apply the proposed models to speaker identification 
systems in emotional talking environments. These models can also be applied to 
speaker verification systems in each of the shouted and emotional talking 
environments and to multi-language speaker identification systems. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The author wishes to thank Prof. Mohammad Fraiwan Al-Saleh/ Prof. of Statistics 
at the University of Sharjah for his valuable help in the statistical part of this 
work. 
 
References 
31 
[1] K. R. Farrell, R. J. Mammone and K. T. Assaleh, “Speaker recognition using 
neural networks and conventional classifiers,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and 
Audio Processing, Vol. 2, January 1994, pp. 194-205. 
 
[2]  K. Yu, J. Mason and J. Oglesby, “Speaker recognition using hidden Markov 
models, dynamic time warping and vector quantization,” IEE Proceedings on 
Vision, Image and Signal Processing, Vol. 142, No. 5, October 1995, pp. 313-
318. 
 
[3] D. A. Reynolds, “Automatic speaker recognition using Gaussian mixture 
speaker models,” The Lincoln Laboratory Journal, Vol. 8, No. 2, 1995, pp. 173-
192. 
 
[4] S. Furui, “Speaker-dependent-feature-extraction, recognition and processing 
techniques,” Speech Communication, Vol. 10, March 1991, pp. 505-520. 
 
[5] S. E. Bou-Ghazale and J. H. L. Hansen, “A comparative study of traditional 
and newly proposed features for recognition of speech under stress,” IEEE 
Transaction on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 8, No. 4, July 2000, pp. 429-
442. 
 
[6] G. Zhou, J. H. L. Hansen and J. F. Kaiser, “Nonlinear feature based 
classification of speech under stress,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and Audio 
Processing, Vol. 9, No. 3, March 2001, pp. 201-216. 
32 
[7] Y. Chen, “Cepstral domain talker stress compensation for robust speech 
recognition,” IEEE Transaction on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 
36, No. 4, April 1988, pp. 433-439. 
 
[8]  I. Shahin, “Improving speaker identification performance under the shouted 
talking condition using the second-order hidden Markov models,” EURASIP 
Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Vol. 5, issue 4, March 2005, pp. 482-486. 
 
[9] I. Shahin, “Enhancing speaker identification performance under the shouted 
talking condition using second-order circular hidden Markov models” Speech 
Communication, Vol. 48, issue 8, August 2006, pp. 1047-1055. 
 
[10] I. Shahin, “Speaker identification in the shouted environment using 
suprasegmental hidden Markov models,” Signal Processing Journal, Vol. 88, 
issue 11, November 2008, pp. 2700-2708. 
 
[11] I. Shahin, “Speaker identification in each of the neutral and shouted talking 
environments based on gender-dependent approach using SPHMMs,” 
International Journal of Computers and Applications (In Press). 
 
[12] J. H. L. Hansen, C. Swail, A. J. South, R. K. Moore, H. Steeneken, E. J. 
Cupples, T. Anderson, C. R. A. Vloeberghs, I. Trancoso and P. Verlinde, “The    
impact of speech under stress on military speech technology”, NATO Research & 
Technology Organization RTO-TR-10, Vol. AC/323(IST)TP/ 5IST/TG-01, 2000. 
 
33 
[13] S. A. Patil and J. H. L. Hansen, “Detection of speech under physical stress: 
model development, sensor selection, and feature fusion,” INTERSPEECH 2008, 
Brisbane, Australia, September 2008, pp. 817-820. 
 
[14] I. Shahin, “Speaker identification in emotional environments,” Iranian 
Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Vol. 8, No. 1, Winter-Spring 
2009, pp. 41-46. 
 
[15] I. Shahin, “Speaking style authentication using suprasegmental hidden 
Markov models,” University of Sharjah Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences, 
Vol. 5, No. 2, June 2008, pp. 41-65. 
 
[16] J. Adell, A. Benafonte and D. Escudero, “Analysis of prosodic features: 
towards modeling of emotional and pragmatic attributes of speech,” XXI 
Congreso de la Sociedad Española para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, 
SEPLN, Granada, Spain, September 2005. 
 
[17] T. S. Polzin and A. H. Waibel, “Detecting emotions in Speech,” Cooperative 
Multimodal Communication, Second International Conference 1998, CMC 1998. 
 
[18] T. L. Nwe, S. W. Foo, L. C. De Silva, "Speech emotion recognition using 
hidden Markov models," Speech Communication, Vol. 41, issue 4, November 
2003, pp. 603-623. 
 
34 
[19] D. Ververidis and C. Kotropoulos, "Emotional speech recognition: resources, 
features and methods," Speech Communication, Vol. 48, issue 9, September 2006, 
pp. 1162-1181. 
 
[20] L. T. Bosch, "Emotions, speech and the ASR framework," Speech 
Communication, Vol. 40, issues 1-2, April 2003, pp. 213-225. 
 
[21] L. R. Rabiner and B. H. Juang, Fundamentals of Speech Recognition, 
Prentice Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1983. 
 
[22] X. D. Huang, Y. Ariki and M. A. Jack, Hidden Markov Models for Speech 
Recognition, Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1990. 
 
[23] J. F. Mari, J. P. Haton and A. Kriouile, “Automatic word recognition based 
on second-order hidden Markov models,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and Audio 
Processing, Vol. 5, No. 1, January 1997, pp. 22-25. 
 
[24] C. Zheng and B. Z. Yuan, “Text-dependent speaker identification using 
circular hidden Markov models”, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing, S13.3, 1988, pp. 580-582. 
 
[25] H. Bao, M. Xu and T. F. Zheng, "Emotion attribute projection for speaker 
recognition on emotional speech," INTERSPEECH 2007, Antwerp, Belgium, 
August 2007, pp. 758-761. 
 
35 
[26] A. B. Kandali, A. Routray and T. K. Basu, “Emotion recognition from Assamese 
speeches using MFCC features and GMM classifier,” IEEE Region 10 Conference 
TENCON 2008, Hyderabad, India, November 2008, pp. 1-5. 
 
[27] T. H. Falk and W. Y. Chan, “Modulation spectral features for robust far-field 
speaker identification,” IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language 
Processing, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 90-100. 
 
[28] G. Zhou, J. H. L. Hansen and J. F. Kaiser, “Nonlinear feature based 
classification of speech under stress,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and Audio 
Processing Journal, Vol. 9, No. 3, March 2001, pp. 201-216. 
 
[29] J. H. L. Hansen and B. D. Womack, “Feature analysis and neural network-
based classification of speech under stress,” IEEE Transaction on Speech and 
Audio Processing Journal, Vol. 43, No. 4, July 1996, pp. 307-313. 
 
[30] J.H.L. Hansen and S. Bou-Ghazale, "Getting started with SUSAS: A speech 
under simulated and actual stress database", EUROSPEECH-97: International 
Conference on Speech Communication and Technology, Rhodes, Greece, 
September 1997, Vol. 4, pp. 1743-1746. 

