RFID Systems and Security and Privacy
Implications
Sanjay E. Sarma, Stephen A. Weis, and Daniel W. Engels
Auto-ID Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
www.autoidcenter.org
Abstract. The Auto-ID Center is developing low-cost radio frequency
identification (RFID) based systems with the initial application as next
generation bar-codes. We describe RFID technology, summarize our ap-
proach and our research, and most importantly, describe the research
opportunities in RFID for experts in cryptography and information se-
curity. The common theme in low-cost RFID systems is that computation
resources are very limited, and all aspects of the RFID system are con-
nected to each other. Understanding these connections and the resulting
design trade-offs is an important prerequisite to effectively answering the
challenges of security and privacy in low-cost RFID systems.
1 Introduction
Automatic Identification (Auto-ID) systems have become commonplace in access
control and security applications, in industries requiring the tracking of products
through the supply chain or manufacturing process, and in industries requiring
the identification of products at the point of sale or point of service. Perhaps the
most widely recognized Auto-ID system is the bar code system developed during
the early 1970’s. More recently, Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) systems
have begun to find greater use in automatic identification applications. RFID
systems consist of Radio Frequency (RF) tags, or transponders, and RF tag read-
ers, or transceivers. The transponders themselves typically consist of integrated
circuits connected to an antenna [8]. The use of silicon-based microchips enables
a wide range of functionality to be integrated into the transponder. Typical
functionality ranges from large read/write memories to integrated temperature
sensors to encryp! tion and access control functionality. The transceivers query
the transponders for information stored on them. This information can range
from static identification numbers to user written data to sensory data.
The potential applications for RFID systems are numerous. Consider, for
example, supply chain management applications and the use of EAN-UCC bar
codes. Today, over 5 billion bar codes are scanned daily world-wide [6]. Yet,
most bar codes are scanned only once during the lifetime of the item, namely at
the check out. RFID systems, if strategically deployed, are a single platform on
which a number of supply chain management applications can be simultaneously
B.S. Kaliski Jr. et al. (Eds.): CHES 2002, LNCS 2523, pp. 454–469, 2003.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2003
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 455
implemented, benefiting all parties involved in a commercial transaction: the
manufacturers, the retailers, the users, and even regulatory bodies (such as the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States). Automated item
level inventory identification using RFID systems will revolutionize supply chain
management by enabling applications such as automated real-time inventory
monitoring (at the shelf and in the warehouse), automated quality control, and
automatic check-out.
The significant benefits that an inexpensive, open standards-based RFID sys-
tem can provide are widely understood and acknowledged. At the same time,
typical low-cost transponders are priced in the range of US$0.50-US$1.00, and
RFID systems lack widely accepted and implemented standards for communi-
cation and functionality, thereby limiting their practical usefulness and keeping
their system costs too high for many applications. In order to achieve significant
item-level penetration within most supply chain applications, transponders will
need to be priced well under US$0.10, and preferably under US$0.05. These cost
targets cannot be achieved without a system-level approach that encompasses
every aspect of the RFID technology, from IC design to RF protocols, from reader
design to back-end data systems, and from IC manufacturing to antenna man-
ufacturing. The challenge has been to develop a complete open standards-based
system that enables the design and manufacture of lo! w-cost RFID systems.
The Auto-ID Center, an industry sponsored research center with laboratories
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA, Cambridge University, UK, and
the University of Adelaide, AU, has designed, developed, and deployed within
a large-scale field trial an open standards-based system that enables the unique
identification of and retrieval of information on ubiquitously tagged items. The
Center, in conjunction with its sponsors, has also undertaken projects to design
and manufacture open standard low-cost RFID transceivers and transponders
capable of little more than communicating a unique identifier stored within them.
Low-cost transponders enable the tagging and unique identification of virtually
all man-made items.
The commercial availability of low-cost, Auto-ID Center standards-based
RFID systems by mid-2003 has poised these systems to be one of the earli-
est and perhaps most explosive opportunities in ubiquitous computing. As these
systems leave the industrial applications and enter our daily lives, privacy and
security related issues will play an increasingly important role in their use and
ubiquity. The pupose of this paper is to explain the technology, the challenges,
and the opportunities ubiquitous RFID systems present to the security and pri-
vacy communities.
2 A Brief Introduction to RFID Systems
2.1 Basic System Components
All RFID systems are comprised of three main components:
– the RFID tag, or transponder, which is located on the object to be identified
and is the data carrier in the RFID system,
456 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
– the RFID reader, or transceiver, which may be able to both read data from
and write data to a transponder, and
– the data processing subsystem which utilizes the data obtained from the
transceiver in some useful manner.
Typical transponders (transmitters/responders) consist of a microchip that
stores data and a coupling element, such as a coiled antenna, used to communi-
cate via radio frequency communication. Transponders may be either active or
passive. Active transponders have an on-tag power supply (such as a battery)
and actively send an RF signal for communication while passive transponders
obtain all of their power from the interrogation signal of the transceiver and
either reflect or load modulate the transceiver’s signal for communication. Most
transponders, both passive and active, communicate only when they are inter-
rogated by a transceiver.
Typical transceivers (transmitter/receivers), or RFID readers, consist of a ra-
dio frequency module, a control unit, and a coupling element to interrogate elec-
tronic tags via radio frequency communication. In addition, many transceivers
are fitted with an interface that enables them to communicate their received
data to a data processing subsystem, e.g., a database running on a personal
computer. The use of radio frequencies for communication with transponders
allows RFID readers to read passive RFID tags at small to medium distances
and active RFID tags at small to large distances even when the tags are located
in a hostile environment and are obscured from view.
The basic components of an RFID system combine in essentially the same
manner for all applications and variations of RFID systems. All objects to be
identified are physically tagged with transponders. The type of tag used and the
data stored on the tag varies from application to application.
Transceivers are strategically placed to interrogate tags where their data is
required. For example, an RFID-based access control system locates its readers
at the entry points to the secure area. A sports timing system, meanwhile, lo-
cates its readers at both the starting line and the finish line of the event. The
readers continuously emit an interrogation signal. The interrogation signal forms
an interrogation zone within which the tags may be read. The actual size of the
interrogation zone is a function of the transceiver and transponder characteris-
tics. In general, the greater the interrogation signal power and the higher the
interrogation signal frequency, the larger the interrogation zone. Sending power
to the transponders via the reader-to-tag communication signal is the bottleneck
in achieving large read range with passive tags. Active tags do not suffer from
this drawback; thus, they typically have larger communication ranges than an
otherwise equivalent passive tag.
The transceivers and transponders simply provide the mechanism for obtain-
ing data (and storing data in the case of writable tags) associated with physical
objects.
Passive RFID systems are the most promising to provide low-cost ubiquitous
tagging capability with adequate performance for most supply chain manage-
ment applications. These low-cost RFID systems are, of necessity, very resource
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 457
limited, and the extreme cost pressures make the design of RFID systems a
highly coupled problem with sensitive trade-offs. Unlike other computation sys-
tems where it is possible to abstract functionality and think modularly, almost
every aspect of an RFID system affects every other aspect. We present a brief
overview of the critical components of RFID technology and summarize some of
these trade-offs in passive RFID design.
2.2 Transceiver-Transponder Coupling and Communication
Passive RFID tags obtain their operating power by harvesting energy from the
electromagnetic field of the reader’s communication signal. The limited resources
of a passive tag require it to both harvest its energy and communicate with a
reader within a narrow frequency band as permitted by regulatory agencies. We
denote the center of this frequency band by f , and we refer to RFID systems
operating at frequency f with the understanding that this is the center frequency
of the band within which it operates.
Passive tags typically obtain their power from the communication signal ei-
ther through inductive coupling or far field energy harvesting. Inductive coupling
uses the magnetic field generated by the communication signal to induce a cur-
rent in its coupling element (usually a coiled antenna and a capacitor). The
current induced in the coupling element charges the on-tag capacitor that pro-
vides the operating voltage, and power, for the tag. In this way, inductively
coupled systems behave much like loosely coupled transformers. Consequently,
inductive coupling works only in the near-field of the communication signal. The
near field for a frequency f extends up to 1/(2πf) meters from the signal source.
For a given tag, the operating voltage obtained at a distance d from the reader
is directly proportional to the flux density at that distance. The magnetic field
emitted by the reader antenna decreases in power proportional to 1/d3 in the
near field. Therefore, it can be shown that for a circularly coiled antenna the flux
density is maximized at a distance d (in meters) when R ∼=
√
2 ·d, where R is the
radius of the reader’s antenna coil. Thus, by increasing R the communication
range of the reader may be increased, and the optimum reader antenna radius
R is 1.414 times the demanded read range d.
Far field energy harvesting uses the energy from the interrogation signal’s far
field signal to power the tag. The far field begins where the near field ends, at
a distance of 1/(2πf) from the emitting antenna. The signal incident upon the
tag antenna induces a voltage at the input terminals of the tag. This voltage
is detected by the RF front-end circuitry of the tag and is used to charge a
capacitor that provides the operating voltage for the tag.
There is a fundamental limitation on the power detected a distance d away
from a reader antenna. In a lossless medium, the power transmitted by the
reader decreases as a function of the inverse square of the distance from the
reader antenna in the far field.
A reader communicates with and powers a passive tag using the same signal.
The fact that the same signal is used to transmit power and communicate data
creates some challenging trade-offs. First, any modulation of the signal causes a
458 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
reduction in power to the tag. Second, modulating information onto an otherwise
spectrally pure sinusoid spreads the signal in the frequency domain. This spread,
referred to as a “side band,” along with the maximum power transmitted at any
frequency, is regulated by local government bodies in most parts of the world.
These regulations limit the rate of information that can be sent from the reader
to the tag. RFID systems usually operate in free bands known as Industrial-
Scientific-Medical (ISM) bands, where the emitted power levels and the side
band limits tend to be especially stringent.
The signaling from the tag to the reader in passive RFID systems is not
achieved by active transmission. Since passive tags do not actively transmit a
signal, they do not have a regulated limit on the rate of information that can
be sent from the passive tag to the reader. In the near field, tag to reader
communication is achieved via load modulation. Load modulation is achieved by
modulating the impedance of the tag as seen by the reader. In the far field, tag
to reader communication is achieved via backscatter. Backscatter is achieved by
modulating the radar cross-section of the tag antenna. Comprehensive reviews
of the operation of tags and readers are available in [8] and [17].
The powering of and communication with passive tags with the same commu-
nication signal places restrictions on the functionality and transactions the tags
are capable of. First, there is very little power available to the digital portion of
the integrated circuit on the tag. This limits the functionality of the tag. Second,
the length of transactions with the tag is limited to the time for which the tag is
expected to be powered and within communication range. Governmental regu-
lations can further limit communication timings. In the US in the 915 MHz ISM
band, regulations require that, under certain operating conditions, the commu-
nication frequency change every 400 ms. Since every change in frequency may
cause loss of communication with a tag, transponders must not be assumed to
communicate effectively for longer than 400 ms. Finally, it is important to min-
imize state information required in passive tags. In many practical situations,
power supplied to the tag may be errat! ic, and any long-term reliance on state
in the tag may lead to errors in the operation of a communication protocol.
2.3 Data Coding
The data, consisting of ones and zeroes, communicated between tags and read-
ers must be sent in a reliable manner. There are two critical steps to reliable
communication, the encoding of the data and the transmission of the encoded
data, that is, the modulation of the communication signal. The combination of
coding and modulation schemes determines the bandwidth, integrity, and tag
power consumption.
The coding and modulation used in RFID communications is limited by the
power and modulation/demodulation capabilities of the tags. Another limiting
factor is the bandwidth occupied by the signal. Readers are capable of trans-
mitting at high power but are limited to narrow communication bands by com-
munications regulations; therefore, the encoding used from reader to tag usually
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 459
needs to occupy a low bandwidth. Passive tags, however, do not actively trans-
mit a signal; therefore, the encoding used for tag to reader communication can
occupy a high bandwidth.
There are two broad categories of codes used in RFID: level codes and tran-
sition codes. Level codes represent the bit with their voltage level. Transition
codes capture the bit as a change in level. Level codes, such as Non-Return-to-
Zero (NRZ) and Return-to-Zero (RZ), tend to be history independent; however,
they are not very robust. Transition codes can be history dependent, and they
can be robust. Figure 1 illustrates several codes.
Fig. 1. Examples of several coding schemes.
The simplest code is Pulse Pause Modulation (PPM) in which the length
between pulses is used to convey the bit. PPM codes provide low bit rates but
occupy only a small bandwidth and are very easy to implement. In addition,
these encodings can be adapted easily to ensure uninterrupted power supply
since the signal does not change for long periods of time.
The Manchester code is a higher bandwidth transition code that represents
a 1 as a negative transition at the half period and a 0 as a positive transition at
a half period. The Manchester Code provides for efficient communication since
the bit rate is equal to the bandwidth of the communication.
In RFID, the coding technique must be selected with three considerations in
mind: 1) the code must maintain power to the tag as much as possible, 2) the
code must not consume too much bandwidth, and 3) the code must permit the
detection of collisions. The collision detection ability of a code is discussed further
in Section 2.5. Depending on the bandwidth available, most RFID systems use
PPM or PWM to communicate from reader to tag and Manchester or NRZ to
communicate from tag to reader.
460 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
2.4 Modulation
The data coding scheme determines how the data is represented in a continuous
stream of bits. How that stream of bits is communicated between the tag and
the reader is determined by the modulation scheme. For convenience, RF com-
munications typically modulate a high frequency carrier signal to transmit the
baseband code. The three classes of digital modulation are Amplitude Shift Key-
ing (ASK), Frequency Shift Keying (FSK) and Phase Shift Keying (PSK). The
choice of modulation is based on power consumption, reliability requirements,
and bandwidth requirements. All three forms of modulation may be used in the
return signal although ASK is most common in load modulation at 13.56 MHz,
and PSK is most common in backscatter modulation.
A problem unique to RFID systems is the vast difference in power between
the signal outgoing from the reader and that returning to the reader as reflected
from the tag. In some situations, this difference may be in the range of 80-
90 dB [8], and the return signal may be impossible to detect. To avoid this
problem, the return signal is sometimes modulated onto a sub-carrier, which is
then modulated on to the carrier. For example, in the ISO 15693 standard for
RFID, a sub-carrier of 13.56/32 (= 423.75 KHz) is used.
2.5 Tag Anti-collision
When multiple tags respond simultaneously to a reader’s signal, their commu-
nication signals can interfere with one another. This interference is referred to
as a collision and typically results in a failed transmission. In order for a reader
to communicate with multiple tags, a method for collision free tag communica-
tion must be employed. These methods are referred to as anti-collision methods.
An anti-collision method must be employed if an application will typically have
more than one tag communicating with a reader at the same time.
Anti-collision methods, or algorithms, in tags have similarities to anti-
collision algorithms in networking. Unlike standard networking however, RFID
tags pose a number of problems that arise from the very limited resources that
they are provided with. First, they can afford only limited computation power.
Second, state information, such as what portion of the tags identifier has al-
ready been read, may be unreliable. Third, collisions may be difficult to detect
due to widely varying signal strengths from the tags. Finally, as in most wireless
networks, transponders cannot be assumed to be able to hear one another.
A common classification of anti-collision algorithms, either probabilistic or
deterministic, is based upon how the tags respond during the anti-collision al-
gorithm. In probabilistic algorithms, the tags respond at randomly generated
times. There are several variations of probabilistic protocols depending on the
amount of control the reader has over the tags. Many probabilistic algorithms
are based on the Aloha scheme in networking [3]. The times at which readers
can respond can be slotted or continuous. The ISO 15693 protocol, for example,
supports a slotted Aloha mode of anti-collision.
Deterministic schemes are those in which the reader sorts through tags based
on their unique identification number. The simplest deterministic scheme is the
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 461
binary tree-walking scheme, in which the reader traverses the tree of all possible
identification numbers. At each node in the tree, the reader checks for responses.
Only tags whose identifier is a child of the checked node respond. The lack of
a response implies that the sub-tree is empty. The presence of a response gives
the reader an indication as to where to search next.
The performance metrics that are traded-off by these algorithms and their
variants include: 1) the speed at which tags can be read, 2) the outgoing band-
width of the reader signal, 3) the bandwidth of the return signal, 4) the amount
of state that can be reliably stored on the tag, 5) the tolerance of the algorithm
to different types of noise in the field, 6) the cost of the tag, 7) the cost of
the reader, 8) the ability to tolerate tags which enter and leave the field during
the inventory-taking process, 9) the desire to count tags exactly as opposed to
sampling them, and finally, 10) the range at which tags can be read.
The impact of regulated reader-to-tag bandwidth on the anti-collision proto-
col can be severe. In the US, for example, two common operating frequencies for
RFID systems are the 13.56 MHz and the 915 MHz ISM bands. The regulations
on the 13.56 MHz band offer significantly less bandwidth in the communication
from the reader to the tag than do the regulations on the 915 MHz band. For
this reason, Aloha-based anti-collision algorithms are more common in systems
that operate in the 13.56 Mhz band and deterministic anti-collision algorithms
are more common in the 915 Mhz band.
In practice, most RFID anti-collision algorithms tend to be an amalgam of
probabilistic and deterministic concepts. Almost all require a unique ID to sort
through the tags. This in itself has implications on privacy, as we will discuss
later. The interplay between the anti-collision algorithm, the identifier, and the
bandwidth available has an impact on all transactions between the reader and
the tag. Approaches to security and privacy must therefore be geared to these
very subtle trade-offs. Protocols to secure the tag at 13.56 Mhz, for example,
must use far less signaling from reader-to-tag than at 915 Mhz. Either way,
when there are several tags in the field, it is best to leverage the anti-collision
algorithms as much as possible for efficiency.
2.6 Reader Anti-collision
RFID systems have traditionally been used in sparse applications where the
readers tend to be far apart. In the applications we have explored, particularly
those in supply chain management, the density of readers will often be very high,
creating a new class of problems related to reader interference. We first reported
the Reader Collision Problem in [7]. The solution to a reader collision problem
allocates frequencies over time to a set of readers. The solution may be obtained
in either a distributed or centrally controlled manner.
Reader collision problems have some similarities to frequency assignment
problems in mobile telephone systems. However, the approaches that work in
mobile telephones do not translate to RFID systems due to the limited func-
tionality in RFID tags. The inability of the transponders to aid in the communi-
cation process means that they are unable to discriminate between two readers
462 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
communicating with them simultaneously. As a result, two readers that may
communicate with the same tag must communicate at different times.
In a cooperative, trusted environment, reader collisions can be handled in
a fairly seamless way. However, complications may arise in the execution of
commands that change the state of the tag. If the reader executing a series
of state changing actions is interrupted by another reader, it may be forced
to relinquish control over the tag. The new reader that acquires the tag may
further change the state of the tag without the cooperation of the first reader.
Transactions between readers and tags must therefore be brief and atomic.
2.7 Frequencies and Regulations
The operation of RFID systems worldwide is regulated by local governmental
bodies which control the electromagnetic spectrum in a region. Most RFID sys-
tems operate in so-called Industrial-Scientific-Medical (ISM) bands. These bands
are freely available for use by low-power, short-range systems. The ISM bands
are designated by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) [11]. A
comprehensive summary of the standards is available in [17]. The most com-
monly used ISM frequencies for RFID are 13.56 MHz and 902-928 MHz (in the
US only). In addition, the low frequency band 9kHz-135 kHz is available for un-
licensed use in most regions, and the 868MHz-870MHz band is available for use
by nonspecific short-range devices in Europe. Each band has its own radiation
power and bandwidth regulations.
 
30 ? V/m 
251 ? V/m 
15,484 ? V/m 
13.56 MHz  
+/- 7kHz 
Astronomy band 
13.36-13.41 MHz 
Maximum intentional radiation 
Maximum spurious radiation 
Fig. 2. The 13.56 MHz ISM band US power regulations.
Each frequency band brings its own challenges and advantages in terms of
operation. The 13.56 MHz band shown in Figure 2 offers a great deal of asymme-
try between the forward and reverse communication. Since readers must power
the tags in passive RFID systems, the reader-to-tag communication must be at
maximum power for maximum communication range. This limits the bandwidth
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 463
in reader-to-tag communication to a total of 14kHz. However, there is a great
deal more bandwidth available for the low-power return communication.
The 915 MHz ISM band in the US, in contrast, allows multiple reader-to-
tag communication options. The option that enables the longest communication
range, the most commonly used mode in RFID systems, requires the reader to
change its communication frequency every 0.4 seconds. The reader may ‘hop’
between 50 or more channels, each with a maximum bandwidth of 250 kHz. Fre-
quency hopping imposes several limitations on RFID systems. The most severe
of these limitations is that a tag cannot be assumed to be in continuous com-
munication across a frequency hop. This means that transactions with 915 MHz
RFID systems in the US should be limited to within the 0.4 second intervals al-
located to any single frequency sub-band. Constraints of this type also point to
the need for limited length, atomic transactions in RFID systems, a requirement
which must be respected in the design of security and privacy systems.
3 The EPC System: A Minimalist Approach
At the Auto-ID Center, we have developed and implemented a system that en-
ables all physical objects to be connected in real-time to the Internet by affixing
an RFID tag to the object [14]. The scale of the system (essentially a several
quadrillion node network), combined with the trade-offs in RFID design, created
an intriguing design challenge. We utilized a minimalist strategy for the RFID
tags (the most replicated component of the system) to enable extremely low-cost
RFID systems. The result is a system that minimizes the functionality on the
tag by moving that functionality to the ‘network.’
The four key components of this system are the Electronic Product Code
(EPC), the Object Name Service (ONS), the Savant, and the RFID transpon-
ders.
The EPC. The Electronic Product Code (EPC) is an identification scheme
designed to enable the unique identification of all physical objects. This is the
only data required to be stored on a tag, for once the unique identity of an object
is established, information about that object can be obtained from the network.
As such, the EPC acts like a pointer to this information.
The ONS. The Object Name Service (ONS) is a directory service that maps
the EPC to an IP (Internet Protocol) address where information about the asso-
ciated object can be written and/or accessed. The ONS is based entirely on the
Domain Name Service (DNS), the directory service used on the Internet today
to map a domain name (e.g., www.mit.edu) to an IP address (e.g., 18.181.0.31).
At the IP address pointed to by the ONS, data about the particular object is
stored in XML [20] format, and can be accessed by standard methods like HTTP
and SOAP [19].
ONS reduces the burden on the transponders, and provides several advan-
tages simultaneously. First, it reduces the memory and power requirements on
the tag. Second, by transferring much of the data communication to a much
higher-bandwidth back-end network, it saves precious wireless bandwidth. Third,
464 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
it makes the system more robust: while it is difficult to store and recover informa-
tion from a failed tag, it is possible to back up databases inexpensively. Finally,
this approach significantly reduces the footprint of the tag’s microchip, reducing
the cost of the transponder. (The cost of the microchip is proportional to its
area [15].)
Savant. The Savant system is a hierarchical control and data management build-
ing block that can be used to provide automated control functionality and man-
age the large volumes of data generated by the RFID readers. A Savant enables
the distributed creation of a reader network by acting as a gateway to the next
higher level in the Savant hierarchy, effectively isolating the reader sub-network.
The use of Savants enables distributed security by providing convenient points
for network isolation.
The Savant network further reduces the burden on the tags while providing
several advantages. First, it reduces the memory and power requirements on the
tags by transferring the computationally intensive functionality to a powered
system. Second, it makes the system more robust: any single point of failure
has local effects. Third, it enables the entire system to be scalable as systems
and reader sub-networks may be added seemlessly. Finally, the Savant network
significantly reduces the footprint of the tag’s microchip, reducing the cost of
the transponder.
RFID Transponders. RFID transponders are the most numerous and cost
sensitive of our system components. We have designed RFID protocols for both
13.56 MHz and 915 MHz, both with the aim of having minimum cost identi-
fication tags with acceptable performance for supply chain applications. Both
transponders are designed to store a unique identifier, an EPC, and have that
identifier retrieved as part of the anti-collision algorithm. The 915 MHz, UHF,
transponder utilizes a directed tree search anti-collision algorithm, while the
13.56 MHz, HF, transponder utilizes a slotted Aloha-based anti-collision algo-
rithm. Both transponders also implement a password protected Self Destruct
command, that enables the owner of the tag to electrically and permanently
destroy the tag.
The implementation cost of securing the Self Destruct command was
weighed against the benefits of that security. It was determined that a secret
key must be used to execute the Self Destruct command; therefore, requir-
ing the destruction of a single tag at a time. The secret key is meant only to
discourage the unauthorized destruction of tags. In a pervasive reader environ-
ment, unauthorized Self Destruct commands can be detected by the readers,
enabling a proper reaction to the issuance of these commands.
We have taken a building-block approach to RFID transponder design in that
these minimal functionality tags form the foundation of the functionality that
will be found in higher-functionality tags. These higher functionality tags may
be used in applications that can afford the additional cost of the transponder
and require the transponder to implement the functionality.
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 465
4 RFID Security Benefits and Threats
Universally deploying RFID tags offers many potential security benefits, yet may
expose new privacy threats. Otherwise intrusive or cumbersome security prac-
tices, such as airline passenger and baggage tracking, can be made practical by
using RFID systems. Authentication systems already take advantage of RFID
technology, for example car key-less entry systems. Embedding RFID tags as
seals of authenticity in documents, designer products, and currency may dis-
courage forgery. While RFID tags improve certain security properties in these
applications, they may exacerbate privacy threats or pose new security risks.
RFID systems are different from other means of identification because RF
communication is non-contact and non-line-of-sight, whereas other means of
identification are either contact-based or require line-of-sight. In other words,
it is more difficult for the owner of the RF tag to physically impede communi-
cation with the tag. The promiscuity of RF tags is not unique; magnetic stripe
cards, for example, are promiscuous, but we assume that the owner of the card
takes the physical responsibility of preventing unauthorized users from physically
accessing the card. Of course, the propagation characteristics of electromagnetic
fields do limit the range from which passive RFID cards can be read. In fact,
most tags operating at 13.56 MHz cannot be read from more than a meter away,
and 915 MHz tags are difficult to read through most materials. Yet, as the in-
formation stored on the tag becomes more and more valuable, it is necessary
to think through some of the security and privacy! related issues in RFID. We
present such a discussion in this section, ending with a proposed approach.
4.1 Previous Work
The contactless interface and constrained computational resources of RFID de-
vices present a unique set of characteristics most closely related to smart cards.
Many relevant lessons may be gleaned from the wealth of smart card and tamper
resistant hardware research. [1] discusses a range of smart card protocols and
analyzes cost and security trade-offs. Many RFID tags will operate in hostile
environments and may be subject to intense physical attacks. Analysis of smart
cards operation in hostile environments is presented in [9], while [18] provides
an excellent overview of many physical attacks and countermeasures. Several
specific lower cost physical attacks are detailed in [2] and are part of ongoing
research at the University of Cambridge’s TAMPER Lab [16]. Many results per-
taining to implementation of cryptographic primitives on smart cards apply to
RFIDs. Cautionary information regarding implementation of AES i! n smart
cards appears in [5]. Being contactless and passively powered may make RFID
devices especially susceptible to fault induction or power analysis attacks. Both
[4] and [12] highlight many of these issues in cryptographic devices.
4.2 Security Goals
It is useful to state clear security goals when discussing security properties of
various RFID designs. Tags must not compromise the privacy of their hold-
ers. Information should not be leaked to unauthorized readers, nor should it be
466 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
possible to build long-term tracking associations between tags and holders. To
prevent tracking, holders should be able to detect and disable any tags they
carry. Publicly available tag output should be randomized or easily modifiable
to avoid long-term associations between tags and holders. Private tag contents
must be protected by access control and, if interrogation channels are assumed
insecure, encryption.
Both tags and readers should trust each other. Spoofing either party should be
difficult. Besides providing an access control mechanism, mutual authentication
between tags and readers also provides a measure of trust. Session hijacking and
replay attacks are also concerns. Fault induction or power interruption should
not compromise protocols or open windows to hijack attempts. Both tags and
readers should be resistant to replay or man-in-the-middle attacks.
4.3 Low-Cost RFID Issues
With these security goals in mind, consider the security properties of passive
factory-programmed, read-only tags. Each tag contains a unique identifier such
as an EPC. While no more “promiscuous” than an optical bar code, automated
monitoring of RF tags is possible. This basic design clearly violates the privacy
goal since tracking tag holders and reading tag contents are possible if the tag
is properly presented to a reader’s interrogation field. Neither tags nor readers
are authenticated; therefore, no notion of trust exists either.
To address these deficiencies, suppose we adopt a policy of erasing unique se-
rial numbers at the point of sale. Consumer held tags would still contain product
code information, but not unique identification numbers. Unfortunately, track-
ing is still possible by associating “constellations” of particular tag types with
holder identities. For example, a unique penchant for RFID-tagged Gucci shoes,
Rolex watches and Cohiba cigars may betray your anonymity. Furthermore, this
design still offers no trust mechanism.
Providing the stated security goals requires implementing access control and
authentication. Public key cryptography offers a solution. A particular (type of)
reader’s public key and a unique private key may be embedded into each tag.
During interrogation, tags and readers may mutually authenticate each other
with these keys using well understood protocols. To prevent eavesdropping within
the interrogation zone, tags may encrypt their contents using a random nonce
to prevent tracking. Unfortunately, supporting strong public key cryptography
is beyond the resources of low cost (US$0.05-0.10) tags, although solutions do
exist for more expensive tags [13] .
Symmetric message authentication requires each tag to share a unique key
with a reader or for a key to be shared among a batch of tags. To support a unique
key per tag, a complex key management overhead is necessary. If keys are to be
shared, tags must be resilient to physical attacks described in [18]; otherwise,
compromising a single tag effective compromises an entire a batch. Implementing
secure memory on a low cost tag with a logic gate count in the hundreds is a
daunting task, especially in light of the difficulty in securing memory on relatively
resource abundant smart cards. Even supporting strong symmetric encryption
is a challenge in the short term.
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 467
4.4 Some Approaches to RFID Protection
Accepting short-term limitations on low-cost tag resources, we discuss a simple
RFID security scheme based on a one-way hash function. In practice, a hard-
ware optimized cryptographic hash function would suffice, assuming it may be
implemented with significantly fewer resources than symmetric encryption. In
this design, each hash-enabled tag contains a portion of memory reserved for a
“meta-ID” and operates in either an unlocked or locked state. While unlocked,
the full functionality and memory of the tag are available to anyone in the in-
terrogation zone.
To lock a tag, the owner computes a hash value of a random key and sends
it to the tag as a lock value, i.e. lock=hash(key). In turn, the tag stores the
lock value in the meta-ID memory location and enters the locked state. While
locked, a tag responds to all queries with the current meta-ID value and restricts
all other functionality. To unlock a tag, the owner sends the original key value
to the tag. The tag then hashes this value and compares it to the lock stored
under the meta-ID. If the values match, the tag unlocks itself.
Each tag always responds to queries in some form and thus always reveals
its existence. Tags will be equipped with a physical self-destruct mechanism and
will only be unlocked during communication with an authorized reader. In the
event of power loss or transmission interruption, tags will return to a default
locked state. A trusted channel may be established for management functions,
such as key management, tag disabling or even tag writes, by requiring physical
contact between a control device and a tag. Requiring physical contact for critical
functionality helps defend against wireless sabotage or denial of service attacks.
The hash-based lock mechanism satisfies most of our privacy concerns. Access
control to tag contents is restricted to key holders. Individuals may both locate
and disable tags they may be carrying since tags always respond to queries.
Long-term associations can be avoided since locked tags only respond with the
correct meta-ID. One caveat is that stale meta-ID values may be used to build
tracking associations over time. This necessitates periodically refreshing meta-ID
values by unlocking and re-locking tags.
Although authenticating readers and providing a trusted channel satisfies
some of our trust requirements, this design does sacrifice several security proper-
ties to save costs; specifically tag authentication. Tag MAC functionality would
allow tags to authenticate themselves, but is beyond current low-cost tag re-
sources. Lacking authentication exposes tags to man-in-the-middle attacks since
an attacker can query tags for meta-IDs, rebroadcast those values to a legitimate
reader, and later unlock the tags with the reader’s response keys. Many key-less
car entry systems currently possess the same vulnerability. Regardless, attack-
ers without access to an authorized reader cannot access tag contents outside
physical channels.
4.5 Future Research Directions
While this candidate design partially satisfies some desired security properties,
more secure implementations require several developments. One key line of re-
search is the further development and implementation of low cost cryptographic
468 S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels
primitives. These include hash functions, random number generators and both
symmetric and public key cryptographic functions. Low cost hardware imple-
mentations must minimize circuit area and power consumption without adversely
affecting computation time. RFID security may benefit from both improvements
to existing systems and from new designs. More expensive RFID devices already
offer symmetric encryption and public key algorithms such as NTRU [10,13].
Adaptation of these algorithms for the low-cost (US$0.05-0.10), passive RFID
devices should be a reality in a matter of years.
Protocols utilizing these cryptographic primitives must be resilient to power
interruption and fault induction. Compared to smart cards, RFID tags possess
more vulnerabilities to these types of attacks. Protocols must account for dis-
ruption of wireless channels or communication hijack attempts. Tags themselves
must gracefully recover from power loss or communication interruption without
compromising security.
Continually improving technology will steadily blur the line between RFID
devices, smart cards and ubiquitous computers. Research benefiting the security
of RFID devices will help pave the way for a universal, secure ubiquitous com-
puting system. Developments related to RFID tags and other embedded systems
may all contribute to the creation of a robust and secure infrastructure offering
many exciting potential applications.
5 Conclusions
This article is a summary of a research effort underway by three universities,
more than 60 companies, and more than 50 researchers world-wide.
The effort has been fueled by the potential economic impact of inexpensive,
ubiquitous item identification in the supply chain. The roadmap towards cheap
tags has been laid out, but like any research effort, uncertainty is a part of
the challenge. Several technology alternatives will need to be tested for each
component of the system before the optimal one is determined. Even after the
first cheap tags have been manufactured, scaling production to the volumes
needed to meet expected demand will be a challenge. It may be years before the
supply meets the enormous demand that a technology of this type is projected
to generate. However, it is these very volumes that make it necessary for the
technology to be carefully thought out to save every fraction of a cent in the
cost of a tag and to ensure the security and privacy of its future users.
Acknowledgments. The authors wish to thank Ron Rivest and Peter Cole for
their continued support of this work.
References
1. M. Abadi, M. Burrows, C. Kaufman, and B. W. Lampson. Authentication and
delegation with smart-cards, In Theoretical Aspects of Computer Software, pages
326–345, 1991.
RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications 469
2. R. Anderson and M. Kuhn. Low cost attacks on tamper resistant devices. In IWSP:
International Workshop on Security Protocols, LNCS, 1997.
3. B. Bing. Broadband Wireless Access, Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
4. D. Boneh, R.A. DeMillo, and R.J. Lipton. On the importance of checking cryp-
tographic protocols for faults. In EUROCRYPT’97, volume 1233, pages 37–51.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Advances in Cryptology, 1997.
5. S. Chari, C. Jutla, J.R. Rao, and P. Rohatgi. A cautionary note regarding evalua-
tion of AES candidates on smart-cards. In Second Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES) Candidate Conference, Rome, Italy, 1999.
6. EAN International and the Uniform Code Council, Note to Editors,
http://www.ean-int.org/index800.html
7. D. Engels. The Reader Collision Problem. Technical Report. MIT-AUTOID-WH-
007, 2001. http://www.autoidcenter.org/research/MIT-AUTOID-WH-007.pdf.
8. K. Finkenzeller. RFID Handbook, John Wiley & Sons. 1999.
9. H. Gobioff, S. Smith, J.D. Tygar, and B. Yee. Smart cards in hostile environments.
In 2nd USENIX Workshop on Elec. Commerce, 1996.
10. J. Hoffstein, J. Pipher, and J.H. Silverman. NTRU: A ring-based public key cryp-
tosystem. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 1423, 1998.
11. International Telecommunications Union. Radio Regulations, Vol. 1, 1998.
12. B.S. Kaliski Jr. and M.J.B. Robshaw. Comments on some new attacks on crypto-
graphic devices. RSA Laboratories’ Bulletin No. 5, July 14, 1997. Available from
http://www.rsasecurity.com/rsalabs/bulletins/.
13. NTRU. GenuID. http://www.ntru.com/products/genuid.htm.
14. S. Sarma, K. Ashton, D. Brock. The Networked Physical World, Technical Re-
port MIT-AUTOID -WH-001, 1999. http://www.autoidcenter.org/research/MIT-
AUTOID-WH-001.pdf.
15. S. Sarma. Towards the 5 cent Tag, Technical Report MIT-AUTOID -WH-006,
2001. http://www.autoidcenter.org/research/MIT-AUTOID-WH-006.pdf.
16. TAMPER Lab. University of Cambridge Tamper and Monitoring Protection En-
gineering Research Lab, http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/Research/Security/tamper.
17. T. Scharfeld. An Analysis of the Fundamental Constraints on Low Cost Pas-
sive Radio-Frequency Indentification System Design. MS Thesis, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institue of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, 2001.
18. S.H. Weigart. Physical security devices for computer subsystems: A survey of at-
tacks and defences. CHES 2000, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 1965,
pages 302–317, 2000.
19. World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3c.org/SOAP/
20. World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3c.org/XML/

