EXPERIENCES WITH A SIMPLE STRUCTURED PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE 
Victor R. Basill 
Albert J. Turner 
Computer Science Department 
University of Maryland 
I. Introduction 
A great deal of interest has developed in 
structured programming [Dahl, DiJkstra, and Hoare, 
1972] during the past few years. This paper is 
concerned with some experiences obtained in the 
use of a structured programming language in the 
computer science curriculum at the University of 
Maryland. The language used was SIMPL-X [Basili, 
1973], a language designed and implemented at the 
University of Maryland. 
SIMPL-X was designed to be a transportable, 
extendable, compiler-writing language that was 
to be the base language for a family of program- 
mine languages. It is, in fact, being used for 
that purpose as the SlMPL-X compiler [Basili and 
Turner, 1973] is written in SlMPL-X, and a com- 
piler for the graph algorithmic language GRAAL 
[Rheinboldt, Basili, and Mesztenyi, 1972] is 
presently being designed as an extension of the 
SIMPL-X compiler. 
However, some of the design criteria for 
SIMPL-X have made it a reasonable language for 
use in programming courses at all levels. These 
criteria include the requirements that the lan- 
guage 
I) have a "simple" control structure and 
require only a "simple" run time envir- 
onment. 
2) conform to the standards of structured 
programming and modular program design. 
3) support and encourage the writing of 
readable, well-commented programs. 
4) be translatable into efficient object 
code for most machines. 
This paper summarizes the SIMPL-X language 
and some of the experiences resulting from its 
use at the University of Maryland. Also included 
are some opinions on the use of a structured pro- 
grammlng language in a computer science curricu- 
lum° 
2. The SIMPL-X Language 
Most of the features of SlMPL-X were derived 
from components that exist in other programming 
languages. As an overview of SIMPL-X, some of its 
main features are 
i) the main statement constructions are the 
assignment, while, if-then-else, case, and 
call statements. There is no goto state- 
ment. 
2) a program contains a sequence of proce- 
dures and functions, each of which can 
access a set of global variables, and a 
set of parameters and local variables. 
3) there are compound statement constructions 
but there is no block structure other than 
that provided by procedures. 
4) facilities for declaring external refer- 
ences and entry points are included. 
5) procedures and functions can be recursive 
if so declared. 
6) an extensive set of operators may be used 
in an expression. These include arith- 
metic, relational, logical, bit manipula- 
tion, shift, and partword operators. 
These features are briefly discussed below. 
A SIMPL-X program consists of a set of global 
declarations and a set of segments. Each segment 
is a procedure or function that consists of a 
parameter specification, a set of local declara- 
tions, and a statement llst to be executed when- 
ever the segment is invoked. Execution begins 
with the procedure designated as the start pro- 
cedure. 
In keeping with the design objective of 
simplicity, segments may be neither declared as 
locals (that is, there are no internal procedures 
or functions) nor passed as parameters. Thus an 
identifier is either local to a particular seg- 
ment or global to all segments. 
There are five basic statement types in 
SIMPL-X: assignment statement, CALL statement, 
IF statement, WHILE statement, and CASE state- 
ment. The assignment and CALL statements are 
similar to the corresponding statements in ALGOL, 
FORTRAN, or PL/I. 
The structure of the IF statement is given by 
144 
IF <expression> 
THEN <statement liStl> 
{ELSE <statement llst2>} 
END 
This causes the execution of <statement llst > 
if <expression> has a nonzero value and <state- 
ment llst_> otherwise. (There is no boolean 
type in S~MPL-X.) The braces ({}) indicate that 
the ELSE part is optional. 
AWHILE statement is used to cause the re- 
peated execution of a llst of statements. Its 
syntax is given by 
WHILE <expression> 
DO <statement llst> END 
This causes the <statement list> to be executed 
repeatedly as long as <expression> has a non- 
zero value. 
The CASE statement is essentially an ex- 
tended IF statement. The syntax is 
CASE <expression> OF 
~n~ <statement llst_> 
~n2\ <statement list~> 
{kEL ~ <statement listk> 
<statement liStk+l> } 
where nl,n2,...,nk are constants. When this 
statemeflt Is executed, the value of <expression> 
determines the statement list to be executed. 
If <expression> - n~ for some i-l,...,k, then 
<statement llst.> i~ executed. Otherwise, the 
ELSE part, <statement liStk+l >, is executed (if 
included). 
Two additional statements, the EXIT and 
RETURN statements, are also available to facil- 
itate the abnormal termination of a WHILE loop 
and the termination of a procedure execution, 
respectively. The RETURN statement is also 
used to specify the value that is the result 
of a function call. 
The data types available in SIMPL-X are 
integer, character, and (character) string. 
The only structure in the language is a one- 
dimensional array whose elements must all be 
of the same type (integer, character, or 
string). Strong typing is observed as no 
implicit type conversion is permitted. 
The operators available in SIMPL-X in- 
clude those found in most general-purpose lan- 
guages and will not be discussed extensively 
here. However, it does seem desirable to comment 
on the relational and boolean operators since 
there is no boolean type in SIMPL-X. 
Relational operators (-,<,#,etc.) are binary 
operators whose operands must be of the same type. 
The result of a relational operation is zero if 
the relation is false, and one if the relation is 
true. Boolean operators (.AND.,.OR.,.NOT.) apply 
only to integer operands and also result in one 
or zero. The expression X .AND. Y has value 1 
if both X and Y are nonzero. The .OR. and 
.NOT. operators function in a similar manner. 
The syntax of SIMPL-X is free format, but 
statement separators, such as semicolons, are not 
used. This lack of redundancy enhances the sim- 
plicity of the language and removes a stumbling 
block for students, who seem to have trouble 
learning where to put the semicolons in languages 
such as ALGOL or PL/I. Comments are delimited 
by /* and */ and may be inserted wherever blanks 
may occur. 
3. Experience with SIMPL-X 
SIMPL-X was first used in a course during 
the Fall Semester 1972 in an upper-division 
compiler writing course. A typical programming 
effort for this course was the writing of a small 
compiler. Previously both ALGOL and FORTRAN 
had proved to be unsatisfactory for use in the 
course, although for different reasons. ALGOL 
was undesirable for the writing of large programs 
due in part to the lack of facilities in the lan- 
guage for separately compiled program modules, 
and in part to the deficiency of the UNIVAC 1108 
implementations in handling large programs. FOR- 
TRAN, while adequately supporting large programs, 
did not have good compiler-wrltlng facilities 
nor did it have desirable structuring. 
The second use of SIMPL-X was in the Spring 
Semester 1973 in a second-semester programming 
course and in an upper-division systems program- 
m/ng course. The programming course involved 
the teaching of a second semester of algorithmic 
problem-solvlng and the basics of programming. 
All of the students had been programming in FOR- 
TRAN for at least a semester and a half, but its 
inadequate statement structure made its continued 
use undesirable. Only two sessions of one and 
one-half hours each were required to teach them 
the SIMPL-X language. 
In the systems programming course, most of 
the work was done for the PDP-II using a SIMPL-X 
cross-compiler on the UNIVAC 1108. The projects 
included the design and programming of a loader, 
a segmentation program, and other operating 
system routines. 
In some respects SIMPL-X was more of a pro- 
blem to use for the more advanced students in 
the compiler writing course than for the students 
in the early course. Many of the more experienced 
students were hindered by bad habits that they 
had learned previously and were unwilling to learn 
to do the kind of thinking and organizing re- 
quired by the gotoless nature of SlMPL-X. On 
the other hand, most students in the earlier 
course enjoyed the structured approach to program- 
ming and seemed to have relatively little trouble 
in learning to program in SIMPL-X. 
Perhaps surprisingly, there was little ob- 
Jection by the students in the programming course 
to the lack of aGOTO statement. In fact, several 
commented that they especially liked this feature 
of SlMPL-X. 
145 
Additional experience with SIMPL-X has been 
obtained through its use by some students in 
special projects. Typical of their generally 
favorable comments has been a statement to the 
effect that the syntax and structure of the 
language are such that fewer errors are made 
when programming in SIMPL-X as opposed to lan- 
guages previously used. 
As a result of these favorable early exper- 
iences, SIMPL-X has been adopted for usage in 
courses by several faculty members. These 
courses include the second-semester program- 
ming course, graduate and undergraduate com- 
piler-writing courses, graduate and undergraduate 
systems programming courses, and a course in the 
structure of program~/ng languages. Addition- 
ally, some hlgher-level courses use a structured 
SIMPL-X-like language for expressing algorithms 
and program-type function definitions. Exam- 
ples of these courses are a course in the certi- 
fication of programs and courses in semantic 
models for programming languages. 
The following are results from a question- 
naire submitted to two classes whose students 
used SlMPL-X after progr,mm~ng in FORTRAN for 
at least a semester and a half. These results 
were not obtained by using statistically valid 
evaluation procedures. However, they were ob- 
tained without any attempt to bias the students 
in favor of SlMPL-X and have been considered 
worthy of note by many faculty members. 
Question Yes No 
1. Was SIMPL-X easy to learn? 33 5 
2. Is SIMPL-X easy to program in? 29 8 
3. Did SIMPL-X contribute to your 
understanding of programming 
and algorithms? 35 2 
4. Do you think SIMPL-X would be 
a good first programming 
l anguage?  26 13 
4. Conclusion 
Simplicity is an important attribute of any 
programming language [Hoare, 1973]. Attempts 
have been made to achieve simplicity by using 
a subset of an existing language [Holt, 1973]. 
Although using a language subset may achieve the 
desired simplicity, it can also cause confusion 
if, for example, a construction occurs that is 
valid in the superset but not in the subset 
[Hoare, 1973]. Thus the use of a complete, 
simple language is preferable to the use of a 
subset of an existing language. 
The simplicity and lack of syntactic redun- 
dancy in SIMPL-X seem to be important factors 
that contribute to the writing of more error- 
free programs by both experienced and inexper- 
ienced programmers. Additionally, the simplicity 
of SIMPL-X aids its compiler in error analysis, 
even though the lack of redundancy in the syntax 
can cause problems in error recovery. The fact 
that SIMPL-X is a simple, yet reasonably power- 
ful, language that encourages the use of struc- 
tured programming techniques makes it a desirable 
language to use at all levels in a computer 
science curriculum. 
There is some disagreement regarding the 
stage at which a language like SIMPL-X should be 
introduced into the curriculum. One view is 
that such a language should be used in a first 
course in computer science. It is argued that 
too many programmers have already been at least 
partially hindered by having been taught to program 
using poor programming principles primarily due to 
inherent deficiencies in the language used. The 
other vlewmalntalns that the entrenchment of 
FORTRAN and similar languages, plus the scarcity 
of reasonable alternative languages in the "out- 
side world", rule against the use of languages 
such as SIMPL-X. Those holdlng this latter opinion 
feel that it is important to provide a student with 
a programming tool that is likely to be available 
wherever he may go. 
These opposing points of view, coupled with 
the common problem of what to teach a student who 
will take only one programming course, have re- 
sulted in making the structured programming course 
the second programming course at the University of 
Maryland. It is generally felt that one semester 
of FORTRAN will not do too much damage to a stu- 
dent since few, if any, habits (good or bad) are 
learned in one semester of an introductory course. 
Thus SIMPL-X is currently being used in the second 
programming course and is not used in the introduc- 
tory course. However, future developments, such 
as a more definite delineation of courses, could 
well result in the use of SIMPL-X in an introduc- 
tory course for majors. 
We feel strongly that the art of programming 
is developing more and more into a science, and 
that the use of methods such as structured pro- 
grammlng should be taught at an early stage in 
the development of programmers and computer scien- 
tists. It is time to do away with practices that 
encourage students to use "micro tricks to save 
micro seconds" [Holt, 1973]. Our experiences with 
SIMPL-X have led us to believe that not only do 
students prefer programming in a structured lan- 
guage but they also make fewer errors and write 
"better" programs when using structured programming 
techniques. We also feel that the use of a struc- 
tured programming language llke SIMPL-X gives 
students a better understanding of programing and 
more respect for programming languages as a power- 
ful tool for problem solving. 
5. Acknowledgments 
The development of the SlMPL-X language and 
its compiler was supported in part by the Office 
of Naval Research under Grant N00014-67-A-0239- 
0021 (NR-044-431) and in part by the Computer 
Science Center of the University of Maryland. 
6. References 
Basili, V.R., SIMPL-X. A Language for Writing 
Structured Programs, TR-223, University of Mary- 
land, Computer Science Center, January 1973. 
Basill, V.R., and Turner, A.J., A Transportable 
Extendable Compiler, TR-269, University of Mary- 
land, Computer Science Center, October 1973. 
146 
Dahl, O.J., DiJkstra, E.W., and Hoare, C.A.R., 
Structured Programming, Academic Press, 1972. 
Hoare, C.A.R., Hints on Programming Language 
Design, Address at SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symposium on 
Principles of Programming Languages, October 
1973. 
Holt, R.C., Teaching the Fatal Disease (or) 
Introductory Compucer Programming Using 
PL/I, SIGPLAN Notices 8, 5, May 1973. 
Rheinboldt, W.C., Basili, V.R., and Mesztenyi, 
C.K., On a Programming Language for Graph 
Algorithms, BIT 12, 2, 1972. 
147 

