Norlini Ramli 
Prof. Dr. Abdul Razak Habib  
E-mail: norlini@unitar.my  
abdrazak@unitar.my 
 
 
A programming language is important to 
computer science students to learn in 
expressing their algorithmic thinking.  
Exposure to and practice using different 
programming paradigms is the best way 
to teach students in this thinking skill.  
Provides info on tendency of 
programming languages taught in 
programming course in Malaysia’s public 
universities. 
Gauges the emphasis of programming 
paradigm in CS/IT curriculum in 
university. 
 Identify materials used as the teaching 
aids to assist students in understanding 
the programming courses. 
Examine teaching methods in teaching 
programming languages based on the 
seven most widespread programming 
language teaching methods  
• Statement-oriented,  
• Using as a tool,  
• Software technology-oriented,  
• Task-type oriented, Language-oriented,  
• Action-oriented,  
• Sample task-based  
(by P.V Zsuzsanna, S. Peter, Z. Laszlo. ICT teaching methods – Programming languages) 
 Investigate the current approach of 
programming skills assessment based on 
three common forms of performance-
based assessment  
• Take-home programming assignments,  
• Examinations, and  
• Charettes 
(by Michael McCracken, Vicki Almstrum, Danny Diaz, Mark Guzdial, Dianne Hagan, 
Yifat Ben-David Kolikant, Cary Laxer, Lynda Thomas, Ian Utting, Tadeusz Wilusz. A 
multi-national, multi-institutional study of assessment of programming skills of first-year 
CS students) 
 
Some of the common teaching aids are 
text book, teacher’s guide (or teaching 
manual), case study, exercises and 
solutions, and powerpoint presentations. 
(by Carver J., Van Voorhis J., Basili V. (2004). Understanding the Impact of Assumptions on 
Experimental Validity, Proceedings of the Third ACM-IEEE International symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE)) 
 
The most widespread programming 
language teaching methods are 
Statement-oriented, Using as a tool, 
Software technology-oriented, Task type-
oriented, Language-oriented, Action-
oriented, and Sample task-based.  
(by Papp-Varga Z.,Szlavi P., Zsako L. (2008). ICT Teaching methods – Programming languages. 
Article in Annales Mathemeticae et Informaticae. No. 35 pp 163-172) 
 
 
There are two categories of assessment 
frequently used in the computing 
courses; which are objective testing and 
performance-based performance. 
 (by Henrichsen L., Smith M.T., Baker D.S. (1997). Research Methods in TESL and Language 
Acquisition) 
The objective testing touches on the 
multiple-choice questions which provide 
a cost-effective means for determining 
student knowledge about areas such as 
language syntax or program behavior.  
 It can provide instant feedback. 
Can be used for formative and summative 
assessment.  
 It cannot directly test on the students’ 
abilities in creating working computer 
programs. 
Meanwhile, in the performance-based 
assessment, students are assessed for 
their ability to create programs which 
include the criteria of fairness, ability to 
generalize, cognitive complexity, content 
quality (depth) and coverage (breadth), 
meaningfulness, and cost. 
The three common forms of 
performance-based assessment 
instruments are take-home 
programming assignments, 
examinations (short answer), and 
charettes (short assignments). 
 In completing this survey, it was divided 
into three phases which are Data 
Collection, Data analysis, and Results 
and Findings. 
Formulate survey 
Determine mode of collecting data 
Determine sampling plan 
Develop questionnaire questions. 
Execute survey 
Subjects 
programming lecturers from 19 public 
universities in Malaysia : 
UITM, IIUM, UM, UPM, UKM, UTM, USM, 
UUM, UPNM, UTeM, UMP, USIM, UPSI, 
UTHM, UniSZA, UMT, UniMAP, UNIMAS 
and UMS. 
 Instruments and treatments 
Questionnaire.  
A questionnaire is useful to be used in a 
survey as it is a method of elicitation and 
collecting of information. 
(by Khamis N., Idris S. (2007). Investigating current object-oriented programming assessment 
method in Malaysia’s universities. Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Electrical Engineering and Informatics. Institut Teknologi Bandung, Indonesia, pp 666-
668. June 17-19, 2007. ISBN 978-979-16338-0-2) 
 Instruments and treatments 
The questionnaire has been divided into 
3 parts.  
• First part : consists of lecturers’ profiles that 
teach programming courses.  
• Second and Third parts: cover the 
programming languages, programming 
paradigms and programming courses taught in 
the University, teaching aids and the 3 common 
programming skills assessment as well as the 7 
teaching programming methods. 
Survey Procedure 
Permission letter to Dean were sent. 
Survey invitation to programming 
lecturers thru email (link to online 
questionnaire was provided in the email). 
The questionnaire was distributed to 
19 public universities in Malaysia. 
Edit and process the data 
Analyze the data 
 
Data Analysis 
All information from the questionnaires was 
extracting into data.  
The results were presented in a tabular 
way.  
The results were split into 5 groups (groups 
of survey) which are the survey on 
programming languages taught in each 
university, the results of programming 
paradigms emphasis, teaching aids, 
teaching methods and programming course 
assessment types. 
Data Analysis 
Descriptive statistics were used to 
characterize the data collected in this 
survey and the commonly used descriptive 
statistics are mean, mode, standard 
deviation, and frequency. 
Together with simple graphics analysis, they 
form the basis of virtually every quantitative 
analysis of data.  
Descriptive statistics are simply describing 
what is and what the data shows. 
Data Analysis 
 Inferential statistics investigate questions, 
models and hypotheses. 
 Inferential statistics are used to infer from 
the sample data what the population thinks.  
 It is also used to make judgments of the 
probability that an observed difference 
between groups is a dependable one or one 
that might have happened by chance in this 
study.  
Conclude the data produced from 
statistic results 
Thus, inferential statistics was used to 
make inferences from the data to more 
general conditions; meanwhile 
descriptive statistics simply to describe 
what's going on in the data. 
 
Total of 19 public universities in 
Malaysia were participated in this 
survey.  
The participation came from 51 
respondents. 
The programming lecturers have 2 to 20 
years teaching experience and have 1 
to 20 years experience in teaching 
programming.  
They have taught 1 to 3 programming 
courses throughout their services in the 
public universities. 
 Programming language and Programming 
Paradigms 
 C, C++, Java and PHP are the most 
commonly used languages in delivering 
programming knowledge and skills in 
Malaysia’s public universities.  
 Therefore, it is concluded that 
imperative paradigm and object-
oriented paradigm are the paradigms 
emphasized by public universities with 
the central tendency of mean: 17.6, mod: 
27, and median: 21 responses. 
 Nevertheless, Visual Basic, Pascal, Prolog 
and other languages such as Haskell, 
FORTRAN, JavaScript, HTML, CSS, ASP, 
JSP and COBOL are also being taught in 
the public universities. 
 
 
 Teaching aids 
 Most of the lecturers are using 
PowerPoint presentations as 
the teaching aids (94.1%) 
followed by Exercises and 
Solutions (92.2%).  
 Referring textbook is also an 
important learning process in 
programming by contributing 
90.2% through the survey (with 
Mean=39.8 and 46 for the 
median value). 
Teaching methods 
Sample-Task Based is the most 
frequently used method in Malaysia’s 
public universities which give more 
understanding to students about 
programming. 
 Programming assessment types 
 Exam (short-answer questions) is 
the most popular programming 
assessment which carry 98% from the 
survey (N=3, Mean=44.3, Median=42, 
Standard Deviation=4.933, 
Variance=24.335, Range=9) 
 There are universities which use 
online contest  and skill-based exam.  
 Students are also being assessed 
through Group Programming Project as 
well as Development-based Project 
which are used by a few universities in 
Malaysia. 
 
Most of the programming lecturers in 
Malaysia’s public universities have taught 
the same programming languages such 
as C, C++, Java and PHP. It shows the 
important of these languages in the IT 
industry which beneficial to students 
after graduated. 
 
 Imperative paradigm is still being used 
by most universities in teaching 
programming, even the Object-oriented 
approach is the most popular and its 
paradigm meets the demands for a 
modern education.  
 
Textbooks, exercises and solutions as well 
as power point slides are the common 
teaching aids in delivering programming 
knowledge and skills in class.  
Textbooks provide students with several 
advantages such as a balanced 
chronological presentation of info but 
lecturers could not over-rely on them due to 
outdated or insufficient topics covered in 
the book and they need to consider other 
materials to be used.  
 
To assess students understanding and 
performance in programming, it is still 
dominated by Exam (Short answer 
questions) and Take-home assignments.  
There are other methods being introduced 
and used by universities such as online 
contest but it still needs to be considered if 
the questions are not updated or being 
changed for a few years and at the end will 
affect the whole process of assessment. 
 
The programming language teaching 
method which is the Task-type oriented 
is the method which can give more 
understanding to students on how 
programs are built and due to the needs 
in the process of problem solving. 
 
Thank you. 

