Journal of Software Engineering and Applications, 2013, 6, 33-36 
doi:10.4236/jsea.2013.63b008 Published Online March 2013 (http://www.scirp.org/journal/jsea) 
Copyright © 2013 SciRes.                                                                                 JSEA 
33
Selection and Research for Online Registration System’s 
Database System 
Yabing Chen1, Haiyong You2 
 
1Department of mechanical and electrical engineering, Yantai Engineering & Technology College, Yantai, China; 2Electrified educa-
tion centre, Yantai Engineering & Technology College, Yantai, China. 
 
Received 2013 
ABSTRACT 
Based on the Online Registration System (ORS) characteristics and key technology analysis, this paper points out that 
that a good performance and high stability of the ORS lies in the choice of the system database. Database clustering 
technology which has merits such as concurrent processing, easy expansion, and high security is proposed to achieve 
database subsystem of ORS, and the design of the database cluster system framework is available in this paper. Finally, 
we also explore the database load balancing of the cluster system, heterogeneous database replication technology. 
 
Keywords: Online Registration System; Database System; Database Cluster System; Load Balancing 
1. Introduction 
With the rapid development of modern information 
technology, the internet characterized with convenient, 
fast, as well as rich information becomes ubiquitous in 
most cities and even countryside. Furthermore it is also 
run widely in various educational resources including the 
common entrance examination, examination of the adult, 
independent recruitment examination institutions at all 
levels, even distance education as well. As the most fo-
cused interface of the network education, the online reg-
istration technology has been developed rapidly. 
Project of Online Registration System (ORS) research 
and development was audited by the Shandong Provin-
cial Planning Leading Group of the Education & Science 
in May 2011. The choice of database system, one of top-
ics in the project is fully researched in this paper. 
2. The Characteristics and Key Technologies 
of ORS 
In my studies the main framework adopts three B/S lay-
ers which are browsers and negligible size of main-
tainance base installed by clients, the Web server kept in 
the middle layer to probe the client's requests, as well the 
underlying database which is visited by the web server. 
Unique features of online registration technology 
mainly focus on below points. 
1) The data access period converged relatively. In 
usual, simple work just to do the routine maintenance 
because of seldom accesses by user. Nevertheless during 
the examination stage, amount of database access will 
surge abruptly, not only by administrators to frequently 
maintenance but by users to access. 
2) The lethal factor of data security. Once the informa-
tion leakage occurs, it is not only the personal informa-
tion leakage problems, but even affect the entire test 
process. The risk of large-scale examination security is 
increased proportionally. 
3) Data types which are mainly text data and a few of 
date or figures type that supports candidates photos are 
relatively simple. However, the surged candidates take 
vast volume data for their private information storage. 
In the ORS technology, data processing is consisted 
with several complicated working processes. One of 
them, the data response speed is the key technical point. 
Therefore, capability of soon data response depends on 
the high reliability and fast response ability of database 
in the whole project. 
In light of the above analysis, the ideal state for the 
ORS technology should meet the flexible requirement 
that the usage of the database system should occupy less 
hardware resources as possible in usual while be able to 
facilitate expansion, integrated the necessary hardware 
and software resources to meet the spurt of the great ac-
cess demand. Ideally, the structure of ORS is shown in 
Figure 1. 
3. Technical Requirements Towards the 
Database by ORS 
To meet the requirements of surge accesses and tight 
security towards users signed in information, the data-
base of the ORS should adopt the following strategies: 
Selection and Research for Online Registration System’s Database System 
Copyright © 2013 SciRes.                                                                                 JSEA 
34 
 
Figure 1. The favorable structure of ORS. 
 
1) The huge data storage, processing, processing ca-
pacity 
2) The ideal response time for user requests 
3) The stability and robustness towards physical data-
base running 
4) The facility of the database itself 
5) The security of the data confidentiality. 
For most stylish database system, desirable services 
are available towards above stability and robustness. And 
most of databases have not addressed the security audit 
data analysis tools, in order to improve and perfect the 
current databases security audit mechanism, we can use 
data mining technology, data mining technology to the 
database security audit, the characteristics of database 
records for analysis. 
But on the view of strategies huge data processing and 
response time for user requests, efforts to improve possi-
bility of efficient database system usage by users are 
never suspended as well. In fact, the strategies huge data 
processing and response time for user requests require 
not only a database management system (DBMS) single 
effort but perplexing factors including a database system 
hardware configuration, Web connected and so on. Con-
sistent with the needs of huge data processing and re-
sponse time for user requests, it is conventional argued to 
improve the capability of database server and storage 
volume, adjust the DBMS parameters and other means 
while database system selection and preparation. How-
ever the factual effect is controversial because of the 
wasted cost of mainframe and limited improvement of 
overall performance of the database system. Paralleled or 
distributed database systems are evolutionary methods. 
Paralleled database systems with high availability and 
scalability focus on parallel data processing capability [1] 
and emphasize one single database system that each of its 
node does not have autonomy so much so flexibility is 
constrained [2]. Distributed database systems emphasize 
the centralized control for the system. It is characterized 
with the distribution of data and database coordination, 
as well it aims to realize the autonomous site and data 
sharing globally and transparently without requiring the 
usage of every node in the network to improve system 
performance [3]. Therefore, we prefer to use a database 
cluster system to meet the online application system for 
database system requirements. 
4. The Choice of Database Cluster System 
As far as the single database system selection, it is key to 
choose the proper DBMS which is selective from rich 
and varied candidates on current IT market. Mainstream 
DBMS products include DB2, Oracle, Microsoft SQL 
Server, Sybase SQLServer, Informix and MySQL which 
have their respective features and advantages. However, 
to the database designers, it seems obsolete DBMS 
products on project schedule until the operation funds 
and other preparations are available sometimes no matter 
how latest he chooses. Theoretically speaking, it is valid 
to use database cluster system to effectively alleviate the 
suffering mentioned and deal with more and more com-
plex demanding for database system nowadays. Database 
cluster system refers a group of database server as one 
whole to manage through the network so that they can 
work coordinately to supply services for users, which can 
be heterogeneous. The cluster system has few limitation 
for the server operating system and all database servers 
are mutually independent to perform a given user request 
by itself, at the same time it is available to replicate data 
for backup, recover data and other functions in the group. 
When there are concurrent requests arrive, it can be in-
visibly for user to choose one certain database server 
node to process requests [4-5]. On the basis of the char-
acteristics of ORS, one framework is proposed to use a 
database cluster system as shown in Figure 2 which can  
 
 
Figure 2. database cluster system framework. 
Selection and Research for Online Registration System’s Database System 
Copyright © 2013 SciRes.                                                                                 JSEA 
35
conceive the volume of access in ORS to adjust on data-
base cluster. It is negligible effect on other databases 
when a single database is adjusted, as well the storage 
area can be used as public data center. 
For the database cluster system, features of reliability, 
high availability and high extensibility are quite suitable 
for ORS. Meanwhile there are some issues such as the 
load balancing, heterogeneous database replication, 
transparent access and database cluster technology which 
should be fixed in the practical application. The weighted 
least connection method is adopted in the processing of 
load balance which administrator assigns corresponding 
weight value for each node based on the database server 
nodes (hereinafter referred to as the node) performance 
because the value is representative of its processing per-
formance and default is 1. So when a connection request 
arrives, the higher priority will assign to the nodes ac-
cording to their weight value. That is to say, higher value 
node will get more links. After a while, it is possible that 
the link number of nodes assigned to becomes propor-
tional to nodes weight value [6-7]. Based on this thought, 
the database administrator can consider total quantity 
value node according to the results by formula (1). 
SN=W×B                (1) 
In the formula, SN means the maximum number of 
links that a node will receive. W means weight values, 
and B means average minimum number of links by each 
node. The W is valued by the hardware and software 
performance of database server node, while B is com-
posed of number of database cluster head nodes and in-
stant total visit volume. When the SN is beyond or close 
to the node DBMS tolerance value, it means cluster node 
number is too small and need to increase the database 
server nodes, whereas the SN is too low, means database 
node surplus and it is better to reduce the node properly. 
On the side of heterogeneous database replication, 
most major database vendors provide exuberant schemes, 
such as Oracle converter, Sybase LTM solution, IBM 
CCD solutions, as well as the Microsoft Publisher / sub-
scriber scheme [8]. One unified data interface is pro-
posed in paper [9] for heterogeneous databases. It is also 
one kind of anticipated scheme to solve the data replica-
tion problem through the JDBC and XML. 
It works on middleware form to fix the issue of access 
the database cluster transparently [10-11]. Middleware is 
the best option for the communication protocol of data-
base cluster standardization and modularization. Mid-
dleware also can provide mechanism to solve heteroge-
neous problems among database cluster system. 
5. Summary 
In this paper, the analysis contents focus on the ORS 
basic structure and work characteristics, and then some 
research on the database system proceeded. According to 
the study, it is lethal factor of the whole application sys-
tem under the circumstance of surge access during the 
register period. Because it is hard to meet needs of the 
performance of the database with conventional methods 
including purely raising the performance of database 
hardware, modifying the DBMS parameters and using 
connection pool technology, this paper puts forward one 
database cluster system with favorable concurrency, 
flexible expansion and high-security based on the 
framework of database system. What’s more, researches 
also proceed in designing of the database cluster system 
framework, and issues of load balancing, data replica-
tion. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.Buyya, T.Cortes, H.Jin. Single System Image (SSI). 
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, 
2001,15(2):124~135 
[2] Gong Weihua. Study on the key issues of database cluster 
system[D]. Huazhong University of Science and Tech-
nology，2006. 
[3] Li Chongxin. Design and implementation snapshot for 
distributed database HBase[D]. Zhejiang Un1versity, 
2011. 
[4] Murthy, V.K. High performance cluster computing using 
component-oriented distributed systems[C].1st Interna-
tional Conference on e-Science and Grid Computing，
Melbourne，   Australia: First International Conference 
on e-Science and Grid Computing，e-Science 2005，
2005:522~529. 
[5] Z Shao, H.Jin.HARTS. High availability cluster architec-
ture with redundant TCP stacks[C].IEEE Initernational 
Performanee, Computing and Communications Confer-
ence，Phoenix，AZ, United states: Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2003:28~29. 
[6] Keong Loh Peter Kok, Hsu Wen Jing, Wentong Cai. How 
network topology affects dynamic load balancing[J]. 
IEEE Parallel and Distributed Technology, 1996, 
4(3):25~35. 
[7] Zhu Xiongfeng. Research and analysis on database cluster 
middleware MySQL proxy[D]. Wuhan University, 2011. 
[8] Gai J Y，Zhang Z N，Xiao H． Data replication technique 
analysis and application in distributed database system [J]. 
Computer Applications and Software，2005，22( 7) : 
36-38，41( in Chinese) ． 
[9] Zhang D P，Chen C，Xu Z． Research and implemen-
tation of heterogeneous database replication technology 
[J]. Journal of Graduate University of Chinese Academy 
of Sicences，2012，29( 1) : 101-108． 
[10] C.L.Pape, S.Gancarski, P.Valduriez. Refresco: Improving 
query performance through freshness control in a data-
base cluster. in: Proceeding of On the Move to Meaning-
ful Internet Systems 2004:CoopIS, DOA and ODBASE, 
Agia Napa Cyprus.Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2004, (1): 
Selection and Research for Online Registration System’s Database System 
Copyright © 2013 SciRes.                                                                                 JSEA 
36 
174~193 
[11] S.Narayanan, U.Catalyurek, T.Kurc et al. Applying data-
base support for large scale data driven science in distrib-
uted environments. in: Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Workshop on Grid Computing.Los Alamitos:IEEE 
Compurter Society,2003.141~148 
 
 

