2012
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was written by Hania Farhan of the Web Foundation, and Debra D’Agostino and 
Henry Worthington of Oxford Economics.
The Web Index benefited from the help and advice of many people, and involved a rigorous 
process of collecting and analyzing data across a large number of indicators and countries, 
as well as consulting leading experts in various fields including Web and computer science, 
economics, education, health, statistics, communications, and the law. 
Oxford Economics was contracted to assist with the production of the Index, and played a 
central role given their vast expertise in econometrics work.  
Global Integrity set up and implemented the Expert Assessment survey via their Indaba 
platform, and their contribution to the project was essential. Special thanks go to Nathaniel 
Heller and Monika Shepard for their support.
Two consultative bodies provided valuable advice during the constructing of the Web Index: the 
Web Index Steering Group and the Web Index Science Council. The Steering Group members 
are: Tim Berners-Lee, Jeff Jaffe, Thomas Roessler, Wendy Seltzer, Nigel Shadbolt and Daniel 
Stauffacher. The Science Council members are: Robert Ackland, Paola Annoni, Stephane 
Boyera, Steve Bratt, Kilnam Chon, Eszter Hargittai, William Lehr, Nii Quaynor, Taylor Reynolds, 
Hans Rosling, Ola Rosling, George Sadowsky, and Piotr Strysczowski. We are grateful for their 
generous contribution of their time and expertise (please refer to the Web Foundation - Web 
Index Website for more details on the Steering Group and Science Council).
We owe a particular debt to the European Commission - Joint Research Centre, Unit of 
Econometrics and Applied Statistics-Ispra – IT. Their contribution in the area of methodological 
and statistical analysis has been of immense value to the project.  
The following institutions have very generously allowed us to use and re-publish their data, and 
for that we are grateful: Ethnologue, Freedom House, International Energy Agency, Reporters 
Without Borders, The UN, The ITU, Wikimedia Foundation, The CIA Factbook, The World Bank, 
The World Economic Forum. 
For more details on the individual indicators used from each data provider, please refer to the 
data provider’s Website and the Web Foundation’s Website: www.webfoundation.org   
We also benefited from the strong support of patient and efficient production partners:  Global 
Integrity, Iconomical, Oxford Economics, Portland Communications, WESO (Jose María Alvarez 
Rodríguez and Jose E. Labra , Departamento de Informática Edificio Facultad de Ciencias,  
Universidad de Oviedo, OVIEDO, Spain)  and Zonda Design. 
Hania Farhan led the Index, with able support from Jules Clement, Justin Edwards, Sofia 
Latif, and the rest of the Web Foundation team. Rosemary Leith, Jonathan Fildes, Andrew 
Williamson, UN Women, and Craig Gallen provided valuable assistance to the project at 
different levels and in various stages. Steve Bratt provided essential and critical input throughout 
the project, and special thanks are due to the large number of experts and professionals who 
assisted us with the Expert Assessment survey. 
Finally, particular thanks must go to Google for seed funding the development and production of 
the first Web Index. 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 2
INTRODUCTION
Since its invention by Sir Tim Berners-Lee in 1989, and its subsequent explosive growth, the 
World Wide Web (the Web) has had a profound impact on humanity. This impact is evolving 
continuously with the creation of new content, connectivity software and infrastructure. Although 
the Web has been an important catalyst of social, political and economic change over the 
past two decades, its impact—both negative and positive—has been unevenly felt both within 
and across countries. Moreover, there is relatively little public debate on the reasons why 
some countries have moved faster and more effectively than others to harness the Web as an 
accelerator of development.
To begin to address this gap, we have created an Index that combines existing secondary data 
with new primary data to rank countries according to their progress and use of the Web. The 
Index is both an analytical tool for researchers and a resource for policy makers in various 
sectors, including the public sector, private sector, and NGOs. 
We hope that the Index will help deepen and broaden our understanding of the impact of this 
most powerful tool on humanity. There is full transparency in the construction of the Index: the 
data and methodology used to produce it are published openly and could be used by others to 
undertake their own research1. 
1 The use and re-publication of the raw data that we use to compute the Index is subject to the licensing rules and 
stipulations that each data provider demands. Please refer to the Website of each data provider listed on page 5 
below for details.
2012
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 3
DESIGN AND STRUCTURE OF THE WEB INDEX
The design of the Web Index is relatively intuitive. To obtain value from the Web, we need a 
base of infrastructure to access it, over which content is laid, from which social, economic and 
political value is derived.
Therefore, as a composite measure, the overall Web Index score consists of three sub-Index 
scores:
  
1. Sub-Index 1: Communications and Institutional 
Infrastructure scores
2. Sub-Index 2: Web Content and Web use scores
3. Sub-index 3: Political, economic and Social Impact 
scores 
Each sub-Index score is computed from a set of underlying indicators, which are grouped into 
components for ease of analysis. 
However, although the design is fairly straightforward, it is not a one-way “causality stream,” 
because—to an extent—the layers feed backwards into each other. That is to say, there 
is value in the “Infrastructure” and “Content” in themselves, not just as conduits for the top 
layer of social, economic and political value and impact. For example, while more and better 
infrastructure could/should allow for more content and access, an explosion in content could 
lead to more investment in infrastructure. Also, the derivation of a particular value (such as 
social use) could drive a rapid growth in content. 
Moreover, the relationships between the sub-Indexes are not necessarily proportional. One 
country might have less developed infrastructure than another, but may derive far greater value 
from that lower level of infrastructure than a country with more developed infrastructure. 
In fact, there appears to be a “threshold” in infrastructure or access levels, above which 
disproportionately higher value could be derived from the Web. More impact and utility could be 
derived from relatively less developed infrastructure, as exemplified most clearly by the recent 
events in North Africa, where only around 40% of the population uses the Web, but the impact 
of the Web as a tool for political change is arguably greater than in many countries where more 
than 70% of people use the Web. This (the Web use—or access—“threshold” effect) is an area 
of interest in which we hope to see much more research, as it could enhance our understanding 
of how future change—facilitated by the Web—might develop in different contexts and 
environments.  
Finally, while the Index structure (at the sub-index level) should not change from year to year, it 
is open to refinements, particularly at the indicator level. The Index is therefore “alive” and open 
to the inclusion of new and better data as they become available, with the aim of becoming 
more accurate in capturing each dimension over time. This is especially important given the 
fast-changing environment of the Web.
Sub-index 2:
Web Use and Web Content - the Web
Sub-index 1:
Communications and Institutional Infrastructure
 
 
 
Sub-
index 3:
Political, 
Economic, and 
Social/Developmental 
Impact
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 4
METHODOLOGY
The Web Index is a composite measure that summarizes in a single (average) number the 
impact and value derived from the Web in various countries. There are serious challenges when 
attempting to measure and quantify some of the dimensions the Index covers (e.g. the social 
and political), and suitable proxies are used instead. 
Also, as the Web Index covers a large number of countries, some of which have serious data 
deficiencies or were not covered by the data providers, we needed to impute the missing 
data. We worked with eminent experts in the relevant fields to overcome these challenges and 
produce a robust and rigorous Index (see Acknowledgements, page 1).
Two types of data were used in the construction of the Index: existing data from other data 
providers (“secondary data”), and new data gathered via a multi-country questionnaire (“primary 
data”) that was specifically designed by the Web Foundation and its advisers. These primary 
data will begin to fill in some of the gaps in measurement of the utility and impact of the Web in 
various countries. Indeed, the data gaps in this field are significant, and we aim to expand those 
questionnaires in future editions of the Index, both in terms of the questions/indicators gathered 
and the number of countries covered by the Index. 
The questionnaire used to collect the primary data was scored by various professionals - or 
experts - in various fields in each country, and the scores were checked and verified by a 
number of peer and regional reviewers for each country. Appendix III includes the Executive 
Summary from a technical report independently written by the European Commission - Joint 
Research Centre, Unit of Econometrics and Applied Statistics-Ispra, assessing the robustness 
of the Index using Rasch analysis and Uncertainty analysis. The report concludes that the Web 
Index  “proved to be robust and consistent”, and that “Overall, despite its multifaceted structure, 
the wide coverage of different countries and the fact that it includes both survey and hard data, 
from a statistical point of view, the Index is robust”.   
The nature of such expert assessment surveys is that they could only be scored for the recent 
year in question (2011 for our purposes). Therefore, given that the Index covers the period 
2007-2011 for secondary data, the historical time-series Web Indexes computed for the five 
years 2007-2011 are not strictly comparable to the “headline” 2011 Index we have focused on 
and are discussing in the bulk of this paper. There is a separate section below that focuses only 
on the time-series Index, and the headline 2011 Index contains both primary and secondary 
data, whereas the 2007-2011 time-series Indexes contain only secondary data. 
As a result, while the time-series comparisons—the trends over time of the Web Index—are 
important and produce very interesting results, they should be done with caution and should not 
be compared to the headline 2011 Index. The former consist of 34 underlying indicators each, 
compared to 85 underlying Indicators in the headline 2011 index (51 of which are from primary 
data and 34 indicators are from secondary data sources). The full list of indicators and countries 
covered can be found in Appendix I.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 5
SOURCES OF SECONDARY DATA
The sources of the secondary data that we use are highly credible organizations that produce 
consistent and valuable data in various fields. We are grateful to those organizations for 
allowing us to use and reproduce their data. Specifically, those are (alphabetically):
1. Ethnologue http://www.ethnologue.com/show_country.asp
2. Freedom House http://www.freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world-aggregate-and-
subcategory-scores
3. International Energy Agency http://www.iea.org/weo/electricity.asp
4. Reporters without Borders http://en.rsf.org/press-freedom-index-2010,1034.html
5. The UN/ITU http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/world/world.html and  http://unstats.
un.org/unsd/demographic/products/socind/education.htm
6. Wikimedia Foundation-Wikipedia   http://stats.wikimedia.org/EN/TablesArticlesTotal.htm 
7. The CIA factbook https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/
8. The World Bank http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.SECR.P6
9. The World Economic Forum (WEF) http://www.weforum.org/reports
10. For more details on the individual indicators used from each data provider, please refer to 
the data provider’s Website and the Web Foundation’s Website: www.webfoundation.org/
Webindex
INDICATOR INCLUSION CRITERIA
Before an indicator is included in the Index, it needs to fulfill five basic criteria:
1. Data providers have to be credible and reliable organizations (e.g., theirs is not a one-off 
dataset being published), and likely to continue to produce these data.
2. Data releases should be regular, with new data released at least every 3 years.
3. There should be at least two data years for each indicator, so that basic statistical 
inference could be made.
4. The latest data year should be no older than three years back from publication year. For 
example, if the first Index is published in 2012, data must be available for 2009 and before. 
Ideally, we would like the data to be available up to 2011, but the worst we would accept is 
2009.
5. The data source should cover at least two-thirds of the sample of countries, so that 
possible bias—introduced by having a large number of indicators from one source that 
systematically does not cover one-third or more of the countries—is reduced.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 6
Some of the critical issues that we would have liked to address in more depth include Internet 
freedom, controls on the Web, and privacy and freedom of expression online. However, 
although there are some organizations that provide some data on these topics (such as 
Reporters Without Borders, the Global Network Initiative and Freedom House) data is often 
qualitative and country coverage is limited. Given how important this issue is, we are hoping to 
be able to work with such organizations to expand country coverage and develop valuable data 
that will be useful for a variety of research projects, including the Index. We will also include 
more indicators on those subjects in the 2013 Web Index expert assessment questionnaire.
We are also looking to develop more indicators on the potential negative impacts of the Web  
on society.
INDEX COMPUTATION
There are several steps in the process of constructing a composite Index. Some of those 
involve deciding which statistical method to use in the normalization and aggregation processes. 
In arriving at that decision, we took into account several factors, including the purpose of the 
Index, the number of dimensions we were aggregating, and the ease of disseminating and 
communicating it, in an understandable, replicable, and transparent way. 
The following 10 steps summarize the computation process of the Index:
1. Take the data for each indicator from the data source for the 61 countries covered by the 
Index for the 2007-2011 time period. 
2. Impute missing data for every (secondary) indicator for the sample of 61 countries over the 
period 2007-2011. Some indicators were not imputed as it did not make sense (logically) 
to do so. Those are noted in the Index file on the Website (www.Webfoundation.org/
Webindex) 
 
Broadly, the imputation of missing data was done using two methods: country-mean 
substitution if the missing number is in the middle year (e.g. have 2008 and 2010 but not 
2009), and taking geometric average growth rates on a year-by-year basis (so: calculate 
the growth rate year-on-year, and then take the geometric average). 
 
Most missing data for 2011 are imputed by applying the (geometric) average growth rate 
for the period, to the 2010 number (some data sources have not yet provided 2011 data 
for the selected indicators). For the indicators that did not cover a particular country in any 
of the years, no imputation was done for that country/indicator. 
 
None of the primary data indicators were imputed. Hence the 2011 Index is very different 
from the Indexes computed using secondary data only.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 7
3. Normalize the full (imputed) dataset using z-scores, making sure that for all indicators, 
a high value is “good” and a low value is “bad”. For example, for the Freedom House 
indicators (raw data), a low score is good and a high score is bad. This was inversed after 
normalization so that it is consistent with all the other values in the Index where a high 
score is always good and a low score is always bad. 
4. Cluster some of the variables (as per the scheme in the tree diagram), taking the average 
of the clustered indicators post normalization. For the clustered indicators, this clustered 
value is the one to be used in the computation of the Index components. 
5. Compute the 7 component scores using arithmetic means, using the clustered values 
where relevant.
6. Compute the min-max values for each z-score value of the components, as this is what will 
be shown in the visualization tool and other publications containing the component values 
(generally, it is easier to understand a min-max number in the range of 0 - 100 rather than 
a standard deviation number). The formula for this is : [(x - min)/(max - min)]*100 .
7. Compute sub-Index scores by averaging the z-scores of the relevant components for 
each sub-Index, but applying the relevant weights as found in the “Reference Weighting 
Scheme” page of the Index file (and below). This is done by multiplying the assigned 
weight by the z-score value of the component.
8. Compute the min-max values for each z-score value of the sub-Indexes, as this is what 
will be shown in the visualization tool and other publications containing the Sub-index 
values. 
9. Compute overall composite scores using the weighted average of the sub-Indexes.  The 
weights are found in the “Reference Weighting Scheme” page (and below). This is done by 
multiplying the assigned weight by the z-score value of the sub-index)]
10. Compute the min-max values (on a scale of 0-100) for each z-score value of the overall 
composite scores, as this is what will be shown in the visualization tool and other 
publications containing the composite scores.
CHOICE OF WEIGHTS
For simplicity, we could have chosen to apply equal weights throughout the Index structure. 
However, after much consideration, and bearing in mind the values and beliefs of the Board and 
founders of the World Wide Web Foundation, we decided to give extra weight to the component 
that includes indicators on Web openness and censorship—“Institutional Infrastructure”—and to 
the “Impact” sub-Index. This decision reflects the Foundation’s belief in openness and freedom 
of expression, as well as the important role that the Web could play in delivering services to 
citizens in both developing and developed economies. Please see the full weighting scheme in 
Appendix II.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 8
COMPOSITE OVERVIEW
The World Wide Web has 
seen explosive growth since its 
invention in 1989. With more than 
a trillion estimated public pages 
and roughly 3.4 billion users, the 
Web is no longer merely a place 
to seek content and information, 
but to actively connect with friends 
and peers, debate globally critical 
issues, collaborate and conduct 
business, and even create 
breakthrough innovations. And 
with the rapid global adoption of 
smart phones, tablets and other 
devices that are less expensive than traditional computers and laptops, the World Wide Web is 
increasingly accessible to an ever-growing population.
However, despite the increasing ease of access, more than 60% of the world’s population do 
not have access to the Web, and are therefore excluded from directly benefiting from it. The 
endeavor to increase access to all people is one of the most important challenges facing policy-
makers everywhere who hope to make use of this powerful tool.   
We believe that if access to the Web increases dramatically, there will be significant social 
development and greater political representation among the billions of people who currently 
have no voice. This year’s Index aims to establish a baseline to help policy-makers, international 
organizations, NGO’s, investors and interested stakeholders identify some of the areas where 
investment in the Web could yield substantial positive impacts.  
THE GLOBAL TOP 10
1. Sweden
Of all 61 countries, Sweden takes top place 
in this year’s ranking, with high marks across   
the three sub-indexes. But some of its scores 
are surprising: Sweden tops the list for overall 
impact of the web (the most heavily weighted 
sub-index), taking first place for political, second 
place for social and third place for Economic 
Impact. And it is second highest on the global 
list in terms of Readiness, scoring third for 
Communications Infrastructure and fifth for 
Institutional Infrastructure. Yet in terms of the 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Sweden
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 9
use and breadth of the web, Sweden has definite room for improvement, taking the twelfth spot 
on the list overall. Why is this the case? According to our data, while roughly 91% of Sweden’s 
population uses the web, the information available to them is surprisingly low compared with 
other top-ranking nations.
2. United States
The United States comes in second overall on 
our list, with somewhat lower ranks for social, 
economic and Political Impacts compared 
with Sweden. It also ranks surprisingly lower 
in Communications Infrastructure. A few 
factors contribute to this: The US has a lower 
percentage of households with personal 
computers than a raft of countries, including 
Canada, Ireland, Japan and Norway. It also 
offers slower bandwidth per Internet user than 
a range of countries, most notably Iceland, 
Sweden and Singapore. The US does take 
the top spot for Institutional Infrastructure, for 
an overall Readiness ranking of fourth. It also 
takes first place globally for Web Content and 
Web use, receiving high marks for the quality 
and usefulness of government Websites to provide online information and services for its 
citizens, according to the Government Online Services Index published by the United Nations. 
3. United Kingdom
In third place is the United Kingdom, which 
ranks in the top nine countries globally for all 
components.  It ranks fourth out of 61 for overall 
impact, second for the Web (just behind the 
US) and sixth for Readiness, boasting a higher 
percentage of both mobile and broadband 
subscriptions than the US, a higher proportion 
of households with computers, and much 
faster average Internet speeds (166,073 Mbits/
Second, compared with just 47,174 Mbits/
Second in the US). The UK also gets slightly 
higher marks than the US for accessibility of 
content for all citizens. 
Of all the sub-components in the Index, the UK 
ranks highest overall for Web Content, with the 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
US
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
UK
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 10
second-highest rank (behind the US) globally. The strong performance in web content reflects 
high scores across both primary and secondary indicators. The scale and quality of available 
content has been boosted by various public sector initiatives, with the UK achieving a high score 
of 0.974 in the latest UN e-government online services index. 
4. Canada
Canada ranks fourth overall on this year’s list, 
and slightly outpaces the UK in terms of overall 
impact of the Web, primarily in terms of Social 
Impact, where it takes first place globally. The 
economic and Political Impacts of the Web are 
markedly lower in Canada—ICT service exports 
account for a much smaller share of GDP than 
in the UK, for example, and its e-participation 
index score is significantly lower than both the 
US and UK. 
In terms of Web use and content, Canada sits 
in third place overall, well ahead of Sweden. 
Still, both its communications and Institutional 
Infrastructure scores fall below the top 10—
Canadian citizens suffer from relatively slow 
Internet speeds (though still well ahead of the US) while mobile phone subscriptions per capita 
are also low by international standards —indicating important areas of focus for the future.
5. Finland
Ranking fifth is Finland, with ranks across the 
board in the top 10—fifth for impact, third for 
Readiness and eighth for the Web. Finland 
ranks particularly highly in terms of the Political 
Impact of the Web (4), Web Usage (3) and 
Institutional Infrastructure (3). 
The high quality of Finland’s communications 
and institutional infrastructure has facilitated 
widespread access to the Web for Finnish 
citizens. This manifests itself in one of the 
highest usage rates in the world—89% in 
2011—only bettered by Sweden, Norway and 
Iceland among other countries in the index. 
Meanwhile, our data indicates that available 
content has increased sharply in recent years. 
As a result, the socio-Economic Impacts have risen as well: According to the United Nations, the 
country’s e-participation index score, which measures the extent to which governments use the 
Web to provide information, interact with stakeholders and engage citizens in decision-making, 
has risen from 0.273 in 2007 to 0.737 in 2011—a dramatic increase.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Canada
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Finland
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 11
6. Switzerland
Switzerland ranks highest for the Economic 
Impact of the Web (2), Web Usage (2) and 
Communications Infrastructure (4). Yet some 
categories rank surprisingly lower, including 
social (15) and political (16) impacts, which 
leave Switzerland ranking 10th overall in the 
impact sub-index. For example, in contrast with 
Finland, Switzerland’s e-participation index 
score has seen a slight decline over the past 
five years, falling from 0.41 in 2007 to 0.34 in 
2011.  
7. New Zealand
New Zealand ranks high on our list, scoring 
eighth for impact, seventh for the Web and 
ninth for Readiness. The Social Impact of the 
Web is quite significant, with New Zealand 
ranking third globally for that component. It 
ranks considerably lower in terms Economic 
Impact (17), Communications Infrastructure 
(15) and Web Usage (11). For example, New 
Zealand’s average Internet speeds are among 
the slowest of all developed nations. However, 
New Zealand is making improvements in its use 
of the Web for commerce—according to survey 
data, the extent to which businesses use the 
Web has risen substantially over the past five 
years.  
8. Australia
Ranking seventh for overall impact, ninth for 
the Web and tenth for Readiness, Australia 
takes eighth place overall in this year’s ranking. 
Similar to New Zealand, it gets the highest 
marks for Social Impact (5) and lowest for 
Economic Impact (14). Its Readiness ranking 
is 10, with a broadly similar performance in 
terms of communications infrastructure (11) 
and institutional infrastructure (9). Although 
scoring fairly highly across most indicators, it is 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
New Zealand
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Australia
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Switzerland
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 12
noticeable that Australia lags behind leading European and North American economies in terms 
of core IT infrastructure, resulting in a lower rate of broadband penetration, slower bandwidth 
and so on. 
9. Norway
Norway ranks ninth overall on our global list, 
with the highest marks for Social Impact (4), 
Communications Infrastructure (5), and Web 
Usage (7). Norway is blessed with a fairly 
advanced IT infrastructure, with broadband 
penetration of 36.6%, amongst the highest 
in the world in 2011, and 94% of households 
having access to a personal computer, again 
a figure that compares favorably in a global 
context. This has helped to facilitate one of the 
highest usage rates of any country (in 2011 
94% of Norwegians used the Web, bettered 
only by Iceland). Yet it ranks much lower in 
terms of available Web Content (16). Its rank of 15th for Political Impact is also rather low; our 
data indicates that perceptions of the country’s use of ICT to improve government efficiency has 
declined slightly over the past five years, revealing important areas of concentration for future 
improvements.  
10. Ireland
Rounding out the top 10 is Ireland, ranking 
sixth for overall impact, tenth for the Web and 
eleventh for Readiness. Ireland outpaces all 
other countries in the Web Index in terms of the 
Web’s effects on its economy: Between 2007 
and 2010, ICT service exports accounted for 
14.8% of GDP —exponentially ahead of any 
other nation. Yet there is considerable room 
for improvement in other areas. The Political 
Impact of the Web (21) in Ireland is substantially 
lower than any of the countries in our top 10, 
ranking below nations including Chile, Colombia 
and Egypt. Ireland’ e-participation index score 
in 2011 was a lowly 0.132, implying significant scope for the Government to increase the extent 
to which it uses the Web to engage and interact with citizens. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Ireland
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Norway
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 13
Spotlight on: Japan
The world’s third largest economy ranks surprisingly low on our global list. In 20th place, Japan is outpaced 
overall by Chile, Spain and Portugal, among others. Japan’s highest marks are in Web Content (10), 
Social Impact (12) and Communications Infrastructure (14) and Economic Impact (16), yet the country 
receives substantially lower ranks for Political Impact (30th out of 61), Institutional Infrastructure (21st) 
and Web Usage (21st).  
Looking deeper into the data reveals some insights. In terms of Institutional Infrastructure, Japan’s tertiary 
enrolment rates are lower than 19 countries, including Chile, Portugal and Venezuela. And its school life 
expectancy is shorter than many countries—15.28 years compared with 18.79 for Ireland. Meanwhile, in 
terms of the Web’s economic impact, it is noticeable that while businesses adoption and use of the Web 
is high by international standards, the extent of consumer Web-based activity lags behind most other 
leading economies. Similarly, Web usage, at 79.5% in 2011, is relatively high in a global context is lower 
than in most other OECD countries. 
Additionally, when we look at Japan’s scores for Political Impact of the Web, we find some surprising 
points. For example, Japan ranks in the bottom half of all countries in terms of how its government uses 
ICT to improve efficiencies. Relatively little political campaigning appears to be done over the Web, and 
Web use for political mobilization also seems very low.
THE GLOBAL BOTTOM TEN
Of the countries that appear at 
the end of our ranking, seven 
are in Africa and two are in 
the Asia-Pacific region. These 
include Nepal, Cameroon, 
Mali, Bangladesh, Namibia, 
Ethiopia, Benin, Burkina Faso 
and Zimbabwe. The country that 
ranks lowest on the Web Index 
is Yemen, which underwent a 
political uprising last year as part 
of the Arab Spring. As a new 
constitution is rewritten in Yemen, steps are being taken to slowly improve available content on 
the Web.  
According to our research, these low-ranking countries suffer from a vicious cycle of poor 
infrastructure and high costs of access. Looking by region at the cost of broadband as a 
percentage of monthly GDP per capita reveals striking differences (see tables below). 
GLOBAL: 
TOP 10 OVERALL
1 – Sweden
2 – United States
3 – UK
4 – Canada
5 – Finland
6 – Switzerland
7 – New Zealand
8 – Australia
9 – Norway
10 – Ireland
BOTTOM 10 OVERALL
52 – Nepal
53 – Cameroon
54 – Mali
55 – Bangladesh
56 – Namibia
57 – Ethiopia
58 – Benin
59 – Burkina Faso
60 – Zimbabwe
61 – Yemen
REGIONAL OVERALL
AFRICA
Leads – Tunisia
Lags – Zimbabwe
AMERICAS
Leads– US
Lags – Ecuador
ASIA-PACIFIC
Leads – New Zealand
Lags – Bangladesh
EUROPE
Leads – Sweden
Lags – Russia
MIDDLE EAST/C ASIA
Leads – Israel
Lags – Yemen
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 14
Regional Cost of Web Access (Fixed Broadband monthly subscription as a % of GDP per capita)
Region 2008 2009 2010 2011
Africa Simple average 553.5 314.2 198.1 125.5
Population weighted 590.8 290.1 160.6 69.3
The Americas Simple average 10.2 8.1 7.0 4.9
Population weighted 4.9 3.7 2.9 2.2
Asia Pacific Simple average 55.0 44.1 34.7 29.5
Population weighted 13.9 11.9 7.7 6.4
Europe Simple average 2.3 2.1 1.7 1.7
Population weighted 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.3
The Middle East & 
Central Asia
Simple average 81.7 67.9 50.8 36.3
Population weighted 89.9 82.8 58.7 39.1
World Simple average 166.9 100.5 66.1 44.0
Population weighted 89.4 49.1 28.8 15.1
Source: ITU, IMF and Oxford Economics estimates
*Note: These figures refer to the average of all countries per region where data was available; not only the 61 
countries included in this year’s index. Estimates were made based on countries where data on the cost of broadband 
and population data was available (172 in total). Where data on web use was not available for all years, values 
were imputed using techniques described in the methodology section at the beginning of this paper. No estimate is 
provided due to lack of data.
As a result, it is of little surprise that the regions where Web access is costliest is where use is 
lowest. When weighted for population, Africa has the fewest Web users followed by Asia Pacific.
 
Regional Web Usage (% of Popluation)
Region 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Africa Simple average 5.5 7.2 8.6 10.3 11.8
Population weighted 6.0 8.7 12.2 13.7 15.6
The Americas Simple average 29.3 33.0 36.3 39.6 43.5
Population weighted 42.6 44.2 46.0 49.1 53.4
Asia Pacific Simple average 23.7 25.2 27.0 29.3 32.4
Population weighted 14.1 17.2 20.1 23.4 26.3
Europe Simple average 52.6 57.1 61.2 65.1 67.0
Population weighted 47.1 51.5 54.9 60.9 62.4
The Middle East & 
Central Asia
Simple average 18.9 23.9 29.3 35.6 44.1
Population weighted 11.4 13.9 17.2 21.3 27.2
World Simple average 25.5 28.6 31.5 34.7 37.9
Population weighted 20.8 23.7 26.6 29.9 32.8
Source: ITU, IMF and Oxford Economics estimates
*Note: These figures refer to the average of all countries per region where data was available; not only the 61 
countries included in this year’s index. Estimates were made based on countries where data on the cost of broadband 
and population data was available (188 in total). Where data on web use was not available for all years, values were 
imputed using techniques described in the methodology section at the beginning of this paper. 
Table 1.1: Summary of the cost of broadband by region
Table 1.2: Summary of Web usage by region
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 15
REGIONAL RANKINGS
In addition to the top and bottom 10 countries in our ranking, there are some standout results 
when we look at the scores by region.
Africa
In Africa, Tunisia takes first place in our 
ranking, and rounds out the top half of our 
global list, in 30th place. While it has seen 
declines over the past five years in terms of 
institutional and Communications Infrastructure, 
it has made important gains in improving 
access and the amount of Web Content. In 
2007, only 17% of Tunisia’s population were 
Web users; today that figure has risen to 39%.  
South Africa ranks second regionally, followed 
by Egypt (3) and Mauritius (4). Kenya takes 
first place in terms of Economic Impact of the 
Web, though it ranks fifth in the region overall. 
Morocco, meanwhile, though ranking 10th in 
the region overall takes second place in terms 
of Web use. 
Americas
Chile takes third place in the Americas, behind Canada and the US, and 19th on our global list, 
just ahead of Japan. Chile also has made substantial strides in improving access and content—
more than half of its population now has access to the Web, compared with just 36% in 2007. 
And its e-participation scores have risen significantly over the same period. 
Mexico takes fourth place in the Americas and is ranked 22nd globally. Its highest ranks are in 
the areas of Web Content and use, as well as Political Impact. Brazil, in contrast, ranks higher 
than Mexico in Readiness, but lower in terms of overall Political Impact, taking 5th place in the 
regional ranking.  
Asia Pacific
Singapore follows New Zealand and Australia in the Asia-Pacific region, and ranks in 11th 
place on our global list. Singapore boasts impressive figures in a number of areas, including 
Communications Infrastructure (ranking 2 on our global list), and Web Content (3). But perhaps 
most surprisingly, it takes second place on our global list for Political Impact—it receives the 
highest scores of any country for using ICT efficiently in government, and the United Nations 
ranks it second globally for e-participation. Singapore also offers the fastest Internet speeds 
in the world—at 547,064 Mbits/Second, its rates are almost twice as fast as second-fastest 
Iceland, at 287,139 Mbits/Second.  
0
20
40
60
80
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Tunisia
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 16
In fourth place is South Korea, with highest rank for Web impact—it takes first place for Political 
Impact of the Web. Japan and China rank fourth and fifth, respectively. Thailand, meanwhile, 
ranks surprisingly high in terms of Economic Impact—fifth in the region—though it takes 10th 
place for the region overall. 
Europe
Sweden, the UK, Finland, Switzerland, Norway and Ireland all rank in the top 10, but Iceland 
ranks ahead of them all in terms of overall Readiness. Among other indicators in this area, 
Iceland offers the fastest Internet speeds in Europe on average (and the second in the world), 
and boasts the most households with personal computers. It also takes first place regionally in 
terms of Web use. 
France and Germany, meanwhile, rank toward the middle of the list, in eighth and ninth place, 
respectively. Portugal ranks surprisingly high in Web Content, in fourth place regionally, but 
rates an overall 10 out of 15 for Europe. 
Middle East and Southeast Asia
Among the countries in Middle East that were 
included in this year’s study, Israel leads and 
takes 15th place overall in our global ranking. 
Israel ranks in the top 20 for all components, 
and rates most highly for Political Impact 
(8th globally). Its use of ICT for government 
efficiency is matched only by a small set of 
countries (and well above the US and UK), 
and it stands in 6th place in the United Nations’ 
e-participation index.
Qatar ranks in second place regionally, followed 
by Kazakhstan. Both countries have made 
seen significant improvements in overall Web 
use over the past five years, a trend we expect 
to continue.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Economic
Political
Usage
ContentCommunications
Institutional
Social
Israel
Source: Oxford Economics
Impact
The WebReadiness
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 17
Envisioning the impact of the Web Index
For Jeff Jaffe, non-executive director of the World Wide Web Foundation, the biggest surprise of our 
study wasn’t which countries ranked highest or lowest—it was that such an index didn’t already exist. 
“When you consider the criticality of the Web as a core infrastructure for everything from entertainment to 
commerce, from government to education, this is a key critical infrastructure for the world,” he says. “It’s 
maddening that no one ever thought to do this before; how we are doing as a country, as the world. The 
Web has unquestionably had a profound impact on humanity, and can fundamentally improve lives. So it 
is fantastic that we have set out to create this.”
The Index, says Jaffe, who is also CEO of the Web standards body W3C, will help governments, companies 
and other organizations improve their use of the Web. “Now we have a tool that policy-makers can use to 
diagnose and identify strengths and weaknesses to create a platform for improvement,” he says. “Every 
country needs to assess where they are to bring the Web to its full potential.” 
Over time, as the Web Index expands to include more countries and indicators, Jaffe is confident that the 
data from the rankings will lead to important insights about how countries should focus their efforts. “It’s a 
work in progress. We’ve only reached 61 countries, and in many cases we didn’t have primary data. But 
over time, the methodology will improve.” 
PER CAPITA INCOME LEVELS AND THE WEB INDEX RANKINGS
Is it always the case that the higher the income, the greater the benefits from the Web in a 
country? We conducted some preliminary regression and correlation analyses, as well as simple 
rank comparisons on the Index results, to begin to examine the links between the Web Index 
rankings and GDP per capita.
Looking at comparative ranks, Column A in the table below ranks countries by GDP per capita 
(in ppp US$ terms), and column B gives the corresponding Web Index ranks for those countries. 
Column C shows the difference between those two rankings.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 18
Country Column A GDP/
capita (US$ ppp) 
ranks
Column B Web 
Index ranks
Column C 
Difference
GDP per capita, 
PPP (current 
international US$)
Qatar 1 21 20  88,919 
Singapore 2 11 9  61,103 
Norway 3 9 6  57,092 
United States 4 2 -2  48,442 
Switzerland 5 6 1  47,817 
Ireland 6 10 4  41,642 
Sweden 7 1 -6  41,447 
Canada 8 4 -4  40,541 
Australia 9 8 -1  39,466 
Germany 10 16 6  39,414 
Finland 11 5 -6  37,581 
Iceland 12 12 0  37,115 
United Kingdom 13 3 -10  36,511 
France 14 14 0  35,194 
Japan 15 20 5  34,278 
Spain 16 18 2  32,701 
Italy 17 23 6  32,569 
New Zealand 18 7 -11  30,864 
Korea (Rep. of) 19 13 -6  30,206 
Israel 20 15 -5  28,007 
Portugal 21 17 -4  25,444 
Russia 22 31 9  21,358 
Poland 23 25 2  21,281 
Argentina 24 38 14  17,674 
Chile 25 19 -6  17,125 
Turkey 26 27 1  16,885 
Mexico 27 22 -5  15,340 
Mauritius 28 41 13  14,523 
Kazakhstan 29 28 -1  13,189 
Venezuela 30 40 10  12,836 
Brazil 31 24 -7  11,719 
South Africa 32 36 4  11,035 
Colombia 33 26 -7  10,103 
Tunisia 34 30 -4  9,415 
Thailand 35 37 2  8,703 
(Table 2.1 continued)
Table 2.1: Comparing GDP and Index ranks
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 19
Ecuador 36 43 7  8,486 
China 37 29 -8  8,442 
Namibia 38 56 18  6,826 
Egypt 39 39 0  6,324 
Jordan 40 35 -5  6,007 
Morocco 41 50 9  4,986 
Indonesia 42 34 -8  4,668 
Philippines 43 32 -11  4,140 
India 44 33 -11  3,650 
Viet Nam 45 47 2  3,435 
Pakistan 46 44 -2  2,763 
Nigeria 47 48 1  2,532 
Cameroon 48 53 5  2,383 
Yemen 49 61 12  2,349 
Senegal 50 46 -4  1,981 
Ghana 51 45 -6  1,884 
Bangladesh 52 55 3  1,788 
Kenya 53 42 -11  1,718 
Benin 54 58 4  1,628 
Tanzania 55 51 -4  1,521 
Uganda 56 49 -7  1,354 
Burkina Faso 57 59 2  1,310 
Nepal 58 52 -6  1,256 
Ethiopia 59 57 -2  1,116 
Mali 60 54 -6  1,099 
Zimbabwe 61 60 -1  477 
(Table 2.1 continued)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 20
Overall, the correlation between the rankings is very tight. The Spearman’s rank correlation 
coefficient is 0.917 which is significantly different from zero at the 1% level. In practice this 
means that the absolute differences between the rankings were generally small. Countries 
that stood out as underperforming in the index relative to their GDP per capita included: Qatar 
(the richest country in the list but with a composite index ranking of 21); Namibia (the 38th 
richest country but with an index ranking of 56); and Argentina (the 24h richest country with a 
composite index ranking of 38). On the other hand, several countries seemed to outperform in 
the index relative their GDP per capita including: Kenya (53rd versus 42nd); India (44th versus 
33rd); the Philippines (43rd versus 32nd); and New Zealand (18th versus 7th). 
The reasons for these discrepancies could be traced back in part to the components and 
underlying indicators of the Index. For example, in Qatar’s case, the country scores relatively 
poorly in the areas of political impact of the Web as well as Web content. However, those are 
not the only reasons behind the rank discrepancies, and more research is needed to understand 
the nature of this relationship better.
CORRELATION ANALYSIS
Although possible, we did not set out to use the Index or any of its constituent parts as a 
potential predictive tool. However, using some basic correlation and OLS regression analysis 
of income per capita, and both the Impact sub-Index and the overall composite Index scores, 
we found that both the composite Index and impact sub-Index scores are highly correlated with 
GDP per capita. The simple correlation coefficient between GDP per capita (measured in US$ at 
PPP exchange rates) and the impact sub-Index scores is 0.784, and the correlation coefficient 
between GDP per capita and the overall composite Index scores is 0.810. 
A visual inspection of those two series against each other (see Chart 1 and Chart 2 below) 
suggests that the relationship is non-linear—a fairly typical feature of most statistical 
relationships involving GDP per capita. In particular, the relationship appears logarithmic rather 
than linear, and an OLS regression of the natural logarithm of GDP on the Impact and overall 
Composite score yields relatively high R-squared values, implying that variations in a country’s 
GDP per capita are able to explain a high proportion of the difference in country index scores.
Still, we do not imply causality between the Index and GDP or any other variables. This aspect 
needs further investigation and research. 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 21
Chart 2.1: Impact sub-Index scores and GDP per capita
Chart 2.2: Overall Composite Index and GDP per capita
Overall composite Index scores
GDP per capita
GDP per capita (US$ppp)
Impact sub-Index scores
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 22
SUB-INDEX AND COMPONENT RANKINGS
READINESS
Readiness refers to the extent to 
which countries have expanded 
their communications and 
Institutional Infrastructure to 
build upon and provide greater 
access to the Web, and is a 
key baseline for our study—the 
Web cannot exist without the 
proper architecture to connect 
computers, servers, mobile 
devices and so on. In this area, 
Iceland leads the global list, 
followed by Sweden, Finland, the 
US and Switzerland to round out 
the top 5 countries.
From a regional perspective, Mauritius ranks highest in Africa, Singapore leads in Asia-Pacific, 
and Israel ranks highest among Middle Eastern nations. In the Americas, Chile ranks just behind 
the US and Canada, for third place.
Looking deeper into the sub-components of this category reveals some interesting differences. 
Communications Infrastructure
As previously noted, 
the Communications 
Infrastructure component 
takes into account such 
factors as international 
bandwidth per Internet user, 
broadband subscribers, 
mobile phone subscriptions, 
and the cost of access—
factors that paint a picture of 
overall public access. Here 
Iceland leads again, followed 
by Singapore, Sweden, 
Switzerland, and Norway. In 
this category the US ranks 
at the bottom of the top 10, 
along with South Korea and 
Germany. Regional standouts in this area include Mauritius, which leads in Africa, along with 
Israel for the Middle East.   
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 23
Institutional Infrastructure
While Communications 
Infrastructure looks 
mainly at the physical and 
communications base that 
provides access to the Web 
in general, Institutional 
Infrastructure looks at the 
extent to which institutions, 
organizations and government 
support and promote Web 
access, and the extent to 
which information about their 
organizations is made available on the Web. To determine the rankings for this sub-index 
we looked at data related to press freedom and overall censorship, education, gender, and 
government openness in sharing data. The US takes first place in this category, followed by 
Iceland, Finland, New Zealand, and Sweden. Mauritius and Israel again lead their respective 
regions in this area. In the Americas, Chile ranks third for both Communications Infrastructure 
and Institutional Infrastructure.
Spotlight on: India
India harbors an immense wealth of engineering and information technology (IT) talent, and the country’s 
strength in technological services has coincided with the growth in Internet consumers: Google predicts 
that India will add 200 million Internet users within the next two years as telecom companies invest in 
high-tech infrastructure and mobile phones become less expensive.  
Yet India’s scalability issue is a challenging one. The number of India’s Internet users is currently around 
121 million, a small fraction of the country’s population of 1.2 billion.  At the same time, there are some 
898 million mobile subscribers in the country, 292 million of whom live in rural areas. Internet connectivity 
will largely be driven by the growth of mobile phones and the ability of people to use those to access the 
Web, particularly in rural areas where landline infrastructure is relatively undeveloped.
Unsurprisingly, there are a number of obstacles for rural Internet use. Currently, only about 2% of rural 
India has access to the Web, according to the Internet and Mobile Association of India (IMAIA) and 18% of 
these rural users have to walk 10 km or more to do so. Many rural inhabitants are also computer illiterate. 
Educational reforms are therefore necessary to help rural inhabitants learn how to use technology to 
improve their lives.  
The Indian government is taking steps to improve access. One example is the Aakash, a new low-cost 
tablet that will be introduced into Indian schools this year to teach students in poor and rural areas the 
critical digital literacy skills they will need for the future. Village computers will also be made accessible to 
everyone, overruling the Hindu caste hierarchy, which privileges certain members of society over others. 
As for Web Content, the biggest change will be in the increase of Websites in local languages. In a country 
of over 100 languages, most Websites are currently in English, Hindi and Bengali. Wikipedia is proving to 
be one of the leading organizations that provides regional language versions of its Website.
Still, as the recent power outages—which left a staggering 620 million citizens across India without power 
for days—have shown, significant work remains to develop a truly sturdy, scalable infrastructure that will 
give all Indians reliable access to the Web.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 24
THE WEB
To determine the overall 
components of this sub-index 
we looked at such indicators 
as Web use as well as the 
content available in each 
country. The US ranks highest 
in this category, followed by the 
UK, Canada, Switzerland, and 
Singapore. Tunisia ranks highest 
in Africa, and Israel again takes 
the top spot for the Middle East. 
For the Americas, Mexico takes 
third place, behind the US and 
Canada, while Iceland ranks 
third in Europe. 
Further examination of the sub-components for this category reveals additional insights.
Web Usage
The variables we included in 
this category are indicators 
of Web Usage—the number 
of people per country who  
use the web , as well as 
“accessibility” indicators  for 
people such as the elderly, 
people with a number of 
disabilities, and those with 
low literacy. Iceland leads 
this ranking, followed by 
Switzerland, Finland, the US, 
and Canada. At the regional 
level, Tunisia takes the top 
rank for Africa, and Singapore 
for Asia-Pacific.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 25
Web Content
Because of the difficulty 
of obtaining reliable and 
consistent data on the exact 
numbers of pages on the 
Web in various languages 
and in different countries, 
we used as a proxy the 
number of Wikipedia articles 
per language. This indicator 
is part of the Web Content 
component in the Index, which 
also includes indicators on the 
type of data and information 
that is accessible on the Web in each country, including government data and data on public 
health and education. Again the US takes top ranking, followed by the UK, Singapore, New 
Zealand, and Canada. 
Spotlight on: China
As the world’s second largest economy, and the largest engine for economic growth, China stands in 
29th place in this year’s Index, ranking lowest for Readiness (35th) yet highest for overall Impact (25th). 
A look at China’s ranks across the various components of the Index reveals some interesting results. 
For example, while its ranks over time for Communications Infrastructure have remained relatively flat, 
Institutional Infrastructure has risen dramatically. Still, while overall Web use has increased slightly, Web 
Content has remained relatively flat. China also ranks 40th in terms of the Web’s Political Impact. 
But beyond the numbers, it appears that China’s citizens are embracing the Web in a variety of ways. 
For example, online shopping represents the largest growth segment of Internet use in China. A recent 
Boston Consulting Group report noted that the number of Chinese online shoppers is expected to grow 
to 329 million by 2015, making it greater than that of the United States and Japan combined. Meanwhile, 
although Twitter and Facebook are banned in the country, a number of domestic social networking sites 
are immensely popular, such as Qzone, Sina Weibo, Tencent Weibo, and RenRen.  
Still, according to a Global Internet Freedom Consortium report, the government in Beijing polices the 
Internet by blocking IP addresses,  redirecting traffic through the Domain Name System (DNS), URL 
filtering, packet filtering, requiring the installation of filtering software in personal computers and by 
forcing companies to comply with government controls. In fact, the “Great Firewall of China” is one of the 
most sophisticated systems of government control over the Internet in the world.  The government also 
prohibits anonymity – all Chinese netizens must use their real names on their websites. Western Internet 
companies that want to do business in China have to balance the fine line of complying with Beijing’s 
censorship directives and adhering to their own standards of free expression and openness.
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 26
IMPACT
Of all three sub-indexes in our 
ranking, Impact carries the 
greatest weight, accounting for 
60% of the composite Index 
score (compared to 20% each 
for Readiness and the Web 
sub indexes). There are three 
components within the Impact 
sub-Index:  Social, Economic 
and Political Impacts. To an 
extent, this sub-Index reflects 
the utility and the value of the 
Web to people, as well as its 
impact on people and countries. 
All countries that rank in the 
top 10 in this sub-index are industrialized, with Sweden taking the top spot followed by the US, 
Canada, the UK, and Finland. 
At the regional level, Tunisia receives the highest score among African countries. Australia leads 
all countries in Asia-Pacific, and Israel ranks first for the Middle East. 
When we look into the components of this category, we see other differences.
Social Impact
To determine the Social 
Impact of the Web we looked 
at a number of indicators 
including the use of social 
networks, the use of the Web 
to disseminate important 
public health information, 
the availability of distance 
learning services, and the 
impact of ICT on access to 
basic services. Canada ranks 
in first place in this regard at 
the global level, with Sweden, 
New Zealand, Norway and 
Australia also appearing in the top 5. At the regional level, Tunisia ranks highest in Africa, and 
Qatar edges past Israel in the Middle East.  
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 27
Economic Impact
Economic Impact assesses 
the extent to which the 
Web affects the economy 
and business in a country. 
Examples of indicators used 
to determine these scores 
and ranks include the extent 
to which governments and 
organizations disseminate 
information to farmers, the 
extent of business Internet 
use, and the extent to which 
people trust the Web as a 
means of buying and selling 
goods and services. This component also includes indicators that assess the extent of 
criminal activities in each country using the Web, the data for which we gathered through the 
country expert assessment surveys we conducted. It proved very difficult to find reliable and 
consistent data on the extent of cyber crime in each country from secondary sources, and 
this is an area where we hope more data should become available in future. 
Ireland takes first place among the global ranking of countries. Switzerland, Sweden, the UK, 
and Canada also appear in the top five. Looking at the other regions, Kenya takes first place 
for Africa, and South Korea leads in Asia-Pacific.
Political Impact
This component looks at 
the extent to which political 
parties use the Web to 
campaign and mobilize their 
constituents, as well as 
the use of ICT to enhance 
government efficiency and 
e-participation. Sweden ranks 
highest out of the 61 countries 
in this component, followed by 
Singapore, the US, Finland, 
and South Korea. Chile ranks 
10th, just below the UK and 
Israel. Regionally, Egypt ranks 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 28
Spotlight on: Egypt
Egypt suffers from a relatively under-developed physical and Institutional Infrastructure for the Web: In 
2011, the International Telecommunications Union estimated the Internet penetration rate in Egypt to be 
36%. And there are only 10 Internet service providers (ISPs) across the country (or just 0.12 per million 
people), making access to the Internet easy to control (in contrast, the US has more than 3,000, or around 
9.57 per million people). Despite this, Egypt scores high in terms of Political Impact, largely as a result 
of the use of the Web as a tool to disseminate information and organize parts of the 2011 revolution that 
toppled former president Hosni Mubarak. .  
While the Mubarak regime was able to shut down the Internet temporarily during the 2011 protests, 
some of the citizens of Egypt were particularly Web-savvy and circumvented the shutdown by using 
older technology—often landline telephones over which they could access modems in foreign countries. 
In some of this effort they were aided by international net-citizen groups, such as “We Rebuild” and the 
infamous hacker group Anonymous.
Since the toppling of the Mubarak regime, the Web landscape has opened to online journalism, including 
independent bloggers and joint initiatives from citizen journalists (such as campaigns against police 
brutality and corruption). In addition, a Website was set up to monitor President-elect Mohammed Mursi 
on his election promises (http://www.morsimeter.com/). 
CHANGES OVER TIME 
As mentioned above, primary data is only available for 2011, as the expert assessment survey 
could not be conducted retrospectively, and we did not think it suitable to impute the results 
retrospectively. Therefore, the results and analysis above relate to the 2011 “headline” Index, or the 
one with both the primary and secondary data indicators. 
However, we also constructed the Index historically for the period 2007-2011 using secondary data 
alone, as it was clear that there is value in analyzing the trends in these data over time. The results 
for the secondary Index rankings show that for some countries, such as Brazil, Spain, Sweden, and 
Switzerland, overall ranks have remained fairly steady over the past five years. For others, there 
were more significant changes over time. 
According to our analysis, the following countries have experienced the most significant positive 
and negative shifts are:  
Finland (+8). In 2010, Finland became the first 
country to make broadband Internet use the right 
of every citizen and ensure that reasonably priced 
broadband connections are available to everyone. 
According to Statistics Finland’s ICT 2011 survey, 
89% of those aged 16 to 74 in Finland use the 
Web—and three out of four use it daily. In fact, the 
use of the Web has increased particularly in the 
older age groups. The share of users among those 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Finland
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 29
aged 65 to 74 has grown by 10 percentage points to 53%. The Web is having a growing 
impact on government and the political process: 58% of citizens aged 16 to 74 had searched 
for information on public authorities’ Web pages during the past 12 months, and 40% had 
sent a filled-in form on the Internet. 
Indonesia (+9). Our scores indicate that the impact 
of the Web on politics has been noteworthy in 
Indonesia. There has been a rise in the country’s 
“e-participation” index score over the past several 
years, for example. And according to a recent 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
report, Web use will also allow for “e-balloting” and 
improve citizens’ access to pertinent government 
information. Such projects can improve the 
government’s communications and information 
dissemination capabilities in the country, especially 
in rural areas, though transparency of government 
systems and processes will be critical. 
Jordan (-8). According to our data, Jordan has 
endured a relatively steep decline since 2007, 
particularly in terms of available Web Content 
and Political Impact, in spite of a paradoxically 
striking relative improvement in Communications 
Infrastructure. The reasons are numerous. Like 
other nations in the Middle East, Jordan suffers 
from high unemployment and a poorly functioning 
economy. The Internet is largely under government 
control and restricted, particularly since the 2011 
protests. Civil liberties and popular participation in 
government are restricted. As a monarchy, supreme 
executive and legislative authority rests with the 
king. This structure makes any political reforms slow 
and limited in scope.  
Kazakhstan (+18). Kazakhstan has experienced 
robust economic growth for most of the 21st century, 
slowing down only recently as a result of the 2008 
financial crisis.  Internet penetration has increased 
significantly over the past several years, primarily 
seen in the expansion of mobile connectivity thanks 
to a progressive reform of its telecom sector. As a 
result, our data shows that Kazakhstan’s overall 
use of the Web is increasing. Still, more can be 
done to improve the institutional structures which 
underpin full access to the Web. Kazakhstan has an 
authoritarian government that periodically censors 
and even blocks the Internet, particularly material 
that is politically sensitive. 
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Indonesia
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Jordan
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
41
43
45
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Kazakhstan
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 30
Qatar (+9).  At $88,000, Qatar’s GDP per capita 
was the highest in the world in 2010. More than 
half of its $184.3 billion GDP (2011 estimate) 
comes from its huge natural gas and oil reserves. 
But recently, the country has decided to diversify 
and build a knowledge-based economy.  Some of 
the energy revenue is thus being re-invested in 
the technology sector with the goal of making the 
country a technology hub for much of the Middle 
East, and aiming to make broadband accessible to 
95% of the population by 2015. Perhaps as a result, 
Qatar is seeing significant improvements in its use 
of the Web, particularly with respect to Web Usage 
(ranked 17th), Web Content (14th), and Economic 
Impact (10th). Coinciding with this investment in infrastructure is one in education, to provide 
its citizens with the skills necessary to thrive in an information economy. 
Russia (+11). According to our data, overall use 
of the Web in Russia has improved over the past 
five years, and particularly in the past two years, 
with the biggest increase in the area of Political 
Impact. Our data indicates an improvement in 
communications infrastructure (7), web content (18) 
and political impact (25).  Like India and China, 
the country has a large reserve of engineering and 
technological talent to draw from.  It also contains 
the largest number of Internet users in Europe, 
at 61.5 million, according to internetworldstats.
com.  The central government plans to invest in 
broadband so that penetration rates will reach 90-
95% by 2020.  In terms of content, the growth of the blogosphere in Russia has created an 
environment for discussion and civic engagement, and provided an alternative to the state-
dominated traditional mass media. However, there have been recent legislative attempts by 
the central government to curb this grass-roots activity.
Thailand (-10). Thailand’s relative decline has 
been broad-based across all components of the 
index. Its Internet penetration rate, for example, is 
relatively low, at 27.4%, and only about one quarter 
of Thailand’s households have personal computers. 
But steps are being taken to improve access: In 
2010, the number of Internet users in Thailand 
grew by 27% to 20 million. This growth was largely 
attributed to the growth in smartphones, tablets 
and an expanding broadband network. In addition, 
3G has been recently introduced to improve the 
wireless market, and 4G LTE trials are beginning 
in certain areas. Still improvements within the 
regulatory framework are needed to support further 
growth. 
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Thailand
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Russia
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Qatar
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 31
Venezuela (-7). Like Thailand, Venezuela’s global 
ranking for each component has declined since 
2007, with the exception of Web Content, where the 
country enjoyed a modest one-place improvement.  
The area that has seen the most significant decline 
is Political Impact. One probable explanation stems 
from Hugo Chavez’s control of government and 
limit on press freedoms. In 2010, the Venezuelan 
parliament formally approved tighter regulation of 
the Internet.  
Both Venezuela’s Communications  Infrastructure 
and Institutional Infrastructure have slipped over the 
past five years. Internet and broadband speeds in 
the country are below average for Latin America, which is surprising since Venezuela’s GDP 
per capita is the highest in the region. This can be explained by the monopoly of state-owned 
CANTV, which dominates broadband. While mobile internet use is growing, the country’s 
mobile subscription rates also lags behind almost all other countries in the region, with the 
exception of Mexico. 
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: Oxford Economics / WWWF
Composite
Venezuela
Using the Web Index for deeper dialogue
At the ICT4Peace Foundation (www.ict4peace.org), Dr. Daniel Stauffacher’s  mission is to help companies, 
countries and other organizations use the web for peace-making and disaster recovery efforts. From that 
perspective, having a tool that helps countries understand in which areas the web is in greatest need 
of improvement is critical. “We have an interest in a well-developed global information society where 
countries and people have access and are empowered through the Web, promoting democracy and 
freedom of speech,” he says. “So if the Web Index can help us on those fronts, we welcome that.” 
One of the key issues Stauffacher’s organization is concerned with is how countries alert their citizens to 
major issues, such as tsunamis or tornados. “There is still a long way to go in alerting the public,” he says, 
particularly in developing nations where high costs prevent many citizens from accessing the Web. “This 
is a major hindering block to overcome if the Web is to reach its full potential.”  
Another concern, says Stauffacher, who is also a non-executive director of the Web Foundation, is the 
privatization of data. “When you think about social networks like Facebook and Google and Twitter—
what is happening with that data? Who owns it? What are the policies around using it? We need some 
reasonable checks and balances, like a code of conduct for the Web.”
Some countries, particularly those in developing regions, have made significant progress. “Kenya is a 
model country,” he says. “It has an open government data policy, and an availability of local talent.” He 
notes the development of iHub, an open space in Nairobi with whom the Web Foundation partners to 
provide opportunities for Kenya’s technologists, investors, tech companies and even hackers to connect, 
innovate and find mentors. “Kenya has policies, processes and people—people who have left the country 
and have now come back.”
But Stauffacher warns against using single examples as best practice for other countries to follow. “This 
Index is a tool to help us analyze together with governments, companies and other stakeholders to 
develop some actionable recommendations per country,” he says. “There is still a lot of analysis—and a 
lot of work—to be done.”
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 32
CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS
The aim of this year’s Web Index is to help begin a useful discussion among corporate 
executives, government officials, policy-makers and other stakeholders around how access to 
and use of the Web can be improved. By providing specific data and rankings by component 
and sub-component, our goal is to help pinpoint the specific areas where an increased focus will 
have the biggest benefit. “We want to be able to answer people when they ask what they need 
to do next,” says Sir Tim Berners-Lee. “Now we can have that discussion because we have a 
carefully constructed set of measurements.” 
At the same time, the Web Index ranking is meant to underscore the true criticality of the 
Web in improving the lives of billions of people around the world. “We want to take this issue 
about whether or not people are a part of the information society,” says Berners-Lee, “and 
help increase awareness that it’s as important as access to water and vaccinations—it’s not a 
secondary issue.”
As such, Berners-Lee cautions countries that rank highly this year to not rest in their efforts 
to keep improving. “It would be a shame if countries at the top of the list felt they didn’t need 
to do anything simply because they rank highly,” he says. Even countries that have well-
developed infrastructure and Web use may find pockets of populations that are in dire need of 
improvement. “There is a missed opportunity to capitalize on getting that last 25% online, for 
example,” he says. “It can mean much greater efficiencies for everyone, including government.” 
At the same time, governments, companies and citizens must be aware of the ongoing threats 
to the World Wide Web, such as degradation of service for commercial, political or religious 
incentives.  
Over the longer term, Berners-Lee hopes that the Web can be used as the basic framework 
that supports true cultural transformation. “When people go on social networking sites today, 
they often connect with people they know—often these are people who aren’t very different 
from themselves. As a result, they can unknowingly demonize other cultures without even being 
aware of their own inhumanity,” says Berners-Lee. “The real key is to embrace other cultures, to 
get to know one another at the global level.”
As this transformation occurs, a parallel expectation is that governments will evolve—and 
citizens will participate far more often and deeply in debate and discussion around key global 
issues. “It’s not just about building systems that will let people communicate more,” he explains. 
“It’s about building frameworks that rely on accountability, so that debates are based on actual 
dialogue by people who have knowledge and expertise, instead of the shouting matches that 
sometimes persist in politics.”
To that end, Berners-Lee hopes that future iterations of the Web Index will probe more deeply 
into critical issues, such as government openness and censorship, along with more granular 
analysis in many more countries around the world. Accomplishing these goals will require the 
work of many partners who can help us by providing additional data sources  
and resources. 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 33
APPENDIX I: LIST OF COUNTRIES AND INDICATORS IN THE 2011 WEB INDEX
The Web Index ranks 61 developed and developing countries across Africa, the Americas, Asia-
Pacific, Europe, the Middle East and Central Asia.
The choice of countries covered in this first Index was largely determined by three criteria: 
1) Secondary data availability for the country (from selected sources such as the World Bank, 
United Nations, International Telecommunication Union, World Economic Forum, etc.)
2) Finding country experts to score country questionnaires in the limited time available
3) Availability of resources to cover the fees of the selected experts. 
In addition, the final selection of countries needed to ensure a sufficient spread across the 
continents. Future editions of the Index will expand country coverage to over 100, resources 
permitting.
Below is the full list of countries covered in the 2011 Web Index:
AFRICA AMERICAS ASIA PACIFIC EUROPE MIDDLE EAST/ 
CENTRAL ASIA
1 Benin 1 Argentina 1 Bangladesh 1 Finland 1 Israel
2 Burkina 
Faso
2 Mexico 2 India 2 France 2 Jordan
3 Cameroon 3 Colombia 3 Indonesia 3 Germany 3 Qatar
4 Egypt 4 Ecuador 4 Korea  
(Rep. of)
4 Italy 4 Yemen
5 Ethiopia 5 Brazil 5 Nepal 5 Iceland 5 Kazakhstan
6 Ghana 6 Canada 6 New Zealand 6 Turkey
7 Kenya 7 Chile 7 Pakistan 7 Poland
8 Mali 8 United 
States
8 Phillipines 8 Portugal
9 Mauritius 9 Venezuela 9 Singapore 9 Ireland
10 Morocco 10 China 10 Norway
11 Namibia 11 Japan 11 Russia
12 Nigeria 12 Thailand 12 Spain
13 Senegal 13 Australia 13 Sweden
14 South 
Africa
14 Viet Nam 14 Switzerland
15 Tanzania 15 United 
Kingdom
16 Tunisia
17 Zimbabwe
18 Uganda
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 34
Web Index Tree Diagram
Readiness
weight: 0.2
The Web
weight: 0.2
Impact
weight: 0.6
Communications
weight: 0.33
Institutional
weight: 0.67
Use
weight: 0.5
Content
weight: 0.5
Economic
weight: 0.33
Political
weight: 0.33
Social
weight: 0.33
ITUD
weight: 1
FHA
weight: 1
Q11a
weight: 0.17
Q8b
weight: 1
Q15
weight: 1
WEFN
weight: 1
Q6
weight: 1
ITUE
weight: 1
FHB
weight: 1
Q11c
weight: 0.17
Q8c
weight: 1
Q14
weight: 1
Q1
weight: 1
WEFJ
weight: 1
ITUF
weight: 1
WEFF
weight: 1
Q11b
weight: 0.17
Q3
weight: 1
Q17
weight: 1
Q2b
weight: 1
Q4
weight: 1
ITUG
weight: 1
WEFG
weight: 0.25
Q11e
weight: 0.17
Q8a
weight: 1
WBC
weight: 1
UND
weight: 1
Q7
weight: 0.5
ITUA
weight: 1
WEFD
weight: 1
Q11d
weight: 0.17
WIKIA
weight: 1
Q12
weight: 1
WEFI
weight: 0.5
ITUB
weight: 1
WEFE
weight: 1
Q11f
weight: 0.17
Q2a
weight: 1
WEFL
weight: 1
ITUC
weight: 1
WBB
weight: 1
ITUH
weight: 1
Q22
weight: 1
WEFM
weight: 1
Q20
weight: 1
WEFC
weight: 0.5
Q23d
weight: 0.1
WEFK
weight: 1
WBA
weight: 1
WEFH
weight: 0.25
Q23e
weight: 0.1
IEAA
weight: 1
Q16
weight: 1
Q23f
weight: 0.1
WEFA
weight: 1
Q10
weight: 1
Q23g
weight: 0.1
WEFB
weight: 1
Q13
weight: 1
Q23a
weight: 0.1
Q18
weight: 1
RSFA
weight: 0.5
Q23b
weight: 0.1
Q9h
weight: 1
Q23c
weight: 0.1
UNA
weight: 1
Q23h
weight: 0.1
UNB
weight: 1
Q23i
weight: 0.1
Q9cd
weight: 0.5
Q23j
weight: 0.1
Q9ab
weight: 0.5
Q26
weight: 1
Q9l
weight: 1
UNC
weight: 1
Q9i
weight: 1
Q5a
weight: 0.33
Q25
weight: 1
Q5c
weight: 0.33
Q9e
weight: 0.25
Q5b
weight: 0.33
Q9g
weight: 0.25
Q24
weight: 1
Q9f
weight: 1
Q9k
weight: 1
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 35
Secondary data indicators:
Indicator Name Description Component Source
FHA Political rights Ratings are determined by the total number 
of points each country receives for 10 
questions associated with political rights. 
Countries receive 0-4 points for each 
question with zero points indicating the 
least degree of freedom and four points the 
greatest degree. An overall score between 
1-7 is then computed where a country is 
deemed to be free if it scores between 1 
and 2.5, partially free with a score between 
3 and 5, and not free with a score between 
5.5 and 7.
Institutional 
Infrastructure
Freedom House
FHB Civil liberties Ratings are determined by the total number 
of points each country receives for 15 
questions associated with civil liberties. 
Countries receive 0-4 points for each 
question with zero points indicating the 
least degree of freedom and four points the 
greatest degree. An overall score between 
1-7 is then computed where a country is 
deemed to be free if it scores between 1 
and 2.5, partially free with a score between 
3 and 5, and not free with a score between 
5.5 and 7.
Institutional 
Infrastructure
Freedom House
IEAA Electrification 
rate
Measued as the proportion of the 
population with access to electricity. Data 
is collected from industry, national survey 
and international sources. Data is typically 
source locally meaning that definitions 
and data quality will vary from country to 
country.
Communications 
Infrastructure
IEA
ITUA International 
Bandwidth 
(Mbits/Second) 
per internet 
user
Capacity of all Internet exchanges that 
backbone operaters provide to carry traffic. 
Based on responses from countries of an 
annual questionnaire supplemented with 
data from ITU research. Measured in terms 
of Mbits per second per internet user
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU
ITUB Broadband 
subscribers per 
100 population
Refers to total fixed (wired) broadband 
Internet subscriptions (that is, subscriptions 
to high-speed access to the public Internet 
(a TCP/IP connection) at downstream 
speeds equal to, or greater than 256 kbit/s) 
divided by population and multiplied by 100.
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU
ITUC % of 
households 
with personal 
computers
Refers to the percentage of households 
with a computer. A computer can include 
a desktop, portable or handheld computer 
(e.g. a personal digital assistant). It does 
not include equipment with some embedded 
computing abilities such as mobile phones 
or TV sets.
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 36
ITUD Mobile phone 
subscriptions 
per 100 
population
Refers to the subscriptions to a mobile 
cellular telephone service, including number 
of pre-paid SIM cards active during the past 
three months, divided by the population and 
multipled by 100.
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU
ITUE Fixed 
broadband 
internet 
monthly 
subscription as 
% of monthly 
GDP per capita
The monthly subscription charge for fixed 
(wired) broadband Internet service. Fixed 
(wired) broadband is considered any 
dedicated connection to the Internet at 
downstream speeds equal to, or greater 
than, 256 kbit/s, using DSL. Where several 
offers are available, preference should 
be given to the 256 kbit/s connection. 
Taxes should be included. If not included, 
it should be specified in a note including 
the applicable tax rate. This indicator is 
expressed in US$ as a share of monthly 
GDP per capita
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU/World Bank
ITUF ITU mobile-
cellular sub-
basket as a 
% of monthly 
GDP per capita
This a composite indicator calculated by ITU 
to quantify the affordability of mobile-cellular 
correspondance. Technically, it sums the 
price of 30 outgoing calls (peak, off-peak, 
on-net and off-net) plus 100 SMS messages 
and expresses it as a share of monthly 
GDP per capita measured at PPP exchange 
rates.
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU/World Bank
ITUG Percentage 
of population 
covered by a 
mobile cellular 
network
Mobile cellular coverage of population 
in percent. This indicator measures 
the percentage of inhabitants that are 
within range of a mobile cellular signal, 
irrespective of whether or not they are 
subscribers. This is calculated by dividing 
the number of inhabitants within range of a 
mobile cellular signal by the total population 
and multiplying by 100. Note that this is not 
the same as the mobile subscription density 
or penetration. When there are multiple 
operators offering the service, the maximum 
amount of population covered should be 
reported.
Communications 
Infrastructure
ITU
ITUH Percentage 
of individuals 
using the 
internet
Refers to the percentage of the population 
using the Internet. The Internet is a 
worldwide public computer network. 
It provides access to a number of 
communication services including the 
World Wide Web and carries e-mail, news, 
entertainment and data files. Internet use 
may be facilitated by any device enabling 
Internet access (not only a computer). This 
includes a mobile phone, PDA, games 
machine and digital TV. Use can be via a 
fixed or mobile network.
Web Use ITU
(Secondary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 37
RSFA Press freedom 
index
Score based on questionnaire filled out 
by independent sources. Questions cover 
violations affecting journalists (murder, 
imprisonment etc) and news media 
(censorship, confiscation of newspaper 
issues) plus the degree of self-censorship 
i.e. the ability of the media to investigate 
and criticise. Also takes into account the 
legal and economic status of the media 
(state monopoly, private monopoly etc).
Institutional 
Infrastructure
RSF
UNA School life 
expectancy 
(years)
Number of years of schooling that a child 
can expect to receive assuming that the 
probability of his or her being enrolled in 
school at any particular future age is equal 
to the current enrolment ratio at that age. 
Includes repeat years.
Institutional 
Infrastructure
UN
UNB Literacy rates Defined as the percentage of the 
population aged 15 and over who can with 
understanding read/write a short simple 
statement about their everyday life.
Institutional 
Infrastructure
UN
UNC Government 
online services 
index
Assesses the quality, relevance and 
usefulness of government websites 
for providing online information and 
participatory tools and services for people.
Web Content UN
UND E-participation 
index
Index score measuring the extent of Web 
use to facilitate provision of information by 
governments to citizens, interaction with 
stakeholders and engagment in decision-
making processes
Political Impact UN
WBA Secure internet 
servers per 
million people
Servers using encryption technology in 
transactions divided by population multiplied 
by 1,000,000.
Communications 
Infrastructure
World Bank
WBB Tertiary 
enrolment rates 
(gross)
Gross enrollment ratio is the ratio of total 
enrollment, regardless of age, to the 
population of the age group that officially 
corresponds to the level of education 
shown. Tertiary education, whether or not 
to an advanced research qualification, 
normally requires, as a minimum condition 
of admission, the successful completion of 
education at the secondary level.
Institutional 
Infrastructure
World Bank
WBC ICT service 
exports as a % 
of GDP
Information and communication 
technology service exports include 
computer and communications services 
(telecommunications and postal and 
courier services) and information services 
(computer data and news-related service 
transactions). The value is expressed as a 
share of nominal GDP.
Economic Impact World Bank
(Secondary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 38
WEFA Accessibility of 
digital content
Survey Question: In your country, how 
accessible is digital content (e.g. text and 
audiovisual content, software products) via 
multiple platforms (e.g. fixed-line Internet, 
wireless Internet, mobile network, satellite, 
etc)? [1 = not accessible at all; 7 = widely 
accessible]
Communications 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFB Firm-level 
technology 
absorption
Survey Question: To what extent do 
businesses in your country absorb new 
technology? [1 = not at all; 7 = aggressively 
absorb]
Communications 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFC Freedom of the 
press
Survey Question: How free is the press 
in your country? [1 = totally restricted; 7 = 
completely free]
Institutional 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFD Quality of 
educational 
system
Survey Question: How well does the 
educational system in your country meet the 
needs of a competitive economy? [1 = not 
well at all; 7 = very well]
Institutional 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFE Internet access 
in schools
Survey Question: How would you rate the 
level of access to the Internet in schools 
in your country? [1 = very limited; 7 = 
extensive]
Institutional 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFF Burden of 
government 
regulation
Survey Question: How burdensome is 
it for your businesses in your country to 
comply with governmental administrative 
requirements (e.g. permits, regulations, 
reporting)? [1 = extremely burdensome; 7 = 
not burdensome at all]
Institutional 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFG Importance 
of ICT to 
government 
vision of the 
future
Survey Question: To what extent does the 
government have a clear implementation 
plan for utilizing information and 
communication technologies to improve 
your country's overall competitiveness? [ 1 
= no plan; 7 = clear plan]
Institutional 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFH Government 
priortization of 
ICT
Survey Question: How much priority 
does the government in your country 
place on information and communication 
technologies? [1 = weak priority; 7 = high 
priority]
Institutional 
Infrastructure
WEF
WEFI Use of virtual 
social networks
Survey question: How widely are virtual 
social networks (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, 
LinkedIn) for professional and personal 
communication in your country? [1 = not 
used at all; 7 = used widely]
Social Impact WEF
WEFJ Impact of ICT 
on access to 
basic services
Survey question: To what extent are 
information and technology technologies 
enabling access for all citizens to basic 
services (health, education, financial 
services etc) in your country? [1 = do not 
enable access at all; 7 = enable access 
significantly]
Social Impact WEF
(Secondary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 39
WEFK Extent of 
business 
internet use
Survey question: To what extent do 
companies within your country use the 
Internet for their business activities? (e.g. 
buying and selling goods, interacting with 
customers and suppliers) [1 = not at all; 7 = 
extensively]
Economic Impact WEF
WEFL Impact 
of ICT on 
organisational 
models
Survey question: To what extent 
are information and communication 
technologies creating new organisational 
models (virtual teams, remote working, 
telecommuting etc) within businesses 
in your country? [1 = not at all; 7 = 
significantly]
Economic Impact WEF
WEFM Impact of 
ICT on new 
services and 
products
Survey question: To what extent 
are information and communication 
technologies creating new business models, 
services and products within your country? 
[1 = not at all; 7 = significantly]
Economic Impact WEF
WEFN ICT use and 
government 
efficiency
Survey Question: To what extent has the 
use of information and communication 
technologies by the government improved 
the efficiency of government services 
in your country? [1 = no effect; 7 = has 
generated considerable improvement]
Political Impact WEF
WIKIA Wikipedia 
articles in local 
language
Number of wikipedia articles in local 
language (taking end-year values). Local 
language data is sourced from the CIA 
which mainly draws on national census data 
and Ethnologue which provides a database 
of academic studies. The number of articles 
in each relevant language is weighted by 
the share of the population that speak that 
language.
Web Content Wikipedia/CIA/
Ethnologue
(Secondary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 40
Primary data indicators:
Indicator code Indicator name Question
Q1 Web use for political 
mobilisation
To what extent has the Web been used for political 
mobilisation in your country (e.g. through the use of 
social networking sites)?
Q2a Political party 
Websites
Do the main political parties have Websites?
Q2b Web-based political 
campaigning
Do they campaign through the Web - if it is legal to do 
so (e.g. to mobilise supporters, or push their political 
agenda)?
Q3 Web-Based health 
information
To what extent is there reliable and trusted health 
information on the Web, to help, for instance, 
identify ailments, and offer preventative or curative 
measures, in a language readable by the local 
population (the official languages of the country)?
Q4 Web use for public 
health
In cases of outbreak of widespread infectious 
diseases or epidemics (e.g. Avian Flu or Cholera), 
does the government proactively provide information 
to the public about disease control or prevention 
via the Web? For example, by using Web-based 
messaging systems to contact the population via 
email or mobile phones, guiding people to a Website 
for further information?
Q5a Primary education 
curriculum
To what extent is the local/state curriculum available 
on the Web (including supporting academic material), 
for each of the following stages of education: primary 
education         
Q5b secondary education 
curriculum
Secondary education:
Q5c tertiary education 
curriculum
Tertiary education:
Q6 Teacher training via 
the Web
To what extent is distance learning used for the 
training of teachers?
Q7 Social networking 
sites
To what extent are social networking sites (local or 
international) used in the country?
Q8a Information on safety 
and security
To what extent is there relevant and useful content 
in the local official languages of the country in the 
following areas:  : Personal Safety and security 
across the country
Q8b General news 
availability
General news - both local and international
Q8c Information on jobs Searching for jobs
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 41
Q9ab boy:girl computer 
training 
Ratio of the extent to which boys are trained in the 
use of computers, relative to girls trained in the use of 
computers?
Q9cd boy:girl 
encouragement to 
study science and 
technology 
Ratio of the extent to which boys are encouraged 
to focus on science and technology, compared to 
the extent to which girls are encouraged to focus on 
science and technology?
Q9e Government 
encouragement of 
Web use
To what extent does the government publicize 
the importance of access to the Web to all the 
population?
Q9f Government 
encouragement of 
Web use for women
To what extent does the government publicize the 
importance of access to the Web specifically for 
women?
Q9g Government ICT 
training
To what extent are there government programmes 
specifically focusing on funding  training for their staff 
in ICT use?
Q9h Government ICT 
training for women
To what extent are there government programmes 
specifically focusing on funding  training for their 
women staff in ICT use?
Q9i Female role models in 
ICT field
In your country, to what extent are there female "role 
models" in the ICT field (such as Women in senior 
positions in IT-sector firms, or women in senior 
government positions in the field of science or IT).
Q9k Women's groups 
Websites
In your country, to what extent are there women's 
groups' Websites?
Q9l % of women ICT 
graduates
In your country, in tertiary education, what proportion 
of ICT graduates are women?
Q10 Government Website 
censorship
To what extent does the government impose 
restrictions on access to Websites (censorship)?
Q11a Web use by the 
Elderly
To what extent do the segments of society listed 
below (a. to e.) have effective and useful access to 
the Web: Elderly people          
Q11b Web use by illiterate 
people
Illiterate people or people with very low literacy
Q11c Web use by those 
with visual disability 
People with visual disability
Q11d Web use by those 
with learning 
disabilities
People with learning disabilities
Q11e Web use by people 
susceptible to 
seizures
People susceptible to seizures
(Primary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 42
Q11f Web use by those 
with hearing disability
People with hearing disability
Q12 Criminal activities To what extent do you think that the Web is making 
it easier to undertake criminal activities in your 
country?
Q13 laws against cyber 
crime
To what extent are there laws against cyber crime in 
your country?
Q14 Trust in the Web for 
commerce
To what extent would you say that the Web is trusted 
as a means of buying and selling goods and services 
in your country?
Q15 Web use for 
Agriculture
To what extent do government or non-government 
agencies use the Web to disseminate important 
information to farmers (for example on prices, 
weather conditions, fertilizers and pesticides, dealing 
with plant and livestock diseases, etc.)?
Q16 Quality of training for 
computer engineers
To what extent would you consider your country 
to be ranking amongst the World's best in training 
computer engineers?
Q17 Business 
development around 
the Web
To what extent would you consider your country to 
have developed successful businesses based on the 
use of the Web?
Q18 Reliability of electricity 
supply
How reliable is the electricity supply in your country?
Q20 Affordability of Web 
access
To what extent would you say that Web access is 
affordable (cost of Internet connection, downloads, 
etc.) to the large majority of the population in your 
country?
Q22 Government use of 
open licenses
To what extent are government agencies publishing 
information on the Web using open licenses?
Q23a publication of trade 
data on the Web
To what extent are there government data on the 
Web in the following areas: International trade data
Q23b publication of fiscal 
data on the Web
Detailed data on budgeted and actual spending of 
different departments
Q23c Publication of health 
data on the Web
Data on health sector performance (hospitals, 
doctors, etc.)
Q23d Publication of 
education data on the 
Web
Education performance data
Q23e Publication of 
transport data on the 
Web
Transport data and schedules
Q23f Publication of census 
data on the Web
Census data –age, income, voting, migration, etc.
(Primary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 43
Q23g Publication of map 
data on the Web
Map data (full map coverage of the country)
Q23h Tax filing via the Web Information on tax returns and how to submit those
Q23i Information 
on contacts in 
government 
departments
Information and contact details of whom to reach 
for different  government services (e.g. local police 
stations/libraries, etc.)
Q23j Publication of crime 
data on the Web
Data and statistics on crime in the country
Q24 Ease of access of 
government data
How easy is it to access government data (as listed 
in Question 23 above) on the Web in open, machine 
readable formats (.csv or .xls file, XML, RDF, etc.)?
Q25 Extent of Open 
Government Data 
Initiative 
Does the government have a specific Open 
Government Data initiative?
Q26 Creation of new 
services based on 
government data
To what extent are Web applications and services in 
areas such as health, education, security, budgets, 
etc., "built" on top of government data (i.e. has 
there been new and useful information and services 
derived from the published government data in those 
fields)?
(Primary data indicators cont:)
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 44
APPENDIX II
Index tree diagram, weighting scheme and description of components and sub-Indexes.
 Description
Component Communications 
Infrastructure
This component assesses the state and availability of 
the physical and Communications Infrastructure that 
enables access to the Web
Component Institutional 
Infrastructure
This component assesses the state of the institutional 
ecosystem - including education, laws and regulations 
- that enable access to the Web
Component Web Content This component assesses the extent to which relevant 
and useful content is available on the Web
Component Web use This component assesses the extent of Web use 
in a country, including by disabled sections of the 
population
Component Political Impact This component assesses the utility of the Web and 
its impact on politics and government
Component Economic Impact This component assesses the utility of the Web and 
its impact on business and the economy
Component Social Impact This component assesses the utility of the Web and 
its impact on health, education and social activities
Sub-index Readiness This sub-Index assesses the state of the 
communications and Institutional Infrastructure that is 
needed to be able to access the Web in a country
Sub-index The Web This sub-index assesses the availability of relevant 
and useful content, as well as the number of Internet 
and Web users in a country 
Sub-index Impact This sub-Index assesses the impact and utility of the 
Web in the political, economic and social dimensions
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 45
APPENDIX III  
“Executive Summary” and “Conclusions” extracts from an advance, online edition of a paper 
entitled: “ASSESSMENT OF THE WEB INDEX, survey questionnaire calibration and uncertainty 
analysis”, by Annoni P., Weziak-Bialowolska D. and Nardo M., European Commission, Joint 
Research Centre Econometrics and Applied Statistics Unit.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The purpose of this analysis is a comprehensive assessment of the Web Index 2011 (WI), 
published by the World Wide Web Foundation in September 2012. The WI aims to measure 
the state and value of the Web focusing on the impact of the Web on people and nations. The 
Index covers 61 countries worldwide and consists of 85 underlying indicators across seven 
components and three sub-indexes. Primary data, coming from an ad hoc expert assessment 
survey, and secondary data coming from official datasets are combined in the WI. 
The usage of primary data is one of the innovative aspects of the first release of the WI. They 
play a remarkable role in the construction of the composite indicator as they account for about 
60% of the WI indicators. They are sourced via an expert assessment survey and reviewed by 
national peers. Given that the expert assessment survey has been specifically designed for the 
first release of the Index, the analysis of the survey outcomes is of particular importance. To 
this aim a statistical model designed for the analysis of survey data is employed. Based on the 
model outcomes we provide suggestions on how to improve data gathering in future surveys.     
The second part of the analysis contains the robustness analysis of the WI. Every composite 
index is the result of a number of choices on the framework, the number and identity of 
indicators to include, their normalization, the weights to attach to each indicator and component, 
the aggregation method and many others. As with every composite index, some choices are 
openly normative and subjective, driven by developers’ and experts’ opinion, others can be 
justified on the basis of statistical analysis, mathematical simplicity or common practice. The 
uncertainty analysis presented in this study aims at assessing to what extent these choices 
might affect the country scores and ranks based on the composite indicator. To this purpose six 
alternative scenarios are simulated each challenging one particular assumption made in the WI. 
The assessment of different scenarios is always done taking the official WI index, version 2011, 
as the reference one. In uncertainty analysis of composite indicators country rank volatility is 
generally caused by the country scoring relatively high in some indicators/components and low 
in others. Our analysis shows no cases of remarkable volatility. There are some countries with 
relatively high volatility for some scenarios. They are likely to feature as a sort of unbalance of 
scores in the different WI indicators/components. 
Analysis of survey data
Primary data are the backbone of the WI. The survey consists of a detailed questionnaire 
submitted to the experts/professionals from 61 countries worldwide and assessed by national 
and regional peer reviewers. Designing a questionnaire is generally a difficult task. The WI 
case is particularly challenging given the complex nature of the topic surveyed and the wide 
coverage required. Our analysis of primary data aims at providing survey designers with some 
insights into possible problematic questions and/or unexpectedly behaving countries. A specific 
“ADVANCE ONLINE EDITION”
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 46
model belonging to the family of the Rasch models is employed. Rasch analysis is a statistical 
measurement tool originally conceived as a psychometric method for the social sciences and 
designed for the treatment of survey data. The analysis of WI primary data allows us to check 
for a series of issues: category redundancy, questions’ unexpected answers , questions’ relative 
difficulty and the validity of the selected framework. Results show that the questionnaire is 
balanced and the response structure organised in a ten-category scale is always appropriate. 
Few questions stand out as problematic: Q10 (To what extent does the government impose 
restrictions on access to websites (censorship)?), Q25 (Does the government have a specific 
Open Government Data initiative?), Q2a (Do the main political parties have websites?) and Q12 
(To what extent do you think that the Web is making it easier to undertake criminal activities in 
your country?). Some of these questions do not seem to be clear enough for the respondents, 
while others appear to be too technical or counter-oriented with respect to the concept under 
measurement. The general suggestion for all of these questions is a rephrasing to make 
them clearer. No country shows a notable unexpected pattern of answers, confirming that 
the questionnaire was always scored by experts with their best efforts. Question difficulty is 
almost always as expected with a clear indication that gender bias does matter. Finally, survey 
data describe an almost unique factor in each WI component, as supported by the Rasch 
dimensionality analysis. This means that the grouping of the different survey indicators into 
different WI components is statistically appropriate.   
Uncertainty analysis
Scenario 1. Weighting. Weights assigned to each component/sub-index of the WI are changed 
for checking the volatility of scores/ranks with respect to the reference WI. Very extreme 
configurations are also tested by choosing a wide range of variability for the simulation weights. 
Overall the WI is not highly affected by the change in weights confirming the robustness of the 
Index with respect to the reference weighting structure. Equal weighting either at the sub-index 
level or at both component and sub-index levels is also tested and shows a maximum shift of 5 
positions in the ranking. Iceland, Argentina and Namibia would be the most favoured countries if 
equal weighting were used for the WI. With more extreme weighting scenarios, distant from the 
reference one, the most affected countries would be Switzerland, Ireland, Singapore, Colombia, 
Poland, China and Russia, with shifts in rank higher than 10% of the maximum possible shift. 
Scenario 2. Different aggregation for three indicators. The Communications Infrastructure 
component is meant to capture if people can (easily) access the Web, not how it is accessed. 
In order to take into account different access modalities for different countries, we adopt an 
alternative way to aggregate some of the indicators describing web access in the WI and check 
the impact on country scores and ranks at component, sub-index and Index levels. The WI is 
almost not affected by the change in the way Web access is included in the Index. A modest 
volatility in ranks is observed for the sub-index Readiness and the component Communications 
Infrastructure. For the Readiness sub-index differences in ranks are at most of 2 positions 
for Uganda (downward in the WI scale) and 3 positions for Pakistan (upward). In the case of 
Communications Infrastructure the maximum shift amounts to 5 for Tunisia and 4 for China, they 
would then gain some positions.
Scenario 3. Inclusion of four additional indicators. The Institutional Infrastructure component 
of WI contains a set of indicators designed to describe possible gender biases in the access 
and use of the Web (gender indicators). In particular two indicators describe implicit gender 
bias in computer training and in focusing on science and technology expressed as a “distance” 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 47
between respective levels for girls and boys. In order to take into account also the level of these 
indicators, four additional indicators are added to the Institutional Infrastructure component 
which measure the level of computer training and focusing on science and technology among 
girls and boys respectively. The addition has almost no effect on the final results. The highest 
observed difference in the WI ranking is of 1 position only. As expected, the volatility increases 
when the sub-index and the components are concerned. The biggest observed differences in 
the sub-index Readiness are of 4 (Morocco) and 3 (Benin) positions, while in the component 
Institutional Infrastructure the highest shift is of 5 positions (Ecuador and China).
Scenario 4. Different treatment for survey data. In the Index computation primary and 
secondary data are treated in the same way: after a statistical preliminary transformation , they 
are normalised and then aggregated across components and sub-indexes. In this scenario a 
different method is used to derive ‘numbers’ from survey data, i.e. the Rasch method employed 
also for the overall analysis of the survey data. The replacement in the WI of the original survey 
indicators with the new statistically quantified indicators turns out to be the biggest challenge 
to the WI structure as the structure of four out of seven components are partially altered due 
to technical reasons related to the use of the Rasch model. Still the comparison between the 
reference WI and our simulations shows a rather robust Index: the largest changes are those 
for Australia and Philippines with a modest improvement of 4 positions in the WI ranking and by 
Singapore, Iceland and Benin which decline by 4 positions. A much higher ranking volatility can 
been seen at the sub-index and component level especially for the Web Content component 
where Indonesia could drop 14 positions in the WI ranking while Bangladesh and Ecuador 
would climb by 16 positions and South Africa by 13.
Scenario 5. Compensability. Can high web use or a high social impact compensate for poor 
institutional or communications infrastructure? The aggregation used in the WI assumes it can, 
as poor performances in some sub-indexes (components) are linearly compensated by good 
scores in others. We test a different aggregation where bads are less easily compensated by 
goods. WI passes the test easily: no country scores relatively high in some components and low 
in others so compensability does not seem an issue with this dataset. 
 Scenario 6. The contribution of each component and sub-index. In this scenario the 
contribution of each component to the Index is assessed by excluding one component at a time 
and comparing scores/ranks to the reference ones. Our analysis highlights the Political, Social 
and Economic Impact components as the three most influential ones, while the least influencing 
one turns out to be the Communications Infrastructure component. This reflects the weighting 
scheme of the WI where 60% of the overall weight is assigned to the sub-index Impact. 
The correlation pattern of the WI is also tested. The weights assigned by developers to different 
sub-indexes and components, with the aim of attributing to these a pre-established scale of 
importance, are compared with the importance the same sub-indexes and components have as 
measured by a statistical measure. Our analysis finds the following: 
Within Components: In the Communications Infrastructure indicator ITUG (% of population 
covered by a mobile cellular network) is much less important than what the weight assigned 
to it by the World Wide Web Foundation would suggest. The same happens in the Institutional 
infrastructure to the indicators WEFF (Burden of government regulation), Q9l (In your country, 
in tertiary education, what proportion of ICT graduates are women?), Q10 (To what extent does 
the government impose restrictions on access to websites?), Q16 (To what extent would you 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 48
consider your country to be ranking amongst the World’s best in training computer engineers?), 
Q25 (Does the government have a specific Open Government Data initiative?) and the cluster 
of Q9a-Q9d on gender bias. 
We notice that the indicators WEFF, Q9l, and Q9a-Q9d are not significantly correlated with the 
WI components. They seem to follow a different behaviour as compared with all other indicators 
in the dataset. The same happens for Q12 (To what extent do you think that the Web is making 
it easier to undertake criminal activities in your country?) and to some extent also for WBC (ICT 
service exports as a share of GDP) in the component Economic Impact. These indicators count 
much less in the composite than the weight theoretically assigned to them.
Within sub-indexes. All the components and sub-indexes scores are highly correlated among 
themselves and with the WI. This means that whatever weights are assigned to the components 
or the sub-indexes the change in the WI is only marginal (as proved by our first scenario). 
Although to the sub-index Impact is assigned 3/5 of the overall weight, it actually weights much 
less being extremely correlated with the other two sub-indexes. In other words, the WI is not 
really “multi” dimensional as all components look pretty much the same from the statistical point 
of view. If the correlation structure is confirmed in other editions of the Index, there might be 
room for a reduction in the number of indicators included in the WI framework.
The overall picture of the effect of different tested scenarios on country ranks is shown in Box 1.
Box 1: Comparison of different scenarios on country ranks
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 49
CONCLUSIONS
This study is an assessment of the Web Index 2011 (WI), published by the World Wide Web 
Foundation in September 2012. The Index, computed for 61 countries, is composed of 85 
indicators and uses both survey (primary) data and hard (secondary) data. We analyse both the 
survey questions with the aim of checking the statistical consistency of the answers, and the WI 
in order to evaluate its robustness with respect to some of its main methodological assumptions.
The presence of primary data is one of the innovative aspects of the first release of the WI. 
They play a remarkable role in the construction of the Index as they account for about 60% of 
the WI indicators. The survey to collect primary data constructed ad hoc for the first release 
of the Index consists of a detailed questionnaire submitted to experts/professionals from 61 
countries worldwide and assessed by national and regional reviewers. Designing questionnaires 
is generally a difficult task. The WI case is particularly challenging given the complex nature of 
the topic surveyed and the wide coverage required.
Our analysis of primary data aims at providing the questionnaire designers with some insights 
into possible problematic questions and/or unexpectedly behaving countries. To this purpose 
a specific model belonging to the family of the Rasch models is employed. Results show that 
the questionnaire is balanced and the response structure organised in a ten category scale is 
always appropriate. A few questions stand out as problematic: Q10 (To what extent does the 
government impose restrictions on access to websites (censorship)?), Q25 (To what extent 
does the government have a specific Open Government Data initiative?), Q2a (To what extent 
do the main political parties have websites?) and Q12 (To what extent do you think that the Web 
is making it easier to undertake criminal activities in your country?). Some of those questions 
are too technical for the respondents while others are not clear enough or seem counter-
oriented with respect to the concept to be measured. In general, we suggest the rephrasing 
of the problematic questions to make them clearer. No country shows a notable unexpected 
pattern of answers, confirming that the questionnaire has been always scored by experts at 
their best. Question difficulties are almost always as expected with a strong indication that 
gender bias does matter. Finally, primary data from the questionnaire describe an almost unique 
factor in each WI component, as supported by the Rasch dimensionality analysis. This means 
that the grouping of the different survey indicators into different WI components is statistically 
appropriate.  
The second part of this report contains the robustness analysis of the WI. Every composite 
index is the result of a number of choices on the framework, the number and identity of 
indicators to include, their normalization, the weights attached to each indicator and component, 
the aggregation method and many others. As with every composite indicator, some choices 
are openly normative and subjective, driven by developers’ and experts’ opinion, others can 
be justified on the basis of statistical analysis, mathematical simplicity or common practice. 
The uncertainty analysis presented in this study aims at assessing the extent to which some 
of these choices might affect the country scores and ranks based on the composite Index . To 
this purpose six alternative scenarios are simulated each challenging one particular assumption 
made in the WI, including  different aggregation methods and different weighting schemes. The 
assessment of the scenarios is always done in comparative terms with respect to the reference 
scenario, that is: the WI published by the World Wide Web Foundation in September 2012. 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 50
The WI proved to be robust and consistent. For each of the six simulated scenarios, even for 
the most distant from the reference one, the maximum shift in WI country ranks is always in the 
band ± 6, which corresponds to 10% of the maximum possible shift in this case. Nevertheless, 
a few indicators are found to be not in line with the underlying concept, while the general high 
correlation across WI elements (indicators, components and sub-indexes) highlights a possible 
redundancy in the number of indicators included. 
Overall, despite its multifaceted structure, the wide coverage of different countries and the fact 
that it includes both survey and hard data, from the statistical point of view the index is robust.
 
2012 Web Indexwww.webfoundation.org/Webindex 51
ABOUT OXFORD ECONOMICS
Oxford Economics is a leading organisation in quantitative analysis 
and economic forecasting. Oxford Economics played a central 
role in the production of the Index, including the data collection, 
statistical analysis and computation, and the country surveys.http://www.oxfordeconomics.com/

