World-Wide Web: The Information Universe 
Tim Berners-Lee, Robert Cailliau, Jean-François Groff, and Bernd Pollermann 
The World-Wide Web (W3) initiative is a practical project designed to bring a global information universe into existence 
using available technology. This article describes the aims, data model, and protocols needed to implement the "web" and 
compares them with various contemporary systems. 
The Dream 
Pick up your pen, mouse, or favorite pointing device 
and press it on a reference in this document— 
perhaps to the author's name, or organization, or 
some related work. Suppose you are then directly 
presented with the background material—other pa-
pers, the author's coordinates, the organization's ad-
dress, and its entire telephone directory. Suppose 
each of these documents has the same property of 
being linked to other original documents all over the 
world. You would have at your fingertips all you 
need to know about electronic publishing, high-
energy physics, or for that matter, Asian culture. If 
you are reading this article on paper, you can only 
dream, but read on. 
Since Vannevar Bush's article (1945), men have 
dreamed of extending their intellect by making their 
collective knowledge available to each individual by 
using machines. Computers give us two practical 
techniques for human-knowledge interface. One is 
hypertext, in which links between pieces of text (or 
other media) mimic human association of ideas. The 
other is text retrieval, which allows associations to be 
deduced from the content of text. In the first case, the 
reader's operation is typically to click with a mouse 
(or type in a reference number). In the second case, it 
is to supply some words representing that which he 
desires. The W3 ideal world allows both operations 
and provides access from any browsing platform. 
Reality 
Existing research projects and commercial products 
are not far form achieving parts of this dream. The 
Xanadu system is an ambitious distributed hyper-
text project. Existing hypertext systems (see for ex-
ample Beyond Hypertext, 1990, Kahn, et al., 1988, & 
Nelson, 1988) tend to be restricted to the local or dis-
tributed file system and they often are developed 
with a limited set of platforms in mind. Contempo-
rary information retrieval and access systems such 
Tim Berners-Lee <trimbl@info.cern.ch> has a background in text processing, real-time software, and communications. He 
developed his first hypertext system, "Enquire," in 1980 for his own use and he started the World-Wide Web initiative in 
1989. 
Robert Cailliau <cailliau@cernvm.cern.ch> has been interested in document production since 1975 and is a long-time 
user of HyperCard. He ran CERN's Office computing Systems group from 1987 to 1989 and joined Tim Berners-Lee in 
1990 to start the World-Wide Web. 
Jean-François Groff <jfg@info.cern.ch> graduated from the French National Institute of telecommunications and came to 
CERN after working for Intelsat. As a strong believer in the future of networked hypertext, he joined the World-Wide Web 
team in 1991. 
Bernd Pollermann <bernd@cernvm.cern.ch> has experience in managing large bases of information and is responsible 
for the index of CERN's computer center documentation, now included in the Web. He is also the editor of CERN's Com-
puter Newsletter. 
The mail address for all authors is: CERN, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland, Phone: +41 22 767 3755, or +41 22 767 7155 
for fax. 
ELECTRONIC NETWORKING, Vol. 2, No. 1, Spring 1992, pp. 52-58. © 1992 Meckler 
52 
Vol.2/No. 1 Electronic Networking ■ Spring 1992 53 
as Alex (Cate, 1992), Gopher (Alberti, 
et al. 1991), Prospero (Neuman, 
1992), and WAIS (Davis, et al., 1990) 
cover a wide area without the hyper-
text functionality. Merging the tech-
niques of hypertext, information re-
trieval, and wide area networking 
produces the W3 model. 
The W3 Data Model 
The W3 model uses both paradigms 
of hypertext link and text search in a 
complementary fashion, for neither 
can replace the functionality of the 
other. Figure 1 shows how a person-
alized web of information is built 
from these operators. 
Features to note are: 
• Information need only be 
represented once, as a refer-
ence may be made instead of 
making a copy. 
• Links allow the topology of 
the information to evolve, so 
modeling the state of human 
knowledge at any time is 
without constraint. 
• The web stretches seamlessly 
from small personal notes on 
the local workstation to large 
databases on other conti-
nents. 
• Indexes are documents, and 
so may themselves be found 
by searches and/or follow-
ing links. An index is repre-
sented to the user by a "cov-
er page" that describes the 
data indexed and the properties of the 
search engine. 
• The documents in the web do not have to 
exist as files; they can be "virtual" docu-
ments generated by a server in response to a 
query or document name. They can there-
fore represent views of databases, or snap-
shots of changing data (such as the weather 
forecasts, financial information, etc.). 
A pleasing and useful aspect is that almost all 
existing information systems can be represented in 
terms of the W3 model. A menu becomes a page of 
hypertext, with each element linked to a different 
destination. The same is true of a directory, whether 
part of a hierarchical or cross-linked system. The no-
tion of many named indexes within the web allows a 
given search engine and database to be visible with 
several different addresses, each representing differ-
ent options for the search algorithm. For example, 
the index / l i b r a r y / b o o k s / t i + a u / s u b s t r i n g 
may give a title and author search, whereas 
54 Electronic Networking ■ Spring 1992 VoI.2/No. 1 
/ l i b r a r y / b o o k s / t e x t / e x a c t may give an exact-
word full-text search. Addresses are discussed in 
more detail below. 
Publishing 
From the information provider's point of view, exist-
ing information systems may be "published" as part 
of the web simply by giving access to the data 
through a small server program. The data itself, and 
the software and human procedures that manage it, 
are left entirely in place. This approach has allowed, 
for example, a mainframe-based document storage 
and index system to be opened up to all platforms in 
the organization. To see how this is done requires a 
brief overview of the W3 architecture. 
W3 Architecture 
Hypertext and text retrieval systems have been 
available for many years, and a valid question is 
why a global system has not already come into exis-
tence. Traditional answers to this question are the 
lack of: 
• a common naming scheme for documents 
• common network access protocols 
• common data formats for 
hypertext 
Most research in hyper-
text systems (the Xanadu pro-
ject excepted) have focused on 
the user interface and authoring 
questions rather than on the 
questions of wide-area and 
long-term distribution. These 
architectures have assumed 
that users share a common ap-
plication program running on 
computers (often of the same 
type) that share a common file 
system. However, the W3 archi-
tecture must cope with a widely 
distributed heterogeneous set 
of computers running different 
applications that use different 
preferred data formats. This re-
quires a client-server model. 
The client has the responsibility 
for resolving a document ad-
dress into a document using its repertoire of net-
work protocols. The server provides data in a simple 
hypertext or plain text form, or, by negotiation with 
the client, in any other data format. 
It may be more difficult initially to develop a 
generic hypertext browser than a specific front-end 
for a particular information system. However, the 
decoupling of the client and server programs by the 
"information bus" pays off as more clients and serv-
ers are plugged in and universal readership is 
achieved. Writing a server for new data is generally 
a simple task because it requires no human interface 
programming. 
Document Naming 
The fulcrum on which the document universe rests is 
the scheme for naming documents. A document 
name provides a method for the client to find the 
server and for the server to find the document. In the 
W3 model, a name can also specify a part of the docu-
ment to be selected from the displaying application. 
Although a document name is normally hid-
den in the hypertext syntax transferred over the link, 
in practice it must sometimes be referred to by peo-
ple, and passed through applications (such as mail) 
that are not yet hypertext-aware. Therefore, ideally 
it must be composed of printable characters and 
manageably short. 
Vol.2/No. 1 Electronic Networking ■ Spring 1992 55 
Any lasting refer-
ence to a document must 
be a logical name rather 
than a physical address. 
That is, it should refer to a 
document's registration 
and some "publishing" 
organization rather than 
any physical location, so 
that its location may later 
be moved. The client is 
therefore prepared to fol-
low several stages of 
translation by name serv-
ers before finding a final 
document server. Similar-
ly, a document name 
should not contain any in-
formation that is transito-
ry, such as the particular 
formats available for a 
document or its length. 
The W3 naming 
scheme fulfills these re-
quirements but is other-
wise open to the addition 
of new protocols as tech-
nology evolves. For this 
purpose a prefix is used 
to identify the protocol 
(and therefore naming 
scheme) to be used. Cli-
ents who do not have that 
protocol in their reper-
toire refer to a gateway 
for translation. 
Protocols 
The W3 clients are built on a common core of net-
working code for information access. This core pro-
vides access using widely deployed internet proto-
cols such as: 
• File Transfer Protocol—FTP (Postel & 
Reynolds, 1985) 
• Network News Transfer Protocol—NNTP 
(Kantor & Lapsley, 1986) 
• Access to mounted file systems 
A new search and retrieve (SR) protocol, 
known as HTTP, was found to be necessary. Faster 
than FTP for document retrieval, HTTP also allows 
index search. HTTP is similar in implementation to 
the Internet protocols above and similar in function-
ality to the WAIS protocol. Some differences are dis-
cussed below. 
Document Formats 
The Dexter data model of hypertext (Halasz & 
Schwartz, 1990) provides a conceptual model for 
hypertext systems and the HyTime standard (Gold-
farb, 1991) formalizes hypertext at a high level. The 
W3 project defines a concrete syntax in the SGML 
style for basic hypertext as it is used for menus, 
search results, and online hypertext documentation. 
56 Electronic Networking ■ Spring 1992 VoI.2/No. 1 
Even W3 browsing application is able to parse this 
simple format (see Figure 3). In the pilot phase of 
the project, this format was all that was required, 
but in the second phase, format negotiation be-
tween client and server will allow the exchange of 
information in any medium using any mutually ac-
ceptable representation. 
WAIS and the Web 
From the point of view of the W3 dream, the WAIS 
protocol represents a significant advance on the 
search and retrieve protocol standard Z39.50/ISO-
10163 by being stateless and introducing a persistent 
name. The document names used are local to the 
containing database, but these names may be ap-
pended to the database name and host address to 
form a universal W3 address. In this way, WAIS in-
dexes and servers can be represented in the web. A 
gateway program, running at CERN and available 
for general use, provides this mapping. The WAIS 
model also uses separate "source" files to describe 
indexes. The WAIS-W3 gateway keeps caches of 
these files, using them to build descriptive "cover 
pages" for indexes. 
The current WAIS model requires that the re-
sults of a search point to documents available from 
the same server. That is, the same server is responsi-
ble for indexing and actually providing the data. In 
the W3 world this restriction does not exist. A practi-
cal advantage of this approach is that, as Yeong 
(1991) points out, a large multimedia document may 
be most efficiently retrieved from a different host 
and by using a different protocol from that used for 
the original query. Furthermore, as online informa-
tion proliferates, an important function is that of 
"third party" reviewers, indexers, and overview 
writers who refer to data they do not actually hold. 
It is expected that these services will be a key to the 
control of the information explosion and a valuable 
asset to the community. 
A W3 user builds a personalized web of infor-
mation by making links from his own notebook into 
the web. He can make a link to the result of a search, 
so that the next time he follows the link the search is 
re-evaluated. This is the equivalent of storing a 
WAIS "question"—there is a good mapping be-
tween the models. The W3 clients do not currently 
support relevance feedback, although it is not alien 
to the model. 
There are two occasions when hypertext would 
particularly enhance the WAIS model. First, users of-
ten would like to be able to browse through availa-
ble WAIS indexes. Both WAIS and W3 regard index-
es as documents and therefore allow them to be 
found using the same techniques as for documents. 
In fact, the WAIS-W3 gateway allows a W3 hypertext 
overview to be made with pointers to WAIS indexes. 
Second, when one has found a piece of text, WAIS 
delivers just that part of file that has been found. 
Very often one would like links to surround infor-
mation in the same database. 
The popularity of WAIS has been a great boost 
to the world of online information. Its integration 
with universal naming and hypertext is to be greatly 
encouraged. 
Menu Systems and the Web 
The Alex (Cate, 1992), Gopher (Alberti et al, 1991), 
and Prospero (Neuman, 1992) systems each use the 
directory and file (or menu and document) model to 
Enthusiastic users of the 
browsing software particularly 
appreciated the consistent user 
interface for all types of data. 
implement a global information system. These map 
into the web very naturally, as each directory 
(menu) is represented by a list of text elements 
linked to other directories or files (documents). 
These systems are very comfortable for readers who 
are used to hierarchical file systems, for whom direc-
tories are an established concept. Even when the 
structure is in fact cross-linked, readers feel at home 
as they regard it as a tree structure. Furthermore, for 
the information provider such systems are easy to 
build by cross-linking existing file systems. 
An example of mapping a menu system onto 
the web is made by the W3 client software which in-
corporates the simple Gopher protocol and therefore 
allows links into the Gopher system. The easy start-
up of these systems has made them fairly popular. It 
is true that a menu is necessarily a more restricting 
medium of communication than general hypertext: a 
page of hypertext can convey more information to 
the reader about the choices to be followed, because 
Vol.2/No. 1 Electronic Networking ■ Spring 1992 57 
it uses more flexible formatting. Hypertext allows 
menus of links to lead to nodes with progressively 
greater textual content. However, the restricted 
world of plain text and menus, with its ease of publi-
cation, is adequate for many information providers. 
Similarly, W3 clients also have built-in ability to 
browse the world of anonymous FTP archives, and a 
gateway provides access to Digital™'s VMS™/Help 
information. 
X.500 and the Web 
The x.500 standard for name servers provides a use-
ful tool for long-term naming of documents. Initially 
intended for coordinates of people and organizations, 
to be used for documents it needs extensions similar 
to (though simpler than) those proposed, for exam-
ple, by Yeong (1991). The chief attribute of a docu-
ment for W3 purposes is the W3 physical address. 
Once access to x.500 name servers is widely available, 
"User Friendly Names" will form an appropriate W3 
document name format for logical addresses. 
Experience with the W3 Pilot Project 
The first client software written to the W3 require-
ments ran on the NeXT machine using the NeXT-
Step™ graphic user interface tools. This hypertext 
browser/editor demonstrated the ease of use of a 
window-based hypertext interface to global informa-
tion. It also allowed an overview hypertext database 
to be built and to point to data on the web by subject 
or organization. The second client written was a 
line-mode browser for character-mode terminals Be-
ing portable to almost any machine, it assures uni-
versal readability of all published documents. Hy-
pertext documentation was put online, and 
gateways were set up into various existing informa-
tion systems. 
Enthusiastic users of the browsing software 
particularly appreciated the consistent user interface 
for all types of data. Reading news articles as hyper-
text is a good example: the same user interface is pro-
vided, and references between articles, and between 
articles and the news groups in which they are pub-
lished, are all consistently represented as links. 
It became evident that both hypertext links and 
text search were important parts of the model. A typ-
ical information hunt will start from a default hyper-
text page by following links to an index. A search of 
that index may return the required data, or some 
more links may be followed. Sometimes a further in-
dex may be found, and that searched, and so on. 
When the user of a hypertext editor has found what 
he wants (no matter how remote), he can make a new 
link to it from his home page so that he can find it 
again later almost instantly. This is generally prefera-
ble to making a copy that may soon be out of date. 
The Future 
The success of the pilot project prompted further de-
velopment of W3-compliant software and informa-
tion. Current client projects within various organiza-
tions include three X11-based browsers and a 
Macintosh browser. Various server gateways to oth-
er information systems have been produced, and the 
total amount of information available on the web is 
becoming very significant, especially since it in-
cludes all anonymous FTP archives, WAIS servers, 
and Gopher servers as well as specific W3 servers. 
We notice that a W3 server could provide the func-
tions of each of these servers, and so we look for-
ward to a single protocol that can be used by the 
whole community. 
The Archie project (Emtage & Deutsch, 1992) 
provides an index into the Internet archives and is 
an excellent example of a service that we hope to 
make available in the web. We can imagine such in-
dexing being extended to cover other forms of data. 
W3 provides a basic infrastructure for information 
access. All kinds of indexing, searching, filtering and 
analysis tools could usefully be built using the ge-
neric W3 access mechanism, and so be applied to all 
the various domains of data. Their results could then 
be made available on the web. Many possible re-
search projects in hypertext are made possible by the 
existence of a very large linked information base. 
Meanwhile, the W3 team at CERN and collabo-
rators worldwide invite any information suppliers to 
join the web, contributing information or software. 
Detailed information about W3 protocols and data 
formats, and so forth, is available from our W3 serv-
er. The crudest way to access this is by Telnet to 
info.cern.ch. A better way is to run browser software 
(available by anonymous FTP from the same host) 
on your local machine. If you use a window-
oriented browser, then you will be able to read arti-
cles like this on your screen. When you do, pick up 
your pen, mouse, or favorite pointing device and 
press it on a reference in this document.... The 
dream is coming true. 
58 Electronic Networking ■ Spring 1992 VoI.2/No. 1 
References 
Alberti, Bob, Anklesaria, Farhad, Lindner, 
Paul, McCahill, Mark, & Torrey, Dan. (1991). Notes 
on the Internet Gopher protocol. Unpublished manu-
script, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, Micro-
computer and Workstation Networks Research 
Center. 
Beyond Hypertext: The DECWindows hyperenvi-
ronment vision. (1990). Maynard, MA: Digital Equip-
ment Corporation. 
Bush, Vannevar. (1945, July). As we may think. 
The Atlantic Monthly, 176 (1), 101-108. 
Cate, Vincent. Unpublished private communi-
cation, January 27, 1992. Carnegie-Mellon 
University. 
Davis, F.; Kahle, Brewster; Morris, Harry; Sa-
lem, Jim; Shen, Tracy; Wang, Rod; Sui, John; & Grin-
baum, Mark. (1990). WAIS interface Protocol: Protocol 
Functional specification. Unpublished report. Menlo 
Park, CA: Thinking Machines Corporation. 
Emtage, A., & Deutsch, D. (1992). Archie—An 
electronic directory service for the Internet. In Pro-
ceedings of the Winter 1992 USENIX Conference (pp. 
92-110). Berkeley, CA: USENIX Association [2560 
Ninth St., Suite 215, Berkeley, CA 94710]. 
Goldfarb, Charles F. (1991). Information Technol-
ogy-Hypermedia/Time-based structuring language (Hy-
Time) (ISO/IEC CD 10744). Unpublished manuscript 
[available from authors]. 
Halasz, F., & Schwartz, M. (1990). The Dexter 
Hypertext reference model. In Moline J.; Benigni, J.; 
and Baronas, J., eds. Proceedings of the Hypertext Stan-
dardization Workshop January 16-18, pp. 95-133. Gai-
thersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and 
technology. 
Kahn, Pau, & Meyrowitz. (1988). Guide, Hyper-
Card, and Intermedia: A comparison of Hypertext/ 
Hypermedia systems. (IRIS Technical Report 88-7). 
Providence, RI: Brown University. 
Kantor, B. & Lapsley, P. (1986, February). A 
proposed standard for the stream-based transmission of 
news (Internet RFC-977). 
Nelson, Theodor H. (1990). Literary Machines 
version 90.1. Sausolito, CA: Mindfull Press [3020 
Brudgeway, Suite 295, Sausolito, CA 94965]. 
Neuman, Clifford B. (1992). Prospero: A tool 
for organizing Internet resources. Electronic Network-
ing: Research, applications, and Policy. 2 (1), 31-38. 
Postel, J., & Reynolds, J. (1985). File transfer pro-
tocol (FTP) Internet RFC-959). 
Yeong, W. (1991) Towards networked information 
retrieval (Technical report 91-06-25-01). Reston, VA: 
performance Systems International, Inc. 
Yeong, W. (1991, November). Representing pub-
lic archives in the directory. Internet Draft. Reston, VA: 
Performance Systems International, Inc. 

