Six Challenges for the Semantic Web 
 
V. Richard Benjamins1, Jesús Contreras1, Oscar Corcho2 and Asunción Gómez-Pérez2  
1Intelligent Software Components, S.A. 
www.isoco.com (Spain) 
{richard,jcontreras}@isoco.com 
2Technical University Madrid. Facultad de Informática. 
Campus de Montegancedo, s/n. 28660 Boadilla del Monte. Madrid. Spain. 
Tel: +34913367439 Fax: +34913524819 
{ocorcho,asun}@fi.upm.es 
Abstract. The Semantic Web has attracted a diverse, but significant, community 
of researchers, institutes and companies, all sharing the belief that one day the 
Semantic Web will have as big an impact on life as currently the WWW/Internet 
has. We share that vision, based on the ever-increasing need to reduce information 
overload, and to increase task delegation to software agents. However, there is 
still a long way to go before the Semantic Web dream comes true. In this paper, 
we identify some of the major challenges the community faces in the coming 
years, and we outline solution directions. The major challenges concern: (i) the 
availability of content, (ii) ontology availability, development and evolution, (iii) 
scalability, (iv) multilinguality, (v) visualization to reduce information overload, 
and (vi) stability of Semantic Web languages. We will also say some words on the 
economic impact of the Semantic Web. 
1   Introduction 
One of the biggest problems we nowadays face in the information society is information 
overload, a problem which is boosted by the huge size of the WWW. The Web has given us 
access to millions of resources, irrespective of their physical location and language. In order 
to deal with this sheer amount of information, new business models on the web have seen the 
light, such as commercial search engines (of which Google is by far the champion). With the 
expected continuous growth of the WWW, we expect search engines will have a hard time 
maintaining the quality of retrieval results. Moreover, they only access static content, and 
ignore the dynamic part of the web (pages generated from databases). It is our vision that the 
technology of current generation of search engines has its limits. To be able to deal with the 
continuous growth of the WWW (in size, languages and formats), we need to exploit other 
information. This is where the Semantic Web comes in.  
 
The current Web is based on HTML, which specifies how to layout a web page for human 
readers. HTML as such cannot be exploited by information retrieval techniques to improve 
results, which has thus to rely on the words that form the content of the page; hence it is 
restricted to keywords. In the Semantic Web, pages not only store content as a set of unrelated 
words in a document, but also code their meaning and structure. Figure 1 illustrates that 
Semantic Web languages are based on XML and go up the Semantic Web Language Pyramid 
to RDF [Lassila et al], RDFS [Brickley et al], OIL [Horrocks et al], DAML+OIL 
[DAML+OIL], etc.  
 
 
Figure 1: Web languages pyramid. 
Those languages are much richer than HTML and allow –to a greater or lesser extent- to 
represent the meaning and structure of content (interrelationships between concepts). This 
contributes to make web content understandable and procesable by software agents, opening 
the way to a whole new generation of technologies, innovative knowledge-based services and 
business models, where we will see a gradual change from information retrieval support to 
task delegation and achievement.  
 
The problem of Information Overload can be partly tackled by adding intelligence to the 
web. Software agents could manifest various levels of intelligent behaviour from simply 
reactive to adaptive and learning behaviour, where agents actually learn what users like and 
dislike [Etzioni, Perkovitz 1997]. This would shield users from irrelevant information, who 
would only be ‘bothered’ for information of real value. Instead of the current ubiquitous pull 
paradigm that requires users to actively look for information and to execute programs, we 
should work towards delegating those tasks to autonomous software agents. Finally, the tasks 
users will want to execute will become increasingly complex. Software agents should ‘learn’ 
to function in ‘social’ environments and where necessary collaborate, compete or negotiate 
with other agents. The quality and usability of the Semantic Web infrastructure will depend 
on advances on all three dimensions 
Recently, the US and EU governments have recognized the importance of the Semantic 
Web and have established dedicated programs (DAML and IST Action Line III.4.1) to fund 
research aimed at developing the core technology for the Semantic Web.  
 
In spite of the big advantages that the Semantic Web promises, its success or failure will -as 
with the WWW- be determined to a large extent by easy access to, and availability of high-
quality and diverse content. There are still several problems to solve before making this 
happen, including, but not limited to: 
• The availability of content. Currently, there is little Semantic Web content available. 
Existing web content should be upgraded to Semantic Web content including static HTML 
pages, existing XML content, and dynamic content, multimedia and web services. 
• Ontology availability, development and evolution. Ontologies will become a key piece, 
as they allow expliciting the semantics of Semantic Web content. A big effort must be 
made in the creation of common widely used ontologies for the Semantic Web, on the 
provision of adequate infrastructure for ontology development, change management and 
mapping, and, in this distributed web environment, on the adequate control of the evolution 
of ontologies and the annotations referring to them. 
• Scalability. A significant effort must be made to organize Semantic Web content, store it 
and provide the necessary mechanisms to find it. All these tasks must be performed and 
coordinated in a scalable manner, as these solutions should be prepared for the huge growth 
of the Semantic Web  
• Multilinguality. This problem already exists in the current Web, and should also be tackled 
in the Semantic Web. Any Semantic Web approach should provide facilities to access 
information in several languages, allowing the creation and access to SW content 
independently of the native language of content providers and users. 
• Visualization. Intuitive visualization of Semantic Web content will become more and more 
important to solve the increasing amount of information overload, as users will demand the 
easy recognition of relevant content for their purposes. New techniques must be explored 
that differ from the usual hypertext structure visualization of the current web.  
• Stability of Semantic Web languages. Finally, standardization efforts must be performed 
urgently in this emerging field, in order to allow the creation of the necessary technology 
that supports the Semantic Web  
 
In this paper, we will explain those challenges1 and provide some solution directions. But 
before that, we will sketch some relevant notions that have emerged in the short history of the 
                                                          
1 The six challenges discussed in this paper will be dealt with in the new European project Esperonto Services 
(www.esperonto.net). 
Page 3/15 
Semantic Web. At the end of the paper we will also say something about possible commercial 
applications exploiting the Semantic Web. 
2   The Semantic Web in Retrospect 
The Semantic Web promises to make web content machine understandable, allowing agents 
and applications to access a variety of heterogeneous resources, processing and integrating the 
content, and producing added value output for users. Current technology, mostly developed in 
research centres, already enables this type of scenarios, such as in the ISI/USC Ariadne 
(theatre, restaurants suggestions) and Heracles (travelling) projects2 [Knoblock et al Ariadne], 
[Knoblock et al] We call these pre-Semantic Web applications because, from an application 
point of view, they allow many of the functionalities the Semantic Web promises: software 
agents accessing, manipulating, and integrating content from distributed heterogeneous web 
resources. However, under the hood of these applications there is an ad-hoc solution using 
wrapper technology. A wrapper is a program that accesses an existing website and extracts the 
needed information (e.g. the address of a location or the price of an article). Wrappers are 
screen scrapers in the sense that they parse the HTML source of a page, using heuristics to 
localize and extract the relevant information. Not surprisingly, wrappers have high 
construction and maintenance costs since much testing is needed to guarantee robust 
extraction, and each time the website changes (e.g. its design), the wrapper has to be updated 
accordingly. 
 
The semantic web aims to provide an extra –machine understandable- layer, which will 
considerably simplify programming and maintenance effort for knowledge-based web 
services. 
 
Two dimensions are especially important in this context: 
• Programming effort to set up new added-value services 
• Web preparation effort (in particular the annotation effort) 
 
The programming effort is determined by the amount of programming required to build a 
new service. Figure 2 illustrates3 this by means of some typical information retrieval (IR) 
applications like basic IR, Google4 and CiteSeer5, and contrasts this with the effort needed if 
the Semantic Web already existed (last bar).  
IR is a standard technique currently not requiring a lot of effort. Advanced search engines 
such as Google exploit the web structure for ranking results and therefore, require more effort. 
CiteSeer, a scientific research index for Computer Science, additionally analyses the content 
of documents to find information such as authors and bibliographical references, and requires  
                                                          
2 http://www.isi.edu/info-agents/index.html 
3 This example has an illustrative character and is not meant to reflect actual programming effort. 
4 http://www.google.com 
5 http://citeseer.nj.nec.com 
KeyWords KeyWords + Web
Structure
KeyWords +
Heuristic Ontology
Semantic Concepts
IR Google SiteSeer SW
Pr
og
ra
m
m
in
g 
Ef
fo
rt
 
Figure 2: Programming effort for some typical web applications (search engines). Number on the Y axis is 
only to indicate relative effort [source: authors] 
a larger programming effort. The point we want to make is that the more knowledge is 
exploited in a web service (an application), the larger is the programming effort. In the vision 
of the Semantic Web, the programming effort decreases significantly because there the 
knowledge would be available in the web rather than that it has to be ‘scraped’ from it.  
 
We should contrast this favourable characteristic of the Semantic Web with its current state 
(January, 2002) and observe that there is hardly any Semantic Web content available. So, 
exploiting the knowledge in the Semantic Web currently requires a significant web 
preparation effort. In Figure 3 below we illustrate this with the same typical applications. 
 
A simple keyword-based IR system, Google and CiteSeer do not need any web preparation 
effort to work. Any current Semantic Web application, on the other hand, requires a 
significant annotation effort to put the knowledge into the web to turn it into the Semantic 
Web [Luke et al] [Decker et al] [Benjamins et al (KA)2]. 
 
One of the main challenges the Semantic Web community faces for the construction of 
innovative and knowledge-based web services is to reduce the programming effort while 
keeping the web preparation task as small as possible. In the next section, we will elaborate 
this challenge, as well as the other challenges. 
3   The Challenges 
3.1   Challenge 1: The Availability of Content 
Semantic Web content is web content annotated according to particular ontologies, which 
define the meaning of the words or concepts appearing in the content. Before the notion of the 
Semantic Web existed, we were involved in an experiment ([Decker et al], [Benjamins et al 
Page 5/15 
(KA)2]) aimed at knowledge-based retrieval of information in the Knowledge Engineering 
community. A simple extension to HTML was used to annotate web pages with ontological 
information. This experiment taught us that the annotation effort is one of the major factors 
for potential failure. Creating Semantic Web content is therefore a serious challenge for the 
Semantic Web. Since the infrastructure of the Semantic Web is still being built (RDFS, OIL, 
DAML+OIL, etc.), currently, there is little Semantic Web content available. Apart from the 
infrastructure, researchers are currently building tools to support semantic annotation of web 
content. Such tools are important and critical to the success of the Semantic Web. However, 
they have two limiting characteristics: 1. Most of them annotate only static pages, and 2. 
Many of them focus on creating new content. This leads to the following not optimal 
situation: 
 
• Dynamically generated content is not considered.  ‘Dynamic’ content is generated from 
databases, and according to a study of [Lawrence & Giles 1999] referring to it as the ‘Deep 
Web’- in March 2000, [Michael K. Bergman] its size is estimated to be 400 to 550 times 
larger than the commonly defined World Wide Web, which includes more than one billion 
static web pages. 
• Existing content is running the risk to be excluded from the Semantic Web, even though 
XML content is gaining ground on content share. Although we agree that in the end the 
whole web will be semantic (10 years horizon?), it would be a pity if current high-quality 
web content were not available on the Semantic Web. 
 
KeyWords KeyWords + Web
Structure
KeyWords +
Heuristic Ontology
Semantic Concepts
IR Google SiteSeer SW
Pr
ep
ar
at
io
n 
Ef
fo
rt
 
Figure 3: Web content preparation effort in typical web application [source: authors] 
We see the solution direction for dealing with this challenge as follows. We need to create a 
set of annotation services (middleware) concerning static and dynamic web documents, which 
may include multimedia, and web services. The output of these annotation services will be 
generated according to the language pyramid of the Semantic Web, so that different agents 
understanding different languages of the Semantic Web might always understand and handle 
as much content as might be represented in the different languages. This approach to the 
annotation of resources is rather innovative, in the sense that current efforts have proposed the 
annotation of web resources in just one of these languages, and this layered approach has just 
been taken into account in the development of languages. 
Basically, automatic annotation of static content uses existing wrapping technology. 
Annotation of dynamic content is much more complex. There are several alternatives, which 
can be explored, for example:  
• Extract the dynamic content from its source, annotate it (as if it were static) and store it. 
The problem here is the almost infinite amount of static pages that can be generated from a 
dynamic (database powered) site, and the almost continuous updates, creations and 
removals of generated static pages when data changes in the databases. 
• Leave the content in the database and annotate the query that retrieves the concerned 
content. This option is less space-consuming, and consistency in the annotations is 
guaranteed with respect to the underlying sources of information, since the content is 
dynamically generated/annotated when retrieved from its sources.  
 
Annotation of web services also needs to be considered, so that complex services will be 
able to use existing services over the Semantic Web. This work needs to build on emerging 
standards such as SOAP [SOAP] (simple object access protocol), WSDL [WSDL] (Web 
Service description language), UDDI [UDDI] (Universal Description, Discovery and 
Integration), and WSFL [WSFL] (Web Service Flow Language). For more complex services, 
DAML-S6 [DAML-S] and UPML [UMPL] are interesting candidates, however more research 
is needed to defined the exact characteristics of such language. DAML-S is a DAML-based 
Web service ontology, which supplies Web service providers with a core set of mark-up 
language constructs for describing the properties and capabilities of their Web services in 
unambiguous, computer-interpretable form. UPML is the language framework to mark-up 
high-level services for task achievement as used in the IBROW project7. 
 
Related to the annotation of multimedia content, there are at least two alternatives: image 
and video processing (on the base of so-called “low level features” detected in the shots they 
try to extract content from) and information extraction using NLP techniques of so-called 
“collateral” documents, including textual explanations of images, transcripts of automatic 
speech recognition that report on the events present in video sequences, etc. Independently 
from what alternative is selected, the results would be annotated following the same ideas as 
in the static and dynamic cases presented above. 
3.2   Challenge 2: Ontology Availability, Development and Evolution 
Ontologies are key to the Semantic Web because they are the carriers of the meaning 
contained in the Semantic Web, that is, they provide the vocabulary and semantics of the 
annotations. There are three main issues to be solved regarding this challenge, the first two 
issues are related to traditional ontology development problems that haven't been solved 
                                                          
6 http://www.daml.org/services/ 
7 http://www.swi.psy.uva.nl/projects/ibrow/home.html 
Page 7/15 
completely until now, and the last one is much more related to the new context of the 
Semantic Web: 
 
The first is the construction of kernel ontologies to be used by all the domains. Initiatives 
exist for the construction of some of these kernel ontologies in different domains: the IEEE 
Standard Upper Ontology Group8 aims to create a common unified top level ontology); 
initiatives in the e-commerce domain also exist, such as UNSPSC9, eclass10, RosettaNet11, 
NAICS12, etc. 
 
The second is to provide methodological and technological support for most of the 
activities of the ontology development process [Fernandez-1997], including:  
• Knowledge acquisition, conceptual modelling and ontology coding in Semantic Web 
languages (RDFS, OIL, DAML+OIL), and new languages that may arise in the coming 
years [Maedche, Staab – 2001]. 
• Ontology alignment and mapping, ontology integration, ontology translation tools, and 
ontology reengineering tools if existing ontologies are going to be reused [Fensel et al, 
2001], [Noy, Musen 2000]. 
• Consistency checking tools for the ontologies to be reused [Gomez-Perez 1996]. 
 
The third is the evolution of ontologies and their relation to already annotated data. 
Configuration management tools are necessary to keep control of the versions of each 
ontology as well as the interdependencies between them and annotations. All of those points 
are far from trivial, but need to be solved before a realistic and scalable Semantic Web 
becomes possible. 
3.3 Challenge 3: Scalability of Semantic Web Content 
Once we have the Semantic Web content, we need to worry about how to manage it in a 
scalable manner, that is, how to organize it, where to store it and how to find the right content. 
We have detected two main issues underlying this challenge: 
 
The first one is related to the storage and organization of Semantic Web pages. The ‘basic’ 
Semantic Web consists of ontology-based annotated pages whose linking structure reflects the 
structure of the WWW, that is, pages connected to others by means of hyperlinks. This 
hyperlinked configuration does not fully exploit the underlying semantics of Semantic Web 
pages. We foresee the use of semantic indexes to group Semantic Web content based on 
particular topics. This is a necessary step to make applications able to aggregate content in 
order to provide added value services. Semantic indexes will be generated dynamically using 
ontological information and annotated documents. 
                                                          
8 http://suo.ieee.org/ 
9 http://www.unspsc.org   
10 http://www.eclass.de 
11 http://www.rosettanet.org/ 
12 http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html 
 
The second issue is related to the easy finding of information in the Semantic Web, in other 
words, to the coordination among semantic indexes. A mechanism must be provided for the 
easy finding of SW content taking into account the semantics of web resources. In this 
context, a peer to peer (P2P) architecture could be explored, similar to the current 
configuration of routers in the WWW, in what we could call a "semantic TCP/IP protocol", 
the new European Semantic Web (SWAP, Semantic Web and Peer-to-peer) project is 
dedicated this topics (Semantic Web and Peer-to-peer). Indexes could be considered as active 
agents that know what topics they can handle (i.e. find content for). Topics that do not occur 
in the index are semantically routed to neighbour indexes. The use of agents should be 
explored for negotiation techniques in order to obtain the semantic routing of topics. Also the 
notion of ‘semantic distance’ used in WordNet should be investigated [Budanitsky et al 
2001]. In this way, there would be no need for a central register of semantic content making 
the whole architecture more scalable in order to accommodate continuous addition of content 
to the Semantic Web. Again, such organisation would be in the spirit of the original WWW. 
3.4   Challenge 4: Multilinguality 
Studies on language distribution over the WWW content show that even if English is the predominating 
language for documents, there exist a important resources written in other languages: English 68.4%, 
Japanese 5.9%, German 5.8%, Chinese 3.9%, French 3.0%, Spanish 2.4%, Russian 1.9%, 
Italian 1.6%, Portuguese 1.4%, Korean 1.3% ,Other 4.6% [Source: Vilaweb.com, as quoted 
by eMarketer]. The diversity of languages is much more acute for European WWW resources. 
Multilinguality plays an increasing role at the following levels: at the level of ontologies, of 
annotations and of user interface. 
 
At the ontology level, ontology builders may want to use their native language for the 
development of the ontologies in which annotations will be based. Since not all users will be 
ontology builders, this level has lowest priority. Existing multilingual and linguistic resources, 
such as WordNet [wordnet], EuroWordnet [eurowordnet], etc., might be explored to support 
multilinguality at this level.  
 
At the annotation level, annotation of content can be performed in various languages. 
Since more users (especially content providers) will rather annotate content than develop 
ontologies, proper support is needed that allows providers to annotate content in their native 
language. To make Semantic Web content generation as low an effort as possible, we cannot 
require from a French to annotate content in the German language nor vice versa.  
 
Finally, at the user interface level, millions of people would like to access relevant content 
in their native language irrespective of the source language in which annotations are 
presented. Although currently, most content is in English, we expect that more content will 
appear in other languages. Any Semantic Web approach should include facilities to access 
information in several languages. Internationalisation and localization techniques should be 
explored to personalize information access based on the native language of the user. 
Page 9/15 
3.5   Challenge 5: Visualization 
With the increasing amount of information overload, intuitive visualization of content will 
become more and more important, as users will be increasingly demanding easy recognition 
of the relevance of content for their purposes. Additionally, the use of semantic indexes and 
routers for the storage, organization and finding of information, will require a major step 
forward in visualization, compared to traditional site maps that represent link structures, as 
presented in section 3.3. Techniques should allow for three-dimensional and new visualisation 
techniques to visualise SW content in any of the current SW languages (RDFS, OIL and 
DAML+OIL).  Technologies to be considered include, but are not limited to X3D (of the 
Web3D Consortium), Java3D (API for writing programs to display and interact with three-
dimensional graphics, Shockwave3D (new technology introduced by Macromedia). By 
developing adequate 3D real-time graphic representation technology and exploiting semantic 
relationships, an innovative three-dimensional interface could be generated automatically. 
This way, more information can be represented in less space, and users can interact with the 
site in a realistic and comfortable way [Van Harmelen et al 2001]. 
3.6   Challenge 6: Semantic Web Languages Standardization 
The Semantic Web is an emerging field and the WWW consortium will produce 
recommendations on the languages and technology that will be used in this area. In order to 
advance the state of the art in the Semantic Web, it is important that such standards appear 
within this year. As already presented above, a layered approach to ontology languages' 
creation and annotations has been adopted by the community. 
 
Tool support is also essential to make a significant step forward in the construction of the 
Semantic Web, and tools are partly dependent on the Semantic Web language they are 
supposed to work with. Important sources to arrive at a Semantic Web language standard and 
the necessary tool support include the W3C Semantic Web Activity (Web Ontology group: 
www.w3.org/2001/sw/WebOnt ), the DAML (www.daml.org ) initiative and results of key 
projects funded by the European Commission, such as OntoKnowledge 
(www.ontoknowledge.org), IBROW (www.swi.psy.uva.nl/projects/ IBROW/ibrow-
home.html). Esperonto (www.esperonto.net), etc. 
 
4   Towards a Semantic Web Architecture 
It is too early to come up with an overall architecture that accommodates all challenges 
mentioned in this paper, and others to be put forward. However, a first high-level draft is 
illustrated in Figure 5, which will be the basis of the European IST Semantic Web project 
Esperonto. 
 
Figure 4: High-level architecture of the Semantic Web construction technology 
• The bottom side of the figure shows the current web with its different types of resources: 
static pages, dynamic pages, web services and multimedia, all of them can be in different 
languages. Dedicated editors and wrappers aggregate the information in those sources into 
semantic indexes. A routing mechanism establishes and maintains the relation and 
communication between the various indexes. Software applications (agents) access 
Semantic Web content through the routing mechanism. Since semantics are represented 
using ontologies, an ontology lifecycle model forms a central component of the 
architecture. 
5   Economic Impact of the Semantic Web 
When thinking of economic impact of the Semantic Web, one has to think of applications, 
services and business models made possible with Semantic Web technology, that are not 
possible without such technology. We foresee several types of products and/or services that 
can be thought of, some of them within reach on a short term, whereas others on a mid or long 
term. 
 
On a short term, we can think of a service where content providers can upgrade their 
existing content to the Semantic Web. Such service could operate in ASP mode and could be 
exploited on a commercial basis (e.g. based on the amount of data to upgrade, or on a 
Page 11/15 
periodical fee, etc.). Why would content providers be willing to pay for such as service? For 
example, because their content then becomes available for other business (one step higher in 
the information food chain) that use their information (Semantic Web content) to sell added 
value services. Another reason to pay for such kind of service would be to have a place in the 
global ‘Semantic Yellow Pages’. We think however, that currently the feasibility for such 
commercial scenarios is limited, not in the least place because such service can only work 
properly when sector/area specific ontologies are in place. The development of such 
ontologies, however, is still an ongoing activity where a lot of improvement is expected in the 
next 5 years.  
 
On a midterm, we envision that ultimately semantic annotation service provision will 
disappear as a stand-alone service, and will be incorporated instead in all kinds of end user 
applications. Compare that for instance to utilities as ‘save as html’ in MSWord, ‘Export to 
HTML’, ‘Import HTML’. In the future we envision similar utilities for the Semantic Web: 
‘save as SWML13 ’ in MSWord, ‘Export to SWML’, and ‘Import SWML’. Notice however 
that such utilities for the Semantic Web are much more complex than for HTML since the 
Semantic Web deals with semantics rather than with syntax. A critical factor (condition), 
again, is advancing ontology technology. 
 
The first commercial applications of Semantic Web technology are foreseen in intranets, 
rather than on the Internet. The major reason for this is that not all companies will like to see 
their essential business information included in the Semantic Web, if this implies that it will 
be accessible by any software agent understanding Semantic Web languages. Public 
organizations offering services for citizens are probably the first entities ready to exploit 
Semantic Web technology on the Internet. This vision is sustained by the On-To-Knowledge 
project where Semantic Web technology is used to help improve companies’ intranets, or the 
project Esperonto, where in two of our three test cases public organizations are involved, 
willing to disseminate their information. There are still a lot of issues (technical, business, 
legal) to resolve (and discover!) before Semantic Web technology can and will be 
commercially exploited at the same level as the current web. 
 
Having said this about full-fledged Semantic Web applications, for so-called ‘pre-Semantic 
Web’ applications these caveats do not apply. (Remember that pre-Semantic Web means that 
from an application point of view, many of the functionalities the Semantic Web promises are 
enabled: software agents accessing, manipulating and integrating content from distributed 
heterogeneous web resources.) For example, in iSOCO we are currently commercialising a 
‘Financial Aggregator14’ through which one can access and manipulate multiple online 
accounts for all major Spanish banks and telecom operators through one web page. The 
software includes wrappers (one for each site involved) to extract the user-related (and 
password protected) information automatically from the online accounts in order to present it 
in a coherent way to users, showing their total balances of money and telephone expenses, 
and allowing them to perform financial transactions between accounts. Construction of such 
                                                          
13 Non-existing acronym for Semantic Web Markup Language. 
14 See www.getsee.com for the aggregator in ASP mode.  
advanced pre-Semantic Web applications requires significant investment (about a year for a 
medium-sized team). It is our vision that mature Semantic Web technology will significantly 
lower the barriers to offer such advanced services over the web, opening the way for much 
more players on the web, and thus raising the number of added value services for people. 
6   Conclusions 
In this paper we identified what in our opinion are some of the main challenges the Semantic 
Web faces in the coming years. The major challenges include: (i) the availability of content, 
(ii) evolving ontologies, (iii) scalability, (iv) multilinguality, (v) visualization to reduce 
information overload, (vi) stability of Semantic Web languages. Current research projects 
specifically funded, for developing Semantic Web technology, by the European Commission, 
DARPA and other funding agencies, should provide answers and solutions to most of those 
issues over the coming 3 years. 
 
In our vision, the expected scientific, technological, economic and social implications of 
the Semantic Web are large. The recent history of computing sciences has shown the 
disruptive nature of some technologies and their implications on many aspects of life. Internet 
technology changed the way people communicated. WWW technology changed the way 
people work, thereby making other technologies obsolete. We are moving from EDI to XML, 
from CORBA to SOAP. All these technological changes have impact on the industry 
providing services and products in these areas. High-tech companies focusing completely on 
one technology, run the risk to become obsolete when such technological discontinuity 
occurs.   
 
Likewise, the Semantic Web technology will contribute to the change of HTML to XML to 
SWML (OIL, DAML+OIL, RDFS, etc.). Companies currently focussing on HTML run the 
risk to run out of business when the Semantic Web comes. There is, however, still a very long 
way to go before the Semantic Web dream becomes true, and will change the information 
society and the information economy. But, ultimately this is what the Semantic Web 
envisions: from syntax to semantics, from information retrieval to task delegation, from 
information overload to infomediaries. 
Bibliographic References 
[Benjamins et al (KA)2] Benjamins R., Decker S., Fensel D., Gómez-Pérez A. “(KA)2: 
Building Ontologies for the Internet”: A Mid Term Report. International Journal of Human 
Computer Studies (IJHCS). 51(3). September 1999. 687-712. 
[Brickley et al] Brickley, D., Guha, R.V. Resource Description Framework (RDF) Schema 
Specification. W3C Proposed Recommendation. March, 2000. http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-
schema/ 
Page 13/15 
[Budanitsky et al 2001] Budanitsky, Alexander and Hirst, Graeme.`Semantic distance in 
WordNet: An experimental, application-oriented evaluation of five measures.' Workshop 
on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources, Second meeting of the North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Pittsburgh, June 2001. 
[DAML-S] Ankolekar A., Burstein M., Hobbs J., Lassila O., Martin D., McIlraith S., 
Narayanan S., Paolucci M., Payne T., Sycara K., Zeng H. DAML-S: Semantic Markup for 
Web Services, Proceedings of the International Semantic Web Working Symposium 
(SWWS). July 30-August 1, 2001. 
[Decker et al]. Decker, S.; Erdmann, M.; Fensel, D.; Studer, R. Ontobroker: Ontology Based 
Access to Distributed and Semi-Structured Information. In R. Meersman et al. (eds.): 
Semantic Issues in Multimedia Systems. Proceedings of DS-8. Kluwer Academic 
Publisher, Boston, 1999, 351-369. 
[Etzioni, Perkovitz 1997] Oren Etzioni, Mike Perkowitz: “Adaptive Web Sites: an AI 
Challenge”, IJCAI-97 
[eurowordnet]   Vossen, P. (eds) (1998) EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical 
Semantic Networks, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht 
[Fensel et al, 2001] Fensel D., Ding Y., Omelayenko B., Schulten E., Botquin G., Brown M., 
and Flett A., “Product Data Integration in B2B E-commerce”, IEEE Intelligent Systems 
(Special Issue on Intelligent E-Business), Vol. 16, No. 4, July/August 2001, pp. 54-59. 
[Fernandez et al 1997] Fernández, M.; Gómez-Pérez, A.; Juristo, N. METHONTOLOGY: 
From Ontological Art Towards Ontological Engineering. Symposium on Ontological 
Engineering of AAAI. Stanford (California). March 1997. 
[Gomez-Perez 1996] Gómez-Pérez, A. “Guidelines to Verify Completeness and Consistency 
in Ontologies” The third World Congress on Expert Systems. February. 1996. Pags. 901-
908. 
[Van Harmelen et al 2001] Frank van Harmelen, Jeen Broekstra, Christiaan Fluit, Herko ter 
Horst, Arjohn Kampman, Jos van der Meer and Marta Sabou, “Ontology-based Information 
Visualisation”, Proceedings of the workshop on Visualisation in conjunction with the 5th 
International Conference on Information Visualisation, London 2001 
[Horrocks et al], Horrocks, I., Fensel, D., Harmelen, F., Decker, S., Erdmann, M, Klein, M. 
“OIL in a Nutshell”. Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Knowledge 
Acquisition, Modeling, and Management ({EKAW}'00), R. Dieng 
[Knoblock et al Ariadne]. Knoblock, C.A., Minton, S., Ambite, J.L., Ashish, N., Muslea, I., 
Philpot, A.G., Tejada, S. The ariadne approach to web-based information integration. 
International the Journal on Cooperative Information Systems (IJCIS) Special Issue on 
Intelligent Information Agents: Theory and Applications, 10(1/2), pp145-169, 2001. 
[Knoblock et al]. Knoblock, C.A., Minton, S., Ambite, J.L., Muslea, M., Oh, J., Frank, M. 
Mixed-Initiative, Multi-source Information Assistants. The Tenth International World Wide 
Web Conference (WWW10), Hong Kong, 2001. 
[Lassila et al], . Lassila, O., Swick, R. Resource Description Framework (RDF) Model and 
Syntax Specification. W3C Recommendation. February, 1999. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/ 
[Lawrence & Giles] S. Lawrence and C.L. Giles, "Accessibility of Information on the Web," 
Nature 400:107-109, July 8, 1999. 
[Luke et al]. Luke, S., Heflin, J. SHOE 1.01 Proposed Specification, SHOE Project, Feb. 
2000. http://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/plus/SHOE/spec1.01.htm. 
[Maedche, Staab – 2001] Alexander Maedche, Steffen Staab: “Learning Ontologies for the 
Semantic Web”, Semantic Web WorkShop 2001, Hongkong , China 
[Michael K. Bergman] Michael K. Bergman  “The Deep Web: Surfacing Hidden Value” 
White Paper http://www.brightplanet.com/deepcontent/tutorials/DeepWeb/index.asp  
[Noy, Musen 2000] N. F. Noy & M. A. Musen “PROMPT: Algorithm and Tool for 
Automated Ontology Merging and Alignment”. In the Proceedings of the Seventeenth 
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-2000), Austin, TX. Available as SMI 
technical report SMI-2000-0831 (2000) 
[owl] “Language standardization for the Semantic Web:The long way from OIL to OWL” D. 
Fense1, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (VU): http://www.cs.vu.nl/~dieter/ftp/paper/dwc.pdf  
[SOAP] SOAP: Don Box et al: "Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)" 
http://www.w3.org/TR/SOAP/ , May 2000 
[UDDI] UDDI: "UDDI Executive White Paper" www.uddi.org , Nov 2001 
[UPML] Fensel D., Benjamins V.R., Motta E., Wielinga B. UPML: A Framework for 
knowledge system reuse. Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on AI (IJCAI-
99), Stockholm, Sweden, July 31 - August 5, 1999. Available at: 
http://www.cs.vu.nl/~upml/  
[DAML+OIL] Reference description of the DAML+OIL language. 
http://www.daml.org/2001/03/reference.html Frank van Harmelen, Peter F. Patel-Schneider 
and Ian Horrocks, editors. 
[wordnet] Miller, George A. ``WordNet: a lexical database for English.'' In: Communications 
of the ACM 38 (11), November 1995, pp. 39 – 41. 
[WSDL] WSDL: E. Christensen (Microsoft), F. Curbera (IBM Research), G. Meredith 
(Microsoft), A. Weerawarana (IBM Research), "Web Services Description Language 
(WSDL)" http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl , Mar 2001 
[WSFL] "Web Services Flow Language" Prof. Dr. Frank Leymann , IBM Software Group: 
May 2001 
Page 15/15 

