Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education
Vol. 33, No. 3, June 2008, 301–314
ISSN 0260-2938 print/ISSN 1469-297X online
© 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/02602930701293231
http://www.informaworld.com
The adequacy of response rates to online and paper surveys: 
what can be done?
Duncan D. Nulty*
Griffith University, Queensland, Australia
Taylor and FrancisCAEH_A_229227.sgm10.1080/02602930701293231Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education0260-2938 (pri t)/1469-297X (online)Original Article2 08 & Francis33 00Ju e 008DuncanNul yd.nulty@g iffith.ed .au This article is about differences between, and the adequacy of, response rates to online and
paper-based course and teaching evaluation surveys. Its aim is to provide practical
guidance on these matters. The first part of the article gives an overview of online
surveying in general, a review of data relating to survey response rates and practical advice
to help boost response rates. The second part of the article discusses when a response rate
may be considered large enough for the survey data to provide adequate evidence for
accountability and improvement purposes. The article ends with suggestions for improving
the effectiveness of evaluation strategy. These suggestions are: to seek to obtain the
highest response rates possible to all surveys; to take account of probable effects of survey
design and methods on the feedback obtained when interpreting that feedback; and to
enhance this action by making use of data derived from multiple methods of gathering
feedback.
Online surveying in general
There are many advantages associated with the use of information technology to support
approaches to evaluation (Dommeyer et al., 2004; Salmon et al. 2004; Watt et al. 2002). As
examples, Watt et al. (2002) note that ‘using web-based evaluation questionnaires can bypass
many of the bottlenecks in the evaluation system (e.g. data entry and administration) and
move to a more “just in time” evaluation model’ (327). Another advantage is avoiding the
need to administer surveys in class (Dommeyer et al. 2004). Unsurprisingly, there is increas-
ing growth in the use of web-based surveying for course and teaching evaluation (Hastie &
Palmer 1997; Seal & Przasnyski 2001). This growth is happening despite concerns from
students (e.g. regarding confidentiality and ease of use) (Dommeyer, Baum & Hanna 2002),
and concerns from staff (e.g. about the adequacy of response rates) (Dommeyer, Baum
et al. 2002).
Online surveying practice varies greatly. For example, in Australia, the University of South
Australia uses a system supporting solely online administration of surveys, while Murdoch
University and Curtin University among others are moving the same way. Griffith University and
Queensland University of Technology have each developed integrated web-based systems that
take a hybrid approach offering academics a choice of paper or online administration for their
surveys. Respondents, however, have no choice: they receive either a paper-based survey or an
online survey. Other emerging systems allow choice of response mode by combining multiple
modes of administration and response (Pearson Assessments 2006), thereby allowing survey
designers to better match the method of survey administration to the needs, abilities or prefer-
ences of respondents and avoid skewing the data.
*Email: d.nulty@griffith.edu.au
302  D.D. Nulty
Despite these variations, there are some common features to online surveying practice.
These have been described by (Dommeyer et al. 2004). They reported that: a typical online
evaluation involves: giving students assurances that their responses will be de-identified and
that aggregate reports will be made available only after the final grades are determined;
providing students with the URL to access the survey—generally using their student ID
number; students responding numerically to multiple response items and typing answers to
open-ended questions; providing students with a receipt verifying that they have completed the
evaluation; and providing at least two weeks in which the students can respond, usually near
the end of term/semester (612).
Comparability of online and on-paper survey response-rate data
(McCormack 2003) reported that there are ‘new expectations in relation to the evaluation of
teaching, for example, expectations about the role of evaluation of teaching in promotion and
probation and about the public availability of student evaluation results on institution web sites
…’ (2). More specifically, the expectations are that teaching evaluations should be used directly,
openly and compulsorily in promotion and probation decisions, and that data on student evalua-
tion of courses should be made available publicly to inform the public. Such expectations may be
seen as an extension of the change in the focus of teaching and course evaluations from formative
to summative (Ballantyne 2003).
These changes in expectations and focus are occurring at the same time that the use of online
surveying is increasing. Considered together, this has raised interest in issues around response
rates to these surveys. Yet, a recent review of literature regarding instruments for obtaining
student feedback (Richardson 2005) claimed that ‘little is known about the response rates
obtained in electronic surveys, or whether different modes of administration yield similar patterns
of results’ (406).
Closer scrutiny of the literature, however, reveals that a good deal is known. Moreover, there
is also a fair amount of information available in relation to the comparison between patterns of
results obtained through using different modes of administration of surveys. Some of that litera-
ture is reviewed below—with the caveat that while it is strongly suggestive of what one might
call a ‘prevailing position’, it also illustrates substantial variability.
In general, online surveys are much less likely to achieve response rates as high as surveys
administered on paper—despite the use of various practices to lift them. Some literature demon-
strating this follows and has been summarized in Table 1. In addition, in some cases (such as
Griffith University), the reported response rate for paper-based surveys is conservative because
an academic may only hand out paper surveys to one sub-group (e.g. one class) of students rather
than to all that were enrolled. Given that this practice is not reported centrally, there is no way to
take it into account when calculating the overall response rate.
In summary, of the eight examples cited in Table 1, most of the online surveys achieved
response rates that were much lower than the paper-based ones (on average, 33% compared with
56% = 23% lower). Thus, in general, these data show that online surveys do not achieve response
rates that are even close to what is achieved with paper-based surveys. There are just two
exceptions which will be detailed next.
In the research by Watt et al. (2002), the overall response rate for online surveys was 32.6%,
while for paper surveys it was 33.3% (333). This finding is inconsistent with the other data
reported in Table 1. However, the context for the low on-paper response rate in Watt et al.’s
research is that the courses surveyed were all taught in distance education mode. This means that
these paper surveys were not handed out in a face-to-face environment as they were in the other
studies. This finding raises a question about the impact of face-to-face administration of surveys.
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education  303
The data clearly show that face-to-face administration results in higher response rates. What is
unknown is whether response rates to online surveys would rise to the same level if they were
also conducted in a face-to-face way.
The author has not found any study reporting on this question. It seems likely that this is
because one of the main benefits (and uses) of the online survey process is to avoid the need to
conduct the survey in class (Dommeyer et al. 2004). Clearly, if the only way to achieve high
response rates with online surveys was to administer them in a face-to-face setting it would negate
these benefits. In general, such steps are not taken—and are unlikely to be taken.
Watt et al.’s (2002) research suggests that when paper surveys of courses and teaching are not
administered face to face, the response rates might be as low as for non-face-to-face online
surveys. It is reasonable to hypothesize that in a non-face-to-face setting it is easier to submit an
online response than it is to physically mail a paper one. It follows that in non-face-to-face
settings this should advantage online survey response rates. It is not, therefore, a conclusion of
this article that on-paper surveys are intrinsically ‘better’ than online surveys.
The second exception to the data reported in Table 1 is contained within the detail of the study
conducted by Dommeyer et al. (2004). These researchers conducted an experiment in which they
found that response rates to online surveys were lower than for on-paper surveys in 14 cases out
of 16—significantly so in 10 of these. Where response rates were not significantly different was
usually when students were offered a (very) small grade incentive (respondents’ grades were
increased by one quarter of 1%). When the grade incentive was applied, the response rates for
both online and on-paper surveys were high—and almost identical (86.67% and 86.99% respec-
tively). This result appears to be unique: that is, I have found no other literature to demonstrate
that it can be, or has been, repeated. Overall, however, Dommeyer et al. reported that online
surveys achieved a 43% response rate, while on-paper achieved 75%.
Boosting online survey response rates
The most prevalent methods for boosting online survey response rates are: 
(1) repeat reminder emails to non-respondents (students);
(2) repeat reminder emails to survey owners (academics);
(3) incentives to students in the form of prizes for respondents awarded through a lottery.
Table 1. Comparisons of response rates to paper-based and online surveys.
Who
Paper-based 
response rate (%)
Online response 
rate (%)
Difference 
(%)
Cook et al. (2000)
Baruch (1999)
55.6
–
–
39.6
−16
Dommeyer et al. (2004) 75 43 −32
Ballantyne (2005) 55 47 −8
Ogier (2005) 65 30 −35
Nair et al. (2005) 56 31 −31
Griffith University (2005) 57 20 −37
Sweep (2006)* 56 23 −33
Watt et al. (2002) 32.6 33.3 <1
Overall 56 33 −23
*(T. Sweep, pers. comm.)
304  D.D. Nulty
Methods used in the institutions investigated, together with the response rate achieved for online
surveys, are summarized in Table 2. These data suggest that, generally speaking, the greater the
number of measures taken to boost online response rates, the higher those rates are.
In addition to the measures specified above, Ballantyne (2005) reported that for each survey
at her university the email sent to students contained a URL which allowed them to access the
survey more easily. This same URL was also embedded in the course WebCT pages and the
course welcome pages. All surveys were also, by default, open for 20 days. Aside from these
extensive mechanisms, Ballantyne speculated on the reasons for the relative success at Murdoch
University. She noted that Murdoch had been using online surveys since 1998 and that it has had
mandatory surveying since 1993. She proposed that this has helped to create a culture in which
such surveys were accepted by students and staff.
Neither Griffith University nor QUT used email reminders for online surveys, nor any form
of incentive scheme to potential respondents. Academics were simply advised to ensure that they
encourage the students to respond. Clearly, given that these institutions achieved the lowest
online response rates (20% and 23% respectively) encouragement alone appears to have little
effect.
Additional approaches to boosting response rates
Two websites offer particularly succinct, credible and partly overlapping advice regarding prac-
tices that can boost response rates. These are Zúñiga (2004) from the US Teaching and Learning
with Technology/Flashlight Group, and Quinn (2002) from the University of South Australia.
Zúñiga offered a set of seven ‘best practices for increasing response rates to online surveys’.
These are: 
(1) Push the survey. This basically means making it easy for students to access the survey by,
for example, providing them with the survey URL in an email sent directly to them.
(2) Provide frequent reminders. Zúñiga advocated ‘At least three reminders’. Others,
however, point to the inevitable diminishing return on this investment coupled with the
possibility of irritating the survey population (Kittleson 1995; Cook et al. 2000). In
the context of surveying multiple lecturers in any one course, and multiple courses in any
one semester, respondents are likely to have several surveys to complete. The potential
for a barrage of reminders—and commensurately higher levels of irritation—is evident.
(3) Involve academics. Zúñiga contended that ‘Nothing helps more than regular reminders to
students from faculty’. This assertion does not appear to be entirely supported by the liter-
ature. As shown earlier in this paper, institutions that did not use direct email reminders
to students—implicitly relying on academics to promote participation—achieved much
lower response rates than those that did. The combination of direct reminders backed up
Table 2. Methods used to boost online survey response rates in five universities.
University Methods used
Online survey 
response rate (%)
Murdoch University (Ballantyne 2005) 1, 2 & 3 47
Canterbury University (Ogier 2005) 1 & 3 30
Monash University (Nair et al. 2005) 1 31
Griffith University no measures taken 20
QUT (Sweep 2006)* no measures taken 23
*(T. Sweep, pers. comm.)
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education  305
by encouragement from academics, however, was certainly better than either method
alone. It may be particularly so if the academics also take the opportunity to demonstrate
and/or convince students that their feedback has been, or will be, used to good effect
(see no. 4 below).
(4) Persuade respondents that their responses will be used. The issue here is whether
students believe that the academics will take the feedback seriously (Nulty 1992). There
is a range of ways to achieve this but all involve some active demonstration to students
that feedback is valued and acted upon.
(5) Provide rewards. Zúñiga stated that ‘Many institutions have found that a drawing for a
prize of general interest … [helps]’. He went on: ‘even one point earned for the course
also works well even though it is not enough to change any individual student’s grade.
Sometimes this reward is given to individuals, and sometimes to the whole class if more
than a certain percentage of students responds.’ However, he echoed a warning made
more clearly by Ehrmann (2004) that thoughtful participation is best achieved by ensur-
ing the survey is worth students’ time, and that using extrinsic motivators may bias the
sample to include more responses from those who need that form of encouragement.
(6) Help students understand how to give constructive criticism. When such help is given it
seems likely that there will be at least two benefits. First, students will improve their
ability to make points of value in ways that are unlikely to bruise academics’ egos.
Second, providing this kind of help to students will help convince them that their
responses will be used (point no. 4).
(7) Create surveys that seek constructive criticism. If a survey does not demand constructive
criticism—for example if all the items require a simple numerical rating—then there will
probably be less engagement with the survey because the survey itself sends a message
that conflicts with attempts made under no. 4.
Quinn (2002) specified eight strategies that have been used by people who have achieved high
response rates to online surveys. Some of these overlapped with those already detailed above, but
the following five did not: 
(1) Extend the duration of a survey’s availability. The longer it is there the higher the chance
students will respond.
(2) Involve students in the choice of optional questions. Aside from making the survey intrin-
sically more interesting to students, this also addresses Zúñiga’s #4.
(3) Assure students of the anonymity of their responses. Dommeyer, Baum & Hanna (2002)
indicated that this was a concern for students, so anonymity seems likely to boost
responses if it is managed effectively.
(4) Familiarize students with online environments by using online teaching aids/methods.
Related to this point, Richardson (2005) gave the following advice: 
It would be sensible to administer feedback surveys by the same mode as that used for delivering
the curriculum (classroom administration for face-to-face teaching, postal surveys for corre-
spondence courses and electronic surveys for online courses). (406)
In the context of online surveying, it seems reasonable that the more familiar students are
with the medium to be used for the survey, the more likely they will use it. Consistency
of mode is likely to help achieve this outcome.
(5) Keep questionnaires brief. The proposition here is that the less time it takes for a student
to complete a survey, the more likely it is they will do so.
From the evidence available (e.g. Ballantyne 2005) it seems reasonable to suggest that the effect
of these measures will be additive: those who use more of these approaches will achieve higher
306  D.D. Nulty
response rates. Clearly, the literature and practice reviewed in the first section of this paper show
that there is a long way to go before online survey response rates will match those of on-paper.
There is an argument that can be made here. The two primary purposes of teaching and course
evaluation surveys are for monitoring quality and for improving quality. Hence the actions of
academics that relate to Zúñiga’s fourth point, ‘Persuade respondents that their responses will be
used’, are the most critical—yet also the most difficult—to impact on.
In summary, there are many methods for boosting response rates to online surveys. Many of
these would apply equally well to boosting response rates to any kind of survey. At present, few
of the methods advocated above are used for on-paper surveys, yet on-paper surveys already
achieve relatively high response rates—perhaps because they are administered to a captive
audience, often with some dedicated class time sacrificed for the purpose. If classes were
conducted in computer laboratories, online surveying done in class could possibly reap similar
rewards. This suggestion may therefore be added to the lists offered by Zúñiga (2004) and Quinn
(2002). Conversely, if some of the measures above were used with on-paper surveys, their
response rates might be even higher than they already are.
What is an adequate response rate?
It might be strictly more correct at this point to be asking what an adequate sample size is.
However, in the context of teaching and course evaluation surveys, sampling is not likely to be
in the minds of academics. It is much more likely that they will ask a question about response
rates. Furthermore, if a determination is made regarding sample size, the size of the population
being sampled needs to be known first and so the corresponding response rate can be readily
calculated from these two figures.
Whether or not a response rate is adequate depends (in part) on the use that is being made
of the data. If the data gathered from a teaching evaluation survey were to be used only to bring
about improvements by that teacher, and there is even one response that provides information
which can be used in this way, the survey’s purpose has, at least in part, been served and the
response rate is technically irrelevant. If such a single useful response were just one from (say)
a hundred or more possible respondents, that is of no consequence—unless that response is
entirely at odds with what the majority of other students would have said. A more likely
outcome would be that a single response would be regarded as completely inadequate in the
context of a summative appraisal of the performance of the teacher. Generally, course and
teaching evaluation data are used for both of these purposes, and increasingly the latter
(Ballantyne 2003).
Accepting that course and teaching evaluations are rarely conducted for solely formative
purposes, there is certain to be widespread concern about the adequacy of the responses to these
surveys. In part, this will translate into a concern about response rates. It should be noted
however, that this concern occurs without sufficient awareness of the importance of sample size
and population size.
Richardson (2005) cited Babbie (1973, 165) and Kidder (1981, 150–151) when stating that
50% is regarded as an acceptable response rate in social research postal surveys. Baruch (1999)
researched the response rates reported by 141 published studies and 175 surveys in five top
management journals published in 1975, 1985 and 1995. He found that the overall average
response rate was 55.6%. Richardson (2005), however, indicated that the Australian Vice-
Chancellors’ Committee & Graduate Careers Council of Australia (2001) regarded ‘an overall
institutional response rate for the Course Experience Questionnaire (CEQ) of at least 70%
[to be] both desirable and achievable’ (4). But, in concluding comments, he stated: ‘Response
rates of 60% or more are both desirable and achievable for students who have satisfactorily
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education  307
completed their course units of programmes.’ (p.409.), despite having noted earlier that this
rate ‘clearly leaves ample opportunity for sampling bias to affect the results’ (406).
Assertions regarding the adequacy or otherwise of a particular percentage response rate
appear to be made without reference to any theoretical justification—or to the total number of
potential respondents. Behind the assertions appears to be a balance between rational and political
considerations of acceptability. It would be better if there was a theoretically justified, systematic
way to calculate the response rate required.
Calculating required response rates
When academics survey their students to gather opinions on their teaching, or the quality of
courses, they may either ask every student enrolled in those courses to respond, or may select only
a smaller sub-set of students. If every student is surveyed, the purpose is to establish the views of
the entire group of students. In this instance the population is every student enrolled on the course.
When academics elect to survey a sub-set of the enrolled students, there is one of two purposes.
They might only be interested in the opinions of that particular sub-set of students because they
possess some characteristic that is of particular interest. For instance, the population could consist
of only the mature-age students who are enrolled in the course. In these circumstances it follows
that the academics have neither the interest nor the intent to deduce anything about other students,
nor subsequently to take actions that in any way relate to those students or their views.
Alternatively, an academic might be interested in the views of all students enrolled on his/her
course but simply finds it more practical to survey only one sub-set. In this case, the population
remains all students enrolled on the course. The sub-set which is surveyed is a sample of that
population. It is common that an academic may survey those students who attend a particular
class on a particular day of the week and not other students who attend on other days. In these
circumstances, the academic will seek to extrapolate findings from the sample to the population.
Whether it is valid to do so is the issue.
In all three scenarios outlined above, it is unlikely that every student who is asked to respond
to a survey will actually do so. As a result, there are a number of matters to consider before it is
possible to determine whether it is valid to extrapolate findings derived from the students who did
respond to either the sample from which they came or the population to which they belong.
In the first two scenarios, every student in the population is surveyed but not all respond. The
respondents represent a non-random sample of the population. An appropriate question is
whether the respondents differ systematically from the non-respondents, and if so, whether these
differences would cause them to respond differently to the questions asked. If the answer to both
questions is ‘yes’, the sample is biased and simple extrapolation of findings from the sample to
the population is not valid.
It is reasonable to expect that any survey that samples a population (or that achieves only a
sample by way of respondents) will incur some sampling error and possibly also some sample
bias. The former is the extent to which any statistical measure applied to the sample (such as the
mean) gives a result that deviates from the mean of the population as a result of random variation
in the membership of the sample. The latter is where a statistical measure applied to the sample
deviates from the population measure because of systematic bias in the membership of the
sample. In principle, both can be reduced by increasing the sample size and/or response rate—
however, neither of these steps guarantees a reduction in either error or bias (Dillman 2000).
There are different ways in which sample bias can be introduced. In the context of course and
teaching evaluation surveys, sample bias might be introduced if the academic chooses to admin-
ister a survey in a daytime lecture in preference to an evening lecture. The evening lecture might
consist of a higher proportion of people who are in full employment, study part time, and are
308  D.D. Nulty
older. The views of these people may deviate systematically from the views expressed by those
who attend the daytime lecture.
Sample bias can also be introduced as a product of the survey method that is chosen. Watt
et al. (2002, 329) have reported that web users are demographically different from other users.
Salmon et al. (2004) reported that variance in data from web surveys was less than for paper
surveys. It is reasonable to suppose that an online survey will attract responses from students who
are demographically different from students who would respond to a paper survey.
Third, sample bias can be introduced because of systematic differences between respondents
and non-respondents. As noted by Richardson (2005, 406), research shows that ‘demographic
characteristics of people responding to surveys are different from those who do not respond in
terms of age and social class’ (Goyder 1987, Chapter 5). While that may not matter to most
academics conducting evaluations of their teaching and courses, Goyder more importantly
reported that ‘respondents differ from non-respondents in their attitudes and behaviour’ (Goyder
1987, Chapter 7) and other research has shown that ‘students who respond to surveys differ from
those who do not respond in terms of their study behaviour and academic attainment …’ (Astin
1970; Neilsen et al. 1978; Watkins & Hattie 1985, 406).
Richardson (2005) concluded: ‘It is therefore reasonable to assume that students who respond
to feedback questionnaires will be systematically different from those who do not respond in their
attitudes and experience of higher education’ (406, emphasis added) and furthermore, ‘it is not
possible to predict attitudes or behaviours on the basis of known demographic characteristics’
(Goyder 1987, Chapter7, emphasis added). This means it impossible to use demographic data
concerning students to construct a sampling frame that might seek to overcome sampling bias.
Thus, not only are the expressed views of respondents likely to be different from those of
non-respondents but responses gathered using web surveys are likely to be different from those
gathered using paper-based surveys.
In the face of evidence of this kind, are we still prepared to accept response rates of 50%–
60%–70% as adequate? It seems reasonable to argue that despite our best efforts it will often be
difficult and/or expensive to obtain response rates above 70%. Politically, it is discomforting to
accept low response rates because the proportion of non-respondents may be too high for us to be
sure that those who responded are representative of the others who did not. The issue becomes
‘what are we prepared to accept?’. As such, there is some degree of arbitrariness about the decision.
But there is some theory to guide us in the domain of statisticians and mathematicians begin-
ning with a seminal paper by Neyman (1934), which discusses ‘the method of stratified sampling’
compared with ‘the method of purposive selection’, followed in 1955 by a paper entitled ‘A
unified theory of sampling from finite populations’ (Godambe 1955) and more recently a paper
by Smith (1983), ‘On the validity of inferences from non-random sample’. A more accessible
account of the salient points has been provided in Chapter 5 of Dillman (2000, 194–213).
First, there is a systematic way to calculate the sample size required for a specified level of
confidence in the result, in relation to a population of a specified size, with a specified degree of
sampling error, given a specified level of probability for a particular answer to be provided by a
respondent (Dillman 2000, 206–207).
Specifically, and in relation to the context of teaching evaluation, under the following condi-
tions it is possible to use a formula provided by Dillman (2000) to calculate how many respon-
dents are required (and therefore also the required response rate).
The conditions are: 
● The total number of students in the population that is being surveyed is known.
● All students in the population are surveyed. (Note: It is not actually necessary to survey all
the students, but this assumption is necessary for the argument being made about response
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education  309
rate. In practice, if the reader wants to calculate sample size instead, the requirement to
survey all the students can be removed.)
● There is a known probability of any one student providing a certain answer to a question on
a survey.
● The required/desired level of accuracy of result is known or set.
● There is a known or chosen level of confidence required/desired for the same result to be
obtained from other samples of the same size from the same total group of students in the
course.
In order to seek to present data representing the ‘best possible scenario’ (i.e. one that maximizes
the probability of needing the lowest response rates) the formula supplied by Dillman (2000) was
initially applied with liberal conditions set. These were: to set a 10% sampling error (higher than
the normal 3%), to assume a simple yes/no question is to be answered equally by respondents in
50:50 ratio (the most conservative situation), and to accept an 80% confidence level (much lower
than the normal 95% used by statisticians).
However, in practice it is known that students’ responses to questions on teaching and course
evaluation surveys use the top ratings more frequently than the lower ones. Considering data
gathered in one Australian university over an eight-year period with over 25,000 surveys using a
1 to 5 scale, actual percentages are 72% of students responding with a rating of 4 or 5, the remain-
der using a rating of 1, 2 or 3. Thus, the assumption of a 50:50 split on a ‘yes/no’ question can be
altered to a (nominal) 70:30 split. Applying this more liberal condition yields lower required
response rates, which are tabulated in Table 3 in the columns headed ‘Liberal conditions’.
Columns under the heading ‘Stringent conditions’ present the required responses and
response rates when more stringent (and more common) conditions are set: specifically 3%
sampling error, and 95% confidence level.
Starting with the data from the liberal conditions, the table shows that for class sizes below
20 the response rate required needs to be above 58%. This is greater than the maximum achieved
by all but one of the universities cited earlier when using paper-based surveys (that maximum was
only a little higher at 65%). In other words, the table suggests that even the relatively good
response rates obtained to paper surveys of teaching and courses are only adequate when the class
size is 20 or higher—and, even then, only when liberal conditions in relation to the acceptable
sampling error and required confidence level are acceptable.
Similarly, considering the response rates achieved with online surveys, the table shows that
the highest response rate reported earlier (47%) is only adequate when class sizes are above
(approximately) 30—and again, even then, only when liberal conditions in relation to the accept-
able sampling error and required confidence level are acceptable.
In other institutions, such as Griffith University for example, class size (at best) needs to
exceed 100 before its existing response rate of 20% can be considered adequate. In other words,
for this institution, unless the response rate can be boosted, online surveys should not be used on
classes with less than 100 students.
When the more traditional and conservative conditions are set, the best reported response rate
obtained for on-paper surveys (65%) is only adequate when the class size exceeds approximately
500 students. The best reported response rates for online surveys (47%) are only adequate for
class sizes above 750 students. The 20% response rate achieved for online surveys by Griffith
University would not be adequate even with class sizes of 2000 students.
Table 3 is, however, only a guide as it is based on the application of a formula derived from
a theory that has random sampling as a basic requirement. With teaching and course evaluations
this requirement is not met. If the total enrolment of a course is sampled, it is generally a conve-
nience sample—selecting all students who show up to the Monday daytime lecture for example.
310  D.D. Nulty
If all students enrolled are surveyed, or if a random selection of these are surveyed, random
sampling is still not achieved in practice because those who respond are not a random selection.
Indeed, those who respond are systematically different from those who do not, and that those who
respond will be different depending on the method of evaluation selected (Astin 1970; Neilsen
et al. 1978; Watkins & Hattie 1985; Goyder 1987; Watt et al. 2002).
Discussion
What are the consequences of ignoring these facts? If the sample size is too small, results obtained
will not be representative of the whole group of students. That is, the results will suffer from both
sample error and sample bias. This means that the results obtained (from a sample) are not likely
to be an indication of what the group as a whole (the population) would have said. Given that the
respondents may be systematically different from non-respondents it is possible that the feedback
provided could influence an academic to respond in ways that are counter to what they would do
if they had feedback from all students. Similarly, if the data are used summatively to judge a
teacher’s performance, it may lead a person to make an erroneous judgement. Although academ-
ics (like the rest of us) have to make judgements all the time in the absence of useful information,
it would be helpful if the parameters affecting the feedback were more transparently obvious. It
would also be helpful if the information available was not itself misleading—as may be the case.
Table 3. Required response rates by class size.
‘Liberal conditions’ ‘Stringent conditions’
10% sampling error; 80% 
confidence level; 70:30 split 
responses 4 or 5 compared with
1, 2, 3
3% sampling error; 95% 
confidence level; 70:30 split 
responses 4 or 5 compared with 
1, 2, 3
Total no. of students 
on the course
Required no. of 
respondents
Response rate 
required (%)
Required no. 
of respondents
Response rate 
required (%)
10 7    75% 10 100%
20 12 58 19 97
30 14 48 29 96
40 16 40 38 95
50 17 35 47 93
60 18 31 55 92
70 19 28 64 91
80 20 25 72 90
90 21 23 80 88
100 21 21 87 87
150 23 15 123 82
200 23 12 155 77
250 24 10 183 73
300 24 8 209 70
500 25 5 289 58
750 25 3 358 48
1000 26 3 406 41
2000 26 1 509 25
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education  311
For example, let us consider a hypothetical scenario. If an online survey is used, the respon-
dents are more likely to be students who are familiar with and able to use this medium. As such,
these students may also comment more favourably regarding online teaching matters than the
other students would. Hypothetically, these students may also constitute a minority. The result
will be a survey with a low overall response rate, made up of students who are mostly familiar
with, able to use and favourably disposed toward online teaching and learning provisions of the
course. If this happens, and these are the only data considered, the academic concerned could
form a false view that she/he should do more to boost the use of online teaching approaches.
It should be noted that the problem here is not simply that the responses to the survey have
come from a minority of students, but that the survey results suffer from systematic bias. This
means that these data may also misrepresent and misinform summative judgements regarding the
performance of the teacher. Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine the direction of that bias.
Although (in this hypothetical case) students responding to online surveys may be more posi-
tively disposed towards online teaching approaches, this does not mean that they will also be
more positively disposed towards the teacher’s teaching.
The hypothetical scenario above serves to illustrate another problem too: imagine an online
survey of all students yields a 30% response and an on-paper survey of the same students yields
a 60% response. The temptation would be to regard the results of the latter as more valid and more
worthy of consideration. However, as already described above, it may be that the online survey
attracted responses from those who predominantly make use of online teaching and learning
resources, while the respondents to the paper survey may contain few of these people. Effectively
the two surveys have sampled two different sub-groups of students with systematically different
views which may (or may not) be reflected in the nature of their answers to survey questions
(depending on the questions). Neither survey may be a valid reflection of the whole group but
each one may be a valid reflection of each sub-group.
In practice, it is likely that only one of these two surveys would be conducted—the academic
will not have both sets of data for comparison. The academic’s responses to improve his/her
teaching and/or his/her course might therefore be erroneous. Similarly, the data for either survey
may be misleading if used for summative purposes. This is not a problem resulting from low
response rate per se but, rather, a problem associated with the potential for systematic sample bias
in respect of the respondents to any one survey type—or, indeed, any survey.
This last point takes us into territory that is beyond the scope of this paper. Suffice it to say
that the design of a survey, not only the mode of administration, may also affect who responds
to it and what they say. Thus, when interpreting survey results, it is important to think about
what was asked, how it was asked and how these variables may have resulted in bias in respect
of who responded, what they said and how these responses may have differed if the survey
itself, the mode of administration and the resultant pool of respondents had been different. The
implication is that data derived from surveys are likely to be somewhat more easily and validly
used if the surveys themselves are appropriately designed and used for particular targeted
purposes. Given that doing this is difficult, even in the best of worlds, this observation under-
scores the need to evaluate courses and teachers using multiple methods, and to carefully
consider the differences between the pictures that emerge from each in order to triangulate a
more accurate position.
It follows from all this discussion that, although Table 3 gives us a guide for response rates
which could (in a theoretically ideal world) be considered adequate, the reality is that even if the
response rates suggested are achieved, great care is needed to be sure that results for a survey are
representative of the whole group of students enrolled. Although this is known, current practice
frequently ignores this need for caution. Generic course and teaching surveys are often used to
evaluate situations they were not designed for, and response rates which are below those
312  D.D. Nulty
advocated by Table 3 are generally accepted. Despite this a high weight is simultaneously placed
on student evaluation results.
Conclusion
This article has confirmed earlier research (Cook et al. 2000) which showed that response rates
to online surveys of teaching and courses are nearly always very much lower than those obtained
when using on-paper surveys. While a wide range of methods exists for boosting response rates,
institutions do not make full use of these. The methods that are used are more likely to be applied
to boosting response rates to online surveys than on-paper surveys. This is despite the fact that
this article has shown that in many cases the response rates obtained for course and teaching
evaluation surveys are not adequate regardless of the method of surveying used.
Given the anonymity of responses and the impossibility of using demographic data to predict
attitudinal variables in students (and therefore there being no viable way to systematically target
surveys at a minimal sample of students that would be representative of the whole group),
appropriate paths of action that remain are to: 
(1) use multiple methods to boost survey response rates as high as possible (regardless of
whether on-paper or online surveys are used—but especially when online surveys are
used);
(2) consider the probable effect that use of a particular survey design and method might have
on the make-up of the respondents and take this into account when interpreting the
feedback obtained;
(3) use multiple methods of evaluation to elucidate findings—so as to construct a better
informed understanding of what the true picture is.
Without these actions being taken, relying heavily on student evaluations of courses and teaching
is likely to be, at best, inadequate, at worst, misleading.
Notes on contributor
Duncan Nulty is senior lecturer in the Griffith Institute for Higher Education at Griffith University,
Queensland Australia. He has more than a decade of experience in teaching, course and programme
evaluation obtained in several large universities. He has also conducted many educational evaluation
consultancies in Australia and overseas.
References
Astin, A.W. 1970. The methodology of research on college impact, part two. Sociology of Education 43:
437–450.
Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee & Graduate Careers Council of Australia. 2001. Code of practice
on the public disclosure of data from the Graduate Careers Council of Australia’s Graduate Destination
Survey, Course Experience Questionnaire and Postgraduate Research Experience Questionnaire, avail-
able online at: http://www.avcc.edu.au/documents/policies_programs/graduates/2003/COP_2001.pdf
(accessed 7 December 2006).
Babbie, E.R. 1973. Survey research methods. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Ballantyne, C. 2003. Measuring quality units: considerations in choosing mandatory questions. Paper
presented at the Evaluations and Assessment Conference: A Commitment to Quality, University of
South Australia, Adelaide, 24–25 November.
———. 2005. Moving student evaluation of teaching online: reporting pilot outcomes and issues with a
focus on how to increase student response rate. Paper presented at the 2005 Australasian Evaluations
Forum: University Learning and Reaching: Evaluating and Enhancing the Experience, UNSW,
Sydney, 28–29 November.
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education  313
Baruch, Y. 1999. Response rates in academic studies: a comparative analysis. Human Relations 52:
421–434.
Cook, C., F. Heath, and R.L. Thompson. 2000. A meta-analysis of response rates in web or internet-based
surveys. Educational and Psychological Measurement 60, no. 6: 821–836.
Dillman, D.A. 2000. Mail and internet surveys: the tailored design method. Brisbane: Wiley.
Dommeyer, C.J., P., Baum, K. Chapman, and R.W. Hanna, 2002. Attitudes of business faculty towards
two methods of collecting teaching evaluations: paper vs. online. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher
Education 27, no. 5: 455–462.
Dommeyer, C.J., P. Baum, and R.W. Hanna. 2002. College students’ attitudes toward methods of collecting
teaching evaluation: in-class versus online. Journal of Education for Business 78, no. 2: 11–15.
Dommeyer, C.J., P. Baum, R.W. Hanna, and K.S. Chapman. 2004. Gathering faculty teaching evaluations
by in-class and online surveys: their effects on response rates and evaluations. Assessment & Evaluation
in Higher Education 29, no. 5: 611–623.
Ehrmann, S. 2004. Increasing Survey Response Rates by ‘Closing the Loop’ from Survey Back to
Respondent, available online at: http://www.tltgroup.org/resources/Flashlight/Participation.html
(accessed 15 March 2006).
Godambe, V.P. 1955. A unified theory of sampling from finite populations. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society 17, no. 2: 269–278.
Goyder, J. 1987. The silent majority: non-respondents on sample surveys. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hastie, M., and A. Palmer. 1997. The development of online evaluation instruments to compliment web-
based educational resources. Paper presented at the Third Australian World Wide Web Conference,
Lismore, New South Wales.
Kidder, L.H. 1981. Research methods in social relations. New York, Holt: Rinehart & Winston.
Kittleson, M. 1995. Determining effective follow-up of e-mail surveys. American Journal of Health
Behavior 21, no. 3: 193–196.
McCormack, C. 2003. Reconceptualising student evaluation of teaching: an ethical framework for
changing times. Paper presented at the Evaluations and Assessment Conference, Adelaide, 24–25
November.
Nair, C.S., C. Wayland, and S. Soediro. 2005. Evaluating the student experience: a leap into the future.
Paper presented at the 2005 Australasian Evaluations Forum: University Learning and Teaching:
Evaluating and Enhancing the Experience, UNSW, Sydney, 28–29 November.
Neilsen, H.D., R.H. Moos, and E.A. Lee, 1978. Response bias in follow-up studies of college students.
Research in Higher Education 9: 97–113.
Neyman, J. 1934. On the two different aspects of the representative method: the method of stratified
sampling and the method of purposive selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 97, no. 4:
558–625.
Nulty, D.D. 1992. Students’ opinions on students’ opinions. In Research and development in higher
education: academia under pressure: theory and practice for the 21st century, ed M.S. Parer
Jamieson, ACT, Australia: Higher Education Research and Development Society of Australasia
Vol. 15, 498–502.
Ogier, J. 2005. The response rates for online surveys—a hit and miss affair. Paper presented at the 2005
Australasian Evaluations Forum: University Learning and Teaching: Evaluating and Enhancing the
Experience, UNSW, Sydney. 28–29 November.
Pearson Assessments 2006. Survey Tracker Plus, available online at: http://www.pearsonncs.com/
surveytracker/index.htm (accessed 3 May 2006).
Quinn, D. 2002. Improving online response rates, available online at: http://www.unisanet.unisa.edu.au/
sei/website/Online-respnrates.asp (accessed 15 March 2006).
Richardson, J.T.E. 2005. Instruments for obtaining student feedback: a review of the literature. Assessment
& Evaluation in Higher Education 30, no. 4: 387–415.
Salmon, P., Deasy, T., and B. Garrigan. 2004. What escapes the Net? A statistical comparison of responses
from paper and web surveys. Paper presented at the 2004 Evaluation Forum: Communicating Evalua-
tion Outcomes: Issues and Approaches, Melbourne, Australia, 24–25 November.
Seal, K.C., and Z.H. Przasnyski. 2001. Using the world wide web for teaching improvement. Computers
and Education 36: 33–40.
Smith, T.M.F. 1983. On the validity of inferences from non-random sample. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society 146, no. 4: 394–403.
Watkins, D., and J. Hattie. 1985. A longitudinal study of the approaches to learning of Australian tertiary
students. Human Learning 4: 127–141.
314  D.D. Nulty
Watt, S., C. Simpson, C. McKillop, and V. Nunn. 2002. Electronic course surveys: does automating
feedback and reporting give better results? Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education 27, no. 4:
325–337.
Zúñiga, R.E. 2004, March. Increasing response rates for online surveys—a report from the Flashlight
Program’s BeTA Project, available online at: http://www.tltgroup.org/resources/F-LIGHT/2004/03-04.
html#BeTA (accessed 15 March 2006).


