267 
An Introduction to Web-based 
Support Systems 
JingTao Yao 
Department of Computer Science, University of Regina 
Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada S4S 0A2 
ABSTRACT 
We view Web-based Support Systems (WSS) as a multidisciplinary 
research area that focuses on supporting human activities in specific domains 
or fields based on computer science, information technology, and Web 
technology. Research on WSS is motivated by the challenges and 
opportunities of the Internet and the Web. The recent advancements of 
computer and Web technologies make the implementation of WSS feasible. 
This paper presents the fundamental issues of WSS, a framework of WSS, 
and research on WSS. We also present preliminary studies on two examples 
of WSS, Web-based research support systems (WRSS) and Web-based 
information retrieval support systems (WIRSS).  
KEYWORDS 
Web-based systems, information retrieval, Web technologies 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The advances in computer technologies have affected everybody’s daily 
life. Computers support and assist almost every single human 
activity. Traditional decision support systems (DSS) focus on computerized 
support for making 
_____________________________________________________________ 
 268 
    Correspondence to: e-mail: jtyao@cs.uregina.ca 
decisions with respect to managerial problems (Turban 2005). Other good 
examples are computer aided software engineering (CASE) and computer 
aided design (CAD). With the introduction of Web technology, one may 
reconsider the existing methods and re-design or modify existing systems to 
meet new challenges. The Web is used both as a universal interface and as 
the underlying infrastructure for Intelligent Web Information Systems (Yao 
et al. 2001). There is an emerging and fast growing interest in computerized 
support systems in many other domains such as information retrieval support 
systems (Yao & Yao 2003, Yao 2002), research support systems (Yao 2003), 
teaching and learning support systems (Fan 2003), computerized medical 
support systems (Stalidis et al. 2001), knowledge management support 
systems (Ginsburg & Kambil 1999), and many more. The recent 
development of the Web generates further momentum to the design and 
implementation of support systems (Yao 2005). 
Many types of Web-based Support System (WSS) have been studied 
recently by researchers (Yao & Lingras 2003, Yao et al. 2004, Yao & Yao 
2003b). It is argued that the time to treat Web-based support systems as a 
new and separate sub-area of Web intelligence is coming based on the obser-
vations of existing studies (Yao & Yao 2003b). Recently, two workshops 
aimed to exchange research on the topics of WSS were held in Halifax, 
Canada and Beijing, China in 2003 and 2004 respectively. Many papers 
published in the proceedings and other venues cover a variety of Web-based 
support systems, including decision support (Li & Ruhe 2003, Lu et al. 2003, 
Power et al. 2002, Wang 2004), research support (Keselj 2004, Tan et al. 
2004, Xiang et al. 2003, Xu et al. 2003, Yao 2004), retrieval support (Curra 
& Higgins 2003, Wegrzyn-Wolska 2004, Wu et al. 2004), teaching and 
learning support (Cao & Greer 2004, Fan 2003, Fan 2004, Wetprasit 2003), 
data mining support (Xu et al. 2004), agricultural support (Hu et al. 2004), 
and business support systems (Bai et al. 2004).  
This article is a revised version of research presented at IICAI’05 (Yao 
2005b). Its aim is to introduce the new research area of WSS. The 
organization of this article is as follows. We first discuss the historical view 
of WSS. A section that presents the framework and some design issues of 
WSS follows. We present preliminary studies on two examples of WSS, 
 269 
Web-based research support systems (WRSS) and Web-based information 
retrieval support systems (WIRSS) in Section 4. 
2. HISTORICAL VIEW OF WEB-BASED SUPPORT SYSTEMS  
The WSS is a natural evolution of studies on various computerized 
support systems. An ultimate goal of computer scientists is to build fully 
automated computer systems that have the same or even a higher level of 
intelligence as human beings. It is hoped that these systems can replace 
human beings to perform various activities, either simple or complex. 
However, we can only study, design and develop systems that have some 
abilities to assist, support, and aid us for various activities due to the limited 
technologies we have mastered. Research in artificial intelligence proves that 
it is almost impossible to replace human intelligence with computer systems, 
at least within the foreseeable future (Rich & Knight 1991). With this 
restriction, we have to lower our expectation to implement systems that can 
fulfill more practical goals. We classify computer systems that support 
human activities as computerized support systems (Yao & Yao 2003b). 
The study of computerized support systems involves many disciplines of 
research. The most popular and successful example is DSS. Turban et al. 
(2005) summarize DSS as “computer-based information systems that 
combine models and data in an attempt to solve non-structured problems 
with extensive user involvement through a friendly user interface” after 
discussing various definitions. DSS can be viewed as a hybrid product of two 
domains of studies. It is an approach or methodology for supporting decision 
making. It uses interactive, flexible, adaptable computer-based information 
systems specifically developed for supporting the solution to a specific non-
structured management problem (Turban et al. 2005). DSS are derived from 
management science and computer science. The same principle applies to 
other types of support systems. For instance, a medical support system or a 
medical expert system is the product of the marriage between medical 
science and computer science. Research support systems are the combination 
of research methodology and computer science. In general, a specific support 
system aims to support activities and operations of the specific domain.  
 
 270 
Fig. 1:  Web-based Support Systems: A multidisciplinary research 
 
2.1 Web-based Support Systems: Moving to a Standard Web Platform 
The World Wide Web provides a new medium for storing, presenting, 
gathering, sharing, processing, and using information. The impacts of the 
Web can be felt in most aspects of our life. The impacts are twofold: Web 
technology provides us with more opportunities in terms of information 
availability, accessibility, and flexibility. However, more challenges are in 
front of us. We have to find the right information and tools from largely 
available resources. We have to learn to use the existing tools that keep 
changing all the time. 
The study of WSS aims to take the opportunities of the Web, to meet the 
challenges of the Web, and to extend the human physical limitations of 
information processing. We define WSS as a multidisciplinary research field 
(as depicted in Figure 1) that focuses on supporting human activities in 
specific domains based on computer science, information technology, and 
Web technology. One of the goals is to find out how applications and 
adaptations of existing methodologies on Web platforms benefit our decision 
making and other various activities. The following are some potential 
benefits of Web technology, 
• The Web provides a distributed infrastructure for information 
processing. 
• The Web delivers timely, secure information and tools with a user 
friendly interface. 
• The Web has no time or geographic restrictions. Users can access systems 
at any time and any place. 
Computer 
 Science 
Related 
Research 
Information 
 Systems 
Web 
Technology 
Specific 
Studies 
Web-based 
Support 
Systems 
 271 
• Users can control and retrieve results remotely and instantly. 
TABLE 1 
A Two dimensional view of WSS 
Technology 
Application domain 
Computer technology Web technology 
Decision making DSS WDSS 
Business application BSS WBSS 
Information retrieval IRSS WIRSS 
Scientific research RSS WRSS 
Teaching TSS WTSS 
Medical application MSS WMSS 
Knowledge management KMSS WKMSS 
Data mining DMSS WDMSS 
… … … 
 
 
 
2.2 A Two Dimensional View of WSS 
Web-based Support Systems have two important features that can be 
understood as extensions of existing research in two dimensions, as shown in 
Table 1. In the application dimension, A WSS covers support systems in 
different domains. They can be viewed as natural extensions of decision 
support systems. In the technology dimension, WSS uses the Web as a new 
platform for the delivery of support. Along the application dimension, the 
lessons and experiences from DSS can be applied to other domains. Along 
the technology dimension, new advances in technology can lead to further 
innovations in support systems. The two-dimensional view of WSS provides 
a simple classification. Schematically, suppose A is a specific domain, a 
computerized support system for the domain can be termed as an A support 
 272 
system. The use of the Web results in Web-based A support systems. 
TABLE 2 
Summary of the Google search results on WSS 
Number of Hits Search Phrases 
2003 2004 2005 
Decision support system 212,000   241,000   576,000 
Decision support systems 332,000 402,000 662,000 
Web-based decision support system 891 745 973 
Web-based decision support systems 583 629 663 
Web-based decision support 3,460 5490 13,200 
Business support system 4,180 5,090 13,700 
Business support systems 11,400 12,600 31,200 
Web-based business support system 3 4 4 
Web-based business support systems 27 30 35 
Web-based business support 87 147 155 
Negotiation support system 1,270 965 3,940 
Negotiation support systems 1,680 1,710 4,590 
Web-based negotiation support system 96 273 280 
Web-based negotiation support systems 294 100 103 
Web-based negotiation support 408 383 390 
Information retrieval support system 39 31 36 
Information retrieval support systems 98 184 443 
Web-based information retrieval support system 0 2 2 
Web-based information retrieval support systems 33 80 172 
Web-based information retrieval support 33 82 179 
Research support system 750 743 718 
Research support systems 48 475 512 
Web-based research support system 2 15 34 
Web-based research support systems 25 44 77 
Web-based research support 33 69 127 
Teaching support system 231 237 403 
Teaching support systems 118 89 92 
Web-based teaching support system 1 9 13 
Web-based teaching support systems 2 8 7 
Web-based teaching support 108 160 222 
Medical support system 1,180 914 934 
Medical support systems 1,010 809 938 
Web-based medical support system 0 2 2 
Web-based medical support systems 0 6 4 
Web-based medical support 33 49 53 
Knowledge management support system 433 286 319 
Knowledge management support systems 90 78 100 
Web-based knowledge management support system 340 184 160 
Web-based knowledge management support systems 1 2 2 
Web-based knowledge management support 414 224 208 
Data mining support system 7 26 25 
Data mining support systems 2 10 12 
Web-based data mining support system 0 2 2 
 273 
Web-based data mining support systems 0 2 2 
Web-based data mining support 0 2 2 
Based on such a scheme, we used one of the most popular search engines, 
Google (http://www.google.com), to find evidence of various existing support 
systems. Table 2 shows search results obtained in August of 2003, 2004, and 
2005. The first column Search Phrases is the phrase we used of links returned 
by Google with the search phrase. The results suggest that users have 
conducted numerous research tasks regarding various support systems. 
Decision support system(s), business support system(s), negotiation support 
system(s), and medical support system(s) are amongst the highest returned hits. 
An interesting observation from Table 2 is that the majority of support systems 
with high hit rates are business and management oriented. Technical oriented 
support systems had not been paid attention to by researchers. Therefore, we 
should investigate more on the technical oriented support systems such as 
support for data mining, research, and learning. 
Although the advantages of applying Web technology to support systems 
are sufficient, researchers have not paid enough attention to the concept of 
Web-based support systems. It is clear to see from the search results in Table 2 
that the number of hits for each type of Web-based support systems is 
dramatically lower than its computerized support system counterpart. For 
instance, the hits of “Medical support system” and “Medical support systems” 
are around 1,000. However, there were none when we changed the phrase to 
“Web-based medical support system” or “Web-based medical support systems” 
in 2003. By comparing the number of hits from 2003 to 2005 respectively, one 
can observe that there is a growing interest in Web-based support systems. Due 
to the coverage of Google databases, the search results may not always be 
consistent. However, the general trend is shown as increasing.  
3. THE ARCHITECTURE OF WEB-BASED SUPPORT SYSTEMS  
Interface, functionality, and databases are some of the components that 
are needed to be considered when we design a system. The architecture of 
WSS can be viewed as a (thin) client/server structure as shown in Figure 2. 
The users, including decision makers and information seekers, are clients on 
the top layer. They access the system with browsers via the Web and 
 274 
Internet. The interface that is designed on the server side will be presented on 
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fi
g.
 2
: 
A
n 
ar
ch
ite
ct
ur
e 
of
 W
eb
-b
as
ed
 su
pp
or
t s
ys
te
m
s 
 275 
 
client’s side by browsers. The lower layers and components encapsulated by 
the oval dotted line are very similar to conventional computerized support 
systems. In other words, a Web-based support system can be viewed as a 
support system with the Web and Internet as the interface. 
The architecture shown in Figure 2 is presented from a usage point of view 
and is logical but not physical. In practice, data and control components may 
not necessarily sit physically on the same point of the network, which is one of 
the major differences between WSS and traditional computerized support 
systems. System components may be spread all over the network. Users of the 
systems are located globally. Agent, grid computing, and Web services play 
important roles in WSS implementation. 
The data layer comprises two components. A database is a basic 
component in any modern system. WSS is not an exception. Another major 
component is the knowledge base. The knowledge base stores rules, principles, 
and guidelines used in supporting activities. We intend to divide the knowledge 
base into two parts: a domain-specific knowledge base and a domain-
independent knowledge base. The former is the knowledge specific to the 
domain that is supported. The latter involves general knowledge for all support 
systems. 
Knowledge management, data management, information retrieval, data 
mining, and other control facilities form the management layer. These serve 
as middleware for the three-tier client/server architecture and as the 
intermediaries between the interface and data layers. Reasoning, inference, 
and agent technologies play important roles on this layer. The separation 
between the management of data and user profiles results in a secure and 
standardized system. To take advantage of Web technology, these processes 
are distributed over the Internet to form a virtual server. In fact, databases 
and knowledge bases on the lower tier are also distributed. 
The WSS can be classified into three levels. The first level is support for 
personal activities. An example of such support is research support for indi-
viduals (Yao 2003). Personal research activities such as search, retrieval, 
reading, and writing are supported. The second level is organizational support, 
such as research support on an institutional level (Tang et al. 2003). The top 
level is the network level. The collaborations between organizations or decision 
 276 
making by a group of people like in group decision support systems fall in this 
level. The group-decision support room may be a virtual room on the Web.  
4. WSS EXAMPLES 
4.1 Web-based Research Support Systems 
As new technologies evolve and existing technologies expand, scientists 
must adjust accordingly and make full use of these emerging tools when 
carrying out research. Scientists face many challenges in using Web-based 
information resources, such as information overload, misinformation, fees, 
poorly designed navigation, retrieval, and browsing tools; effectively, 
supporting scientists to meet such challenges is an important issue. Many 
computerized systems have been implemented to support various research 
activities. The study of Web-based Research Support Systems (WRSS) is 
trying to provide a common framework for such systems (Yao 2003). Similar 
to what we discussed above, WRSS is also interdisciplinary, involving at 
least three domain of studies: research methodologies (purpose of research, 
research methods, research activities), computer science (computer systems 
that support various research activities), and the Web (as an infrastructure 
and a medium of support delivery as well as a common user interface). 
Many computerized systems, although not designed specifically for 
research support, have been used by scientists in different stages of research. 
The WRSS aim at pooling together all these isolated efforts and un-
integrated systems with a common goal of research support. Research 
activities can be broadly classified into two levels—the institutional level and 
the individual level. The institutional level deals with the management of 
research and research projects in an institution. The individual level is the 
actual research process of a scientist. A research process model at the 
individual level may include the following phases: idea generating, problem 
definition, procedure design and planning, observation and experimentation, 
data analysis, results interpretation and explanation, and communication and 
dissemination (Yao 2003). It is possible to combine several phases into one 
phase or to divide one phase into more detailed steps. The division between 
phases is not clear cut. Moreover, the research process does not follow a 
rigid sequencing of the phases. Iteration of different phrases may be 
necessary. 
 277 
To support a large spectrum of research activities, the WRSS must be 
flexible and have much functionality (Yao 2003). We summarize some basic 
functionality in this section. 
The first component is profile management, which deals with profiles of 
users of WRSS, i.e., scientists. Different classes of profiles may exist, such 
as research interest, personal libraries, address books, Web bookmarks, and 
many more. The profile management module collects, organizes, and stores 
all relevant information for a scientist. Resource management is the second 
functionality of WRSS. Many types of resources exist for supporting research, 
such as human resources, tool resources, and information/knowledge resources. 
Database, knowledge base, information retrieval, and agent technologies can 
be used. Web search engines can be used for retrieval. The third component 
is data/knowledge management. Typically, research involves the collection 
and processing of a large amount of data. The WRSS must have a module to 
record the useful data, which gathers information and knowledge during the 
entire research process. The module must contain some data/knowledge 
operations and retrieval facilities.  
The profile, resource, and data management components form a solid 
basis of WRSS. A research support system consists of many sub-systems to 
support different activities. They share common data and knowledge bases. 
We list some specific supporting functionality: exploring support, retrieval 
support, reading support, analyzing support, and writing support. As a specific 
type of WSS, the WRSS assist scientists to improve their research quality 
and productivity. The feasibility of such systems is based on the assumption 
that relatively systematic approach exists in scientific research. Furthermore, 
a general research process can be established, consisting of several steps or 
phases, such as idea generation, exploration, problem definition, procedure 
design and planning, observation and experimentation, data analysis, results 
interpretation, and communication. A number of activities are involved in 
each of these phases. 
4.2 Web-based Information Retrieval Support Systems  
Each support sub-system of WRSS has its special feature, as described 
above. Information retrieval support is the one that has been paid attention by 
 278 
some researchers (Yao & Yao 2003, Yao 2002). Web-based Information 
retrieval support systems (WIRSS) are designed with the objective to provide 
the necessary utilities, tools, and languages that support a user to perform 
various tasks in finding useful information and knowledge. We summarize 
the WIRSS in this section. 
Information retrieval support systems, Web browsers, and Web search 
engines extend the basic search functionalities of data retrieval systems 
exemplified by a database system. They provide basic functionalities to assist a 
user or scientist in the context of libraries and in the early stage of the Web. A 
scientist may have to perform many different tasks when finding useful 
information. The new tasks include understanding, analysis, organization, and 
discovery in addition to the conventional tasks of searching and browsing. It is 
discussed in literature that WIRSS is actually a natural evolution from retrieval 
systems. The evolution from data retrieval systems to information retrieval 
systems and from information retrieval systems to information retrieval support 
systems have been discussed in detail (Yao 2002). The WIRSS attempt to 
resolve the problems of information retrieval systems by providing more 
supporting functionalities. A WIRSS provides models, languages, utilities, and 
tools to assist a user in investigating, analyzing, understanding, and organizing 
a document collection and search results. These tools allow the user to explore 
both semantic and structural information of each individual document, as well 
as the entire collection. 
We can classify WIRSS models into three related types. Documents in a 
document collection serve as the raw data of WIRSS. The document models 
deal with representations and interpretations of documents and the document 
collection. They allow multiple representations of documents. Granular 
computing plays an important role in the construction of document models. The 
retrieval model deals with the search functionality. They provide languages and 
tools to assist a user in performing tasks such as searching and browsing. 
WIRSS should provide multi-strategy retrieval. A user can choose different 
retrieval models with respect to different document models. The presentation 
models deal with the representation and interpretations of results from the 
search. They allow a user to view and arrange search results as well as various 
document models. The same results can be viewed in different ways by using 
distinct presentation models. Moreover, a user can analyze and compare results 
 279 
from different retrieval models. A single document model, a retrieval model, or 
presentation model may not be suitable for different types of users. Therefore, 
the WIRSS must support multiple models as well as provide tools for users to 
manage various models. 
A WIRSS focuses on the supporting functionalities of information 
retrieval. Yet, existing information retrieval systems focus only on the search 
and browsing functionalities. The WIRSS are more flexible and combine the 
functionalities of IRS, Web browser, and Web search engines. It is expected 
that current IRS should be extended to support more user tasks. A WIRSS is 
based on a different design philosophy that emphasizes the supporting 
functionality of the system instead of the specific search and browsing 
functionality. In the process of finding useful information, a user plays an 
active role in a WIRSS by using the utilities, tools, and languages provided by 
the system. The components of a WIRSS also include data management, model 
management, knowledge-based management, and user interface subsystems.  
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS  
The emerging interdisciplinary study of Web-based support systems is 
motivated by the challenges and opportunities of the Web. It focuses on the 
theories, technologies, and tools for the design and implementation of Web-
based systems that support various human activities. The research of Web-
based support systems is a natural evolution and extension of existing research. 
The evolution of the application dimension is the extension of decision support 
systems to computerized support systems. With the emergence of Web tech-
nology and Web intelligence, various Web-based support systems are extended 
from a single machine—a single user computerized support system. The 
research on Web-based support systems can be classified into a few categories. 
There are four types of existing research, namely, WSS for specific domains, 
Web-based applications, techniques that are related to WSS and design, and the 
development of WSS that can be classified as WSS research. 
 280 
REFERENCES  
Bai, J., Paradis, F. and Nie, J.Y. 2004. Web-supported matching and 
classification of business, in WSS’04, 28-36. 
Cao, Y. and Greer, J. 2004. Facilitating Web-based education using intelli-
gent agent technologies, in WSS’04, 37-44. 
Curra, K. and Higgins, L. 2003. A Web-based intelligent case-based reasoning 
legal aid retrieval information system, in WSS’03, 63-7. 
Fan, L. 2004. Adaptation and personalization in Web-based learning support 
systems, in WSS’04, 60-6. 
Fan, L. and Yao, Y.Y. 2003. Web-based learning support systems, in WSS’03, 
43-8. 
Ginsburg, M. and Kambil, A. 1999. Annotate: A Web-based knowledge 
management support system for document collections, in Proceedings of 
HICSS-32. 
Hu, Y.G., Zhi Quan, Z. and Yao, Y.Y. 2004. Web-based agricultural support 
systems, in WSS’04, 75-80. 
Keselj, V. and Cercone, N. 2004. PPDN—a Framework for Peer-to-Peer 
Collaborative Research Network, in WSS’04, 88-93. 
Li, J. and Ruhe, G. 2003. Web-based decision support for software release 
planning, in WSS’03, 13-20. 
Lu, J., Zhang, G. and Shi, C. 2003. Framework and implementation of a 
Web-based multi-objective decision support system: WMODSS, in 
WSS’03, 7-11. 
Power, D.J. and Kaparthi, S. 2002. Building Web-based decision support 
systems, Studies in Informatics and Control, 11, 291-302. 
Rich, E. and Knight, K. 1991. Artificial intelligence, McGraw-Hill. 
Stalidis, G., Prentza, A., Vlachos, I.N., Maglavera, S. and Koutsouris, D. 
2001. Medical support system for continuation of care based on XML 
Web technology, International Journal of Medical Informatics, 64, 385-
400. 
Tang, H., Wu, Y., Yao, J.T., Wang, G.Y. and Yao, Y.Y. 2003. CUPTRSS: a 
Web-based research support system, in WSS’03, 21-8. 
Turban, E., Aronson, J.E., and Liang, T.P. 2005. Decision support systems 
and intelligent systems, New Jersey, USA, Pearson Education. 
Wang, M. Design of merchant reputation system: a Web-based purchase 
decision support system, in WSS’04, 149-54, 2004. 
Wetprasit, R. 2003. Developing an intelligent Web-based Thai tutor: some 
issues in the temporal expert, in WSS’03, 49-53. 
Wegrzyn-Wolska, K. 2004. FIM-metaindexer: a meta-search engine purpose-
built for the French civil service and statistical classification of the 
interrogated search engines, in WSS’04, 163-70. 
 281 
Wu, Z.M., Mundluru, D. and Raghavan, V.V. 2004. Automatically detecting 
Boolean operations supported by search engines, towards search engine 
query language discovery, in WSS’04, 171-78. 
Xiang, X., Huang, Y. and Madey, G. 2003. A Web-based collaboratory for 
supporting environmental science research, in WSS’03, 29-36. 
Xu, J., Huang, Y. and Madey, G. 2003. A research support systems frame-
work for Web data mining, in WSS’03, 37-41. 
Yao, J.T. 2005. Design of Web-based support systems, in Proceedings of the 
8th International Conference on Computer Science and Informatics 
(CSI), 349-52. 
Yao, J.T. 2005b. On Web-based support systems, Proceedings of the 2nd 
Indian International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Edited by 
Prasad, B, IICAI, 2589-600. 
Yao, J.T. and Lingras, P. 2003. Proceedings of 2003 WI/IAT Workshop on 
Applications, Products and Services of Web-based Support System 
(WSS’03), Saint Mary's University, Canada. 
Yao, J.T., Raghvan, V.V. and Wang, G.Y. 2004. Proceedings of the Second 
International Workshop on Web-based Support System (WSS’04), Saint 
Mary's University, Canada. 
Yao, J.T. and Yao, Y.Y. 2003. Web-based information retrieval support 
systems: building research tools for scientists in the new information 
age, Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC International Conference on Web 
Intelligence, 570-73. 
Yao, J.T. and Yao, Y.Y. 2003b. Web-based support systems, in WSS’03, 1-5, 
2003. 
Yao, Y.Y. 2002. Information retrieval support systems, Proceedings of 
FUZZ-IEEE'02, 773-78. 
Yao, Y.Y. 2003. A framework for Web-based research support systems, in 
Proceedings of COMPSAC'03, 601-6. 
Yao, Y.Y. 2004. Web-based research support systems, in WSS’04, 1-6. 
Yao, Y.Y., Zhong, N., Liu, J. and Ohsuga, S. 2001. Web intelligence (WI): 
research challenges and trends in the new information age, in Web 
Intelligence: Research and Development, LNAI 2198, Berlin, Germany, 
Springer, 1-17. 

