M
uch more than a
provocative term, “Web
science” signals a new
way of thinking about computer
science. Computer science
researchers and professionals
are familiar with the turbu-
lence of technology innova-
tion; Web science promoters challenge them to
expand the scope of computer science. Indeed,
declining enrollment and industry shifts have
shaken computer science, so Web science promises
to be an invigorating direction. 
Writing in Science magazine last August, Sir Tim
Berners-Lee and collaborators called for a new disci-
pline [3] and detailed their case in an online 130-
page monograph [2]. These esteemed revolutionaries
offered a visionary manifesto that says that after 40
years of focusing on computer science, it is time for
computer scientists to shift to Web science [9]. 
Their starting definition of the new discipline is
the “science of decentralized information systems”;
they followed with a rich research agenda of emerg-
ing technologies, including the Semantic Web,
ontologies, Web services, and Web-scale computing
(see the table here). This proposed shift to Web sci-
ence raises the importance of such traditional com-
puter science topics as graph theoretic models,
network structure analyses, and search algorithms
that are likely to be familiar to computer scientists.
But Web science advocates make clear that under-
standing Google’s technology and business success
requires more than a discussion of Web crawling
and distributed search algorithms. They insist some-
thing bigger and bolder is becoming important and
will take an open mind for the traditional computer
science community to absorb.
SOCIALLY EMBEDDED
Although the research topics they describe have
origins in computer science, “the Web as a technol-
ogy,” they say, “is socially embedded.” The impli-
cations of this expanded view are profound,
leading them to broaden their research agenda to
address such social issues as trust, reputation, pri-
vacy, governance, copyright, and network commu-
nications standards. Since they recognize the
essential social nature of Web technologies, they
also embrace the idea that Web science must
address user needs and requirements analysis
through questions like: What do people and com-
munities want from the Web? 
The social perspective pushes Web science
researchers toward a deep understanding of the infor-
mation and services users want. The disruptive shift
involves moving away from studying the technology
toward studying what users can do with the technology
[7]. While computer scientists have found Moore’s Law
to be a helpful measure of progress, Web scientists are
more interested in counting page views and unique vis-LIS
A
H
A
N
EY
Viewpoint Ben Shneiderman 
Web Science: A Provocative 
Invitation to Computer Science
Here’s how it can awaken computer science to the 
interdisciplinary possibilities of the Web’s socially embedded 
computing technology.
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM June  2007/Vol. 50, No. 6 25
 
26 June  2007/Vol. 50, No. 6 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
itors. In short, the shift is from chips to clicks. 
The social computing projects described in the
Web science framework deal with massive multi-
player online role-playing games, online discussion
groups, and photo-sharing Web sites that attract
audiences in the tens of millions worldwide. 
However, I wish the authors of the Web science
framework would go even further to address such
challenges as developing descriptive theories to
explain the wide variations in adoption of social
computing projects and
prescriptive models to
guide implementers. For
example, they should be
trying to understand
whether moderated
online communities
generate greater partici-
pation when discussions
are kept on topic and
when harsh language is
prohibited. They should
ask: Does moderation
inhibit spirited debate,
thereby undermining
interest? And how can
successful discussion
groups grow by, say, a
factor of a hundred yet
preserve the intense participation of their originators? 
Web use is much more than access to decentral-
ized information and discussion groups. The Web
empowers individuals, invigorates collaboration, and
unleashes social creativity. Innovative metrics are
needed to capture the effect of children writing
empathic email messages in foreign languages, blog
entries that catalyze lively discussion, and scientific
insight made possible by Web-based databases and
visualization tools. 
The social analysis of Web science must also deal
with the negative aspects of Web-based social inter-
action (such as security breaches, identity theft, pri-
vacy violations, and the social disruptions of
globalization). The Web produces such dangers
because it provides opportunities for those who
break laws, spread hate, or promote terrorism. These
are troubling aspects of the Internet, so a responsible
research agenda must include their study. 
RICHLY INTERDISCIPLINARY
I urge a richly interdisciplinary path for Web sci-
ence that also addresses the emerging applications
for scientific collaboration, e-commerce, entertain-
ment, social creativity, and social networking [6].
Explanatory theories are needed to understand why,
say, eBay remains a huge
success with few serious
competitors. Predictive
models are needed to
understand why the
video-sharing site
YouTube and the photo-
sharing site Flickr are so
successful and why social
networking sites like
MySpace, FaceBook, and
Friendster have hundreds
of millions of users. Mul-
tiple scientific studies of
Wikipedia would provide
valuable understanding
and guidance needed by implementers of public
health information Web sites, community-response
grids for emergency preparedness [8], and policy-
oriented discussion groups. Most computer scien-
tists are likely to dismiss these concerns as outside
their territory, but Web scientists would eagerly
take on these research challenges. 
Another potentially strong distinction about Web
science is its commitment to universal usability.
While the framework document is brief on issues
concerning the digital divide, Berners-Lee says, “The
most important thing about the World Wide Web is
that it is universal” [1]. The dimensions of that uni-
versality are more than the technologies of fast/slow
networks or large/small displays. A universal usability
research agenda must also address users who speak
multiple languages, as well as users from diverse cul-
tures, novices/experts, young/old, low-literacy users,
and users with disabilities. Web science could take
Viewpoint
Schneiderman table (6/07)
Computer Science
Metrics
Moore’s Law
Order (n) algorithm analysis
Gigabytes
Topics
Focus
Technology
Computers
Supercomputers
Proficient programmers
Page views
Unique visitors/month
Number of songs or videos
Social networks
Voice over IP, music sharing
Relationships
Wikis, blogs, tagging
E-commerce, e-learning, e-government,
 medical informatics, financial analysis 
Creating and sharing video, animation,
 music, photos, maps
Applications
Users
Mobile devices
Universal usability
 
Web Science
Computer networks
Packet switching
Information
Programming languages
Databases, operating systems,
compilers
3D graphics, rendering algorithms, com-
 putational geometry, object modeling
Computer science vs. 
Web science.
on these research tasks, which promise profound
payoffs in terms of increased participation in democ-
ratic processes and enhanced collective efficacy of
communities. I hope Web science advocates will also
dedicate themselves to addressing the economics of
providing equitable access, the challenges of working
in developing nations, and the strategies needed to
train users with low literacy. 
As part of their focus on universality, Web science
advocates [2] assert that “Mobile access to the Web
may become the dominant mode in many nations,
particularly developing ones.” The commitment to
pervasive or ubiquitous access for users as they travel
reflects more than just technological challenges; it gen-
erates opportunities for novel services with temporal
and geospatial requirements. Cell phones, for example,
are more than information-access devices, restructuring
social expectations and offering life-altering opportuni-
ties, as well as life-saving resources. I hope these con-
cerns will be a more substantial part of Web science. 
REFORM MOVEMENTS
Calls for research and education in Web science are
in harmony with many other reform movements
that seek to redefine and reinvigorate computer sci-
ence. Some are from within the traditional field of
computer science (such as Georgia Tech’s New Face
of Computing initiative, www.cc.gatech.edu/sym-
posium/), which offers a curriculum based on inter-
disciplinary threads. Nascent efforts from
forward-looking computer science faculty deal with
expanding the discipline to include new media,
games, usability engineering, design, and the teach-
ing of innovation [5]. Another approach to reviving
computer science is to seek inspiration from such
application areas as e-commerce, medical informat-
ics, and computational biology. 
Related developments include vigorous growth of
alternative programs from the i-schools (information
schools and colleges of information studies,
www.ischools.org). These new curricula, which
already generate high enrollment in the Universities
of Maryland, Michigan, and North Carolina, focus
on the use of information, exploratory search, text-
analysis tools, human-computer interaction, social
informatics, and digital libraries. These programs
also cover applications in e-learning, public health
information, and digital government, as well as
social, ethical, policy, and economic issues. 
Industry pressure also brings such healthy new
cross-disciplinary ideas as IBM’s promotion of “ser-
vices science” as a new discipline aligned with
requirements analysis and customer relationship
management [4]. Services science also covers a wide
range of Web-based transactions that are central to
business-to-business relationships, workflow analysis,
and business process modeling. 
CONCLUSION
The Web science framework is a provocative
research agenda that deserves serious review but
that already needs expansion to adequately address
such important issues as social computing, univer-
sal usability, and interdisciplinary strategies. Vision-
aries say it is time for a change, but will the
traditional computer science community accept the
invitation? I hope it will.
References
1. Berners-Lee, T. Japan Prize Commemorative Lecture. Available from the
World Wide Web Consortium, Cambridge, MA, 2002;
www.w3.org/2002/04/Japan/Lecture.html. 
2. Berners-Lee, T., Hall, W., Hendler, J., O’Hara, K., Shadbolt, N., and
Weitzner, D. A framework for Web science. Foundations and Trends in
Web Science 1, 1 (2006), 1–130; www.nowpublishers.com/web/. 
3. Berners-Lee, T., Hall, W., Hendler, J., Shadbolt, N., and Weitzner, D.
Creating a science of the Web. Science 313, 11 (Aug. 2006), 769–771. 
4. Chesbrough, H. and Spohrer, J. A research manifesto for services sci-
ence. Commun. ACM 49, 7 (July 2006), 35–43. 
5. Denning, P. The social life of innovation. Commun. ACM 47, 4 (Apr.
2004), 15–19. 
6. Klawe, M. and Shneiderman, B. Crisis and opportunity in computer
science. Commun. ACM 48, 11 (Nov. 2005), 27–28. 
7. Shneiderman, B. Leonardo’s Laptop: Human Needs and the New Com-
puting Technologies. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, Oct. 2002. 
8. Shneiderman, B. and Preece, J. 911.gov. Science 315, 5814 (Feb. 16,
2007), 944. 
9. Web Science Research Initiative; www.webscience.org/. 
Ben Shneiderman (ben@cs.umd.edu) is a professor in the 
Department of Computer Science (www.cs.umd.edu/~ben) at the 
University of Maryland at College Park and a member of the Advisory
Board for the Web Science Research Initiative. 
© 2007 ACM 0001-0782/07/0600 $5.00 
c
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM June  2007/Vol. 50, No. 6 27

