The Internet  
and World Wide Web
Chapter Two
1439079420_Ch02OP_REV.indd   72 10/27/09   10:32:18 AM
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
 1 Discuss the evolution of the Internet
 2 Identify and briefly describe various broadband Internet connections and 
state differences between broadband Internet connections and dial-up 
connections 
 3 Describe the types of Internet access providers: Internet service providers, 
online service providers, wireless Internet service providers
 4 Describe the purpose of an IP address and its relationship to a domain 
name
 5 Explain the purpose of a Web browser and identify the components of a 
Web address
 6 Describe how to use a search engine to search for information on the Web 
and differentiate between a search engine and a subject directory
 7 Describe the types of Web sites: portal, news, informational, business/
marketing, blog, wiki, online social network, educational, entertainment, 
advocacy, Web application, content aggregator, and personal
 8 Explain how Web pages use graphics, animation, audio, video, virtual 
reality, and plug-ins
 9 Identify and briefly describe the steps required for Web publishing
 10 Describe the types of e-commerce: business-to-consumer, consumer-
to-consumer, and business-to-business
 11 Explain how e-mail, mailing lists, instant messaging, chat rooms, VoIP, 
newsgroups and message boards, and FTP work
 12 Identify the rules of netiquette
Objectives
1439079420_Ch02OP_REV.indd   73 10/27/09   10:32:36 AM
74 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
The Internet
One of the major reasons business, home, and 
other users purchase computers is for Internet 
access. The Internet is a widely used research 
tool, providing society with access to global 
 information and instant communications. 
Further, access to the Internet can occur any-
time from a computer anywhere: at home, at 
work, at school, in a restaurant, on an airplane, 
and at a park.
The Internet, also called the Net, is a world-
wide collection of networks that links millions 
of businesses, government agencies, educational 
institutions, and individuals. Each of the networks 
on the Internet provides resources that add to the 
abundance of goods, services, and information 
accessible via the Internet.
Today, more than one billion home and busi-
ness users around the world access a variety of 
services on the Internet, some of which are shown 
in Figure 2-1. The World Wide Web, or simply 
the Web, and e-mail are two of the more widely 
used Internet services. Other services include chat 
rooms, instant messaging, and VoIP (Voice over 
Internet Protocol). To enhance your understand-
ing of these Internet services, the chapter begins 
by discussing the history of the Internet and how 
the Internet works and then explains each of 
these services.
Figure 2-1 People around the world use a variety of Internet services in daily activities. Internet services allow home and business 
users to access the Web for activities such as conducting research, reading blogs, or sharing videos; to send e-mail messages; or to 
converse with others using chat rooms, instant messaging, or VoIP.
Web — conduct research
Web — share videos
Web — read blogs
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   74 11/09/10   6:02:48 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 75
Evolution of the Internet
The Internet has its roots in a networking  project 
started by the Pentagon’s Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (ARPA), an agency of the U.S. 
Department of Defense. ARPA’s goal was to build a 
network that (1) allowed scientists at different physi-
cal locations to share information and work together 
on military and scientific projects and (2) could 
function even if part of the network were disabled 
or destroyed by a disaster such as a nuclear attack. 
That network, called ARPANET, became functional 
in September 1969, linking scientific and academic 
researchers across the United States.
The original ARPANET consisted of four main 
computers, one each located at the University 
of California at Los Angeles, the University of 
California at Santa Barbara, the Stanford Research 
Institute, and the University of Utah. Each of these 
computers served as a host on the network. A host, 
more commonly known today as a server, is any 
computer that provides services and connections 
to other computers on a network. Hosts often use 
high-speed communications to transfer data and 
messages over a network.
As researchers and others realized the great 
benefit of using ARPANET to share data and 
information, ARPANET underwent phenomenal 
growth. By 1984, ARPANET had more than 1,000 
individual computers linked as hosts. Today, more 
than 550 million hosts connect to the Internet.
Some organizations connected entire networks 
to ARPANET to take advantage of its high-speed 
communications. In 1986, the National Science 
Foundation (NSF) connected its huge network 
of five super computer centers, called NSFnet, to 
ARPANET. This configuration of complex net-
works and hosts became known as the Internet.
chat room
e-mail
VoIP
instant messaging
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   75 11/09/10   6:02:58 PM
76 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
 W3C
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch2/weblink and then 
click W3C.
Until 1995, NSFnet handled the bulk of the 
 communications activity, or traffic, on the Internet. 
In 1995, NSFnet terminated its network on the 
Internet and resumed its status as a research network.
Today, the Internet consists of many local, 
regional, national, and international networks. 
Numerous corporations, commercial firms, and 
other companies such as IBM provide networks 
to handle Internet traffic. Both public and private 
organizations own networks on the Internet. These 
networks, along with telephone companies such as 
Verizon and AT&T, cable and satellite companies, 
and the government, all contribute toward the inter-
nal structure of the Internet. 
Each organization on the Internet is responsible 
only for maintaining its own network. No single 
 person, company, institution, or government agency 
controls or owns the Internet. The World Wide 
Web Consortium (W3C), however, oversees research 
and sets standards and guidelines for many areas of 
the Internet. The mission of the W3C is to contrib-
ute to the growth of the Web. More than 350 orga-
nizations from around the world are members of the 
W3C, advising, defining standards, and addressing 
other issues.
Internet2
Internet2 is a not-for-profit research and 
 development project that connects more than 200 
universities and 115 companies via a high-speed pri-
vate network. Founded in 1996, the goal of Internet2 
is to develop and test advanced network technolo-
gies that will benefit Internet users in the short-term 
future. These technologies require an extremely 
high-speed network that exceeds the capabilities of 
today’s Internet and networks. Examples of previ-
ous Internet2 projects that are now mainstream 
include telemedicine, digital libraries (online books, 
magazines, music, movies, speeches, etc.), and faster 
Internet services. Current Internet2 projects include 
interactive high-definition video and enhanced 
 detection and resolution of network problems. 
Connecting to the Internet
Many home and small business users connect 
to the Internet via high-speed broadband Internet 
service. With broadband Internet service, your com-
puter or mobile device usually is connected to the 
Internet the entire time it is powered on. Examples 
of broadband Internet service include cable, DSL, 
fiber, radio signals, and satellite.
• Cable Internet service provides high-speed Internet 
access through the cable television network via a 
cable modem.
• DSL (digital subscriber line) provides high-speed 
Internet connections using regular copper 
telephone lines.
• Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) uses fiber-optic cable 
to provide high-speed Internet access to home 
and business users.
• Fixed wireless provides high-speed Internet 
connections using a dish-shaped antenna on your 
house or business to communicate with a tower 
location via radio signals.
• A cellular radio network offers high-speed Internet 
connections to devices with built-in compatible 
technology or computers with wireless modems.
• A Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) network uses 
radio signals to provide high-speed Internet 
connections to compatible or properly equipped 
wireless computers and devices.
• Satellite Internet service provides high-speed 
Internet connections via satellite to a satellite dish 
that communicates with a satellite modem.
Employees and students typically connect their 
computers to the Internet through a business or 
school network. The business or school network 
connects to a high-speed broadband Internet service.
Many home users set up a Wi-Fi network, which 
sends signals to a communications device that is con-
nected to a high-speed Internet service such as cable 
or DSL. Instead of using broadband Internet service, 
however, some home users connect to the Internet 
via dial-up access, which is a slower-speed technology. 
Dial-up access takes place when the modem in your 
computer connects to the Internet via a standard tele-
phone line that transmits data and information using 
an analog (continuous wave pattern) signal. Users may 
opt for dial-up access because of its lower price or 
because broadband access is not available in their area.
Mobile users access the Internet using a  variety of 
Internet services. Most hotels and airports  provide 
wired or wireless Internet connections as a service to 
travelers. Wireless Internet services, such as Wi-Fi 
networks, allow mobile users to connect easily to the 
Internet with notebook computers, smart phones, 
and other mobile devices while away from a tele-
phone, cable, or other wired connection. Many public 
locations, such as airports, hotels, schools, shopping 
malls, and coffee shops, are hot spots that provide 
Wi-Fi Internet connections to users with mobile 
computers or devices. At public locations, you may 
be required to agree to terms of service, obtain a 
password (for example, from the hotel’s front desk), 
or perform some other action in order to connect to 
the Internet. Some cities provide free Wi-Fi Internet 
connections to all residents. 
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   76 11/09/10   6:03:01 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 77
Screen
T.K.
local call
local call
toll-free call cable Internet service
DSL
wireless connection
Regional
ISP
Wireless
Internet
Service
ProviderOnline
Service
Provider
Online Service
(special members-only
content)National
ISP
Access Providers
An access provider is a business that  provides 
individuals and organizations access to the 
Internet free or for a fee. For example, some 
Wi-Fi networks provide free access while  others 
charge a per use fee. Other access providers often 
charge a fixed amount for an Internet connection, 
offering faster speeds or more services for higher 
rates. Typical monthly rates range from about 
$5 to $24 per month for dial-up, $13 to $70 for 
DSL, $20 to $75 for cable, $40 to $150 for FTTP, 
$30 to $80 for fixed wireless, $60 to $80 for cellu-
lar networks, and $50 to $120 for satellite. Many 
Internet access providers offer services such as 
news, weather, financial data, games, travel guides, 
e-mail, photo communities, and online storage 
to hold digital photos and other files. (A file is a 
named unit of storage.)
Access providers are categorized as regional 
or national ISPs, online service providers, and 
wireless Internet service  providers (Figure 2-2). 
Figure 2-2 Common ways to access the Internet are through a regional or national Internet service provider, an online service 
provider, or a wireless Internet service provider.
How popular is broadband?
According to a study performed by Pew Internet & 
American Life Project, 63 percent of American adults 
have broadband Internet  connections at home. 
Adoption of broadband connections increases during 
good economic times, while some may hesitate to 
make the switch during an economic downturn. It is 
believed that once the price of a broadband connec-
tion decreases, and broadband is available in more 
rural areas, its popularity will increase further.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch2/faq and then click Broadband.
FAQ 2-1
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   77 11/09/10   6:03:02 PM
78 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
An ISP (Internet service provider) 
is a regional or national access provider. 
A regional ISP usually provides Internet 
access to a specific geographic area. A 
national ISP is a business that provides 
Internet access in cities and towns nation-
wide. For dial-up access, some national 
ISPs provide both local and toll-free tele-
phone numbers. Due to their larger size, 
national ISPs usually offer more services 
and have a larger technical support staff 
than regional ISPs. Examples of national 
ISPs are AT&T and EarthLink.
In addition to providing Internet 
access, an online service provider 
(OSP) also has many members-only 
features such as instant messaging or 
their own customized version of a Web 
browser. The two more popular OSPs 
are AOL (America Online) and MSN 
(Microsoft Network). AOL differs from 
many OSPs in that it provides gateway 
functionality to the Internet, meaning it 
regulates the Internet services to which 
members have access. AOL also provides 
free access to its services to any user with 
a broadband Internet connection.
When selecting an ISP or OSP for dial-up 
access, ensure it pro vides at least one local 
 telephone number. Otherwise, long-distance 
 telephone charges will apply for the time you 
connect to the Internet.
A wireless Internet service provider, some-
times called a wireless data provider, is a com-
pany that provides wireless Internet access to 
desktop and notebook computers and mobile 
devices, such as smart phones and portable media 
players, with built-in wireless  capability (such as 
Wi-Fi) or to computers using wireless modems 
or wireless access devices. Wireless modems, 
which usually are in the form of a USB flash 
drive or a card that inserts in a slot in a computer 
or mobile device, generally dial a telephone num-
ber to establish a connection with the wireless 
Internet service provider. An antenna on or built 
into the computer or device, wireless modem, 
or wireless access device typically sends signals 
through the airwaves to communicate with a 
wireless Internet service provider. Some examples 
of wireless Internet service pro viders include 
AT&T, Boingo Wireless, Sprint Broadband 
Direct, T-Mobile, and Verizon Wireless.
 Wireless Modems
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
Wireless Modems.
How Data and Information Travel 
the Internet
Computers connected to the Internet work 
together to transfer data and information 
around the world using servers and clients and 
various wired and wireless transmission media. 
On the Internet, your computer is a client that 
can access data, information, and services on a 
variety of servers.
The inner structure of the Internet works 
much like a transportation system. Just as 
interstate highways connect major cities and 
carry the bulk of the automotive traffic across 
the country, several main transmission media 
carry the heaviest amount of traffic on the 
Internet. These major carriers of network 
traffic are known collectively as the Internet 
backbone.
In the United States, the transmission media 
that make up the Internet backbone exchange 
data and information at several different major 
cities across the country. That is, they transfer 
data and information from one network to 
another until reaching the final destination 
(Figure 2-3).
What types of Web sites do mobile Internet 
users visit?
More than 87 million individuals subscribe to a wireless 
Internet service provider. Mobile Internet users most 
frequently visit weather, entertainment, and e-mail Web 
sites. The chart below illustrates various types of Web 
sites and their associated increase in traffic resulting 
from mobile Internet users.
Source: ClickZ
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/faq 
and then click Mobile Internet.
FAQ 2-2
Increase Due to Mobile Internet Users
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Pe
rc
en
t 
In
cr
ea
se
25%
We
ath
er
En
ter
tai
nm
en
t
E-m
ail
Sp
ort
s
Bu
sin
ess
So
cia
l N
etw
ork
ing
Se
arc
h
Sh
op
pin
g
Web Site Type
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   78 11/09/10   6:03:05 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 79
Internet Addresses
The Internet relies on an addressing system 
much like the postal service to send data and 
information to a computer at a specific destina-
tion. An IP address, short for Internet Protocol 
address, is a number that uniquely identifies each 
computer or device connected to the Internet. 
The IP address usually consists of four groups of 
numbers, each separated by a period. The number 
in each group is between 0 and 255. For example, 
the numbers 72.14.207.99 are an IP address. In 
general, the first portion of each IP address iden-
tifies the network and the last portion identifies 
the specific computer.
These all-numeric IP addresses are difficult to 
remember and use. Thus, the Internet  supports 
the use of a text name that represents one or more 
IP addresses. A domain name is the text version 
of an IP address. Figure 2-4 shows an IP address 
and its associated domain name. As with an IP 
address, the components of a domain name are 
separated by periods.
The text in the domain name up to the first period 
identifies the type of Internet server. In Figure 2-4, 
for example, the www indicates a Web server.
Step 1
You initiate an action 
to request data or
information from
the Internet. For
example, you
request to display
a Web page on your
computer screen.
Step 2
A cable modem 
transfers the 
computer’s digital 
signals to the cable 
television line in 
your house.
Step 3
Your request (digital signals) travels 
through cable television lines to a 
central cable 
system, which 
is shared by 
up to 500 
homes in a 
neighborhood.
Step 4
The central cable system sends 
your request over high-speed 
fiber-optic lines to the cable 
operator, who often 
also is the ISP.
Step 5
The ISP routes your request through the 
Internet backbone to the destination server 
(in this example, the server that contains 
the requested Web site).
Step 6
The server retrieves the requested 
Web page and sends it back through 
the Internet backbone to your computer.
How a Home User’s Data and Information Might Travel the Internet 
Using a Cable Modem Connection
IP address  72.14.207.99
Domain name  www.google.com
top-level domain
Figure 2-4 The IP address and domain name for the Google Web site.
Figure 2-3 This figure shows how a home user’s data and information might travel the Internet using a cable modem connection.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   79 11/09/10   6:03:07 PM
80 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Every domain name contains a top-level domain 
(TLD), which is the last section of the domain 
name. A generic TLD (gTLD), such as the com in 
Figure 2-4 on the previous page, identifies the type 
of organization associated with the domain. The 
Internet server and gTLD portions of a domain 
name often are not required.
The organization that assigns and controls 
top-level domains is the Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN pronounced 
EYE-can). Figure 2-5 lists some gTLDs. For TLDs 
such as biz, com, info, name, net, and org, you reg-
ister for a domain name from a registrar, which is an 
organization that sells and manages domain names.  
For international Web sites outside the United 
States, the domain name also includes a country 
code TLD (ccTLD), which is a two-letter country 
code, such as au for Australia. For example, 
www.philips.com.au is the domain name for Philips 
Australia. Some smaller countries have granted use 
of their ccTLDs for commercial purposes, such as tv 
(Tuvalu) for the television/entertainment industry.
The domain name system (DNS) is the method that 
the Internet uses to store domain names and their 
corresponding IP addresses. When you specify a 
domain name, a DNS server translates the domain 
name to its associated IP address so that data and 
information can be routed to the correct computer. 
A DNS server is an Internet server that usually is 
associated with an Internet access provider. For a 
more technical discussion about DNS servers, read 
the High-Tech Talk article on page 382.
The growth of the Internet has led to a shortage 
of IP addresses. Thus, a new IP addressing scheme, 
called IPv6, may increase the number of available 
IP addresses. For a more technical discussion about 
Internet addresses and IPv6, read the High-Tech 
Talk article on page 110.
The World Wide Web
Although many people use the terms World Wide 
Web and Internet interchangeably, the World 
Wide Web actually is a service of the Internet. 
While the Internet was developed in the late 1960s, 
the World Wide Web emerged in the early 1990s. 
Since then, it has grown phenomenally to become 
one of the more widely used Internet  services.
The World Wide Web (WWW ), or Web, 
 consists of a worldwide collection of electronic 
documents. Each electronic document on the 
Web is called a Web page, which can contain text, 
graphics, animation, audio, and video. Additionally, 
Web pages usually have built-in connections to 
other documents.
Examples of Generic Top-Level Domains
   Generic TLD Intended Purpose
aero Aviation community members
biz Businesses of all sizes
cat Catalan cultural community
com Commercial organizations, businesses, and companies
coop Business cooperatives such as credit unions and rural  electric co-ops
edu Educational institutions
gov Government agencies
info Business organizations or individuals providing general  information
jobs Employment or human resource businesses
mil Military organizations
mobi Delivery and management of mobile Internet services
museum Accredited museums
name Individuals or families
net Network providers or commercial companies
org Nonprofit organizations
pro Certified professionals such as  doctors, lawyers, and accountants
tel Internet communications
travel Travel industry
Figure 2-5 In addition to the generic TLDs listed above, ICANN continually 
evaluates proposals for new TLDs.
Instructions: Find the true statement below. 
Then, rewrite the remaining false statements so 
that they are true.
1. An access provider is a business that 
 provides individuals and organizations 
access to the Internet free or for a fee.
2. A wireless Internet service provider is a 
 number that uniquely identifies each com-
puter or device connected to the Internet.
3. An IP address, such as www.google.com, is 
the text version of a domain name.
4. Satellite Internet service provides high-
speed Internet access through the cable 
television  network via a cable modem.
5. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 
oversees research and owns the Internet.
 Quiz Yourself Online: To further check your 
knowledge of pages 74 through 80, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/quiz and then click 
Objectives 1 – 4.
QUIZ YOURSELF 2-1
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   80 11/09/10   6:03:09 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 81
Some Web pages are static (fixed); others are 
dynamic (changing). Visitors to a static Web page 
all see the same content. With a dynamic Web 
page, by contrast, visitors can customize some or 
all of the viewed content such as desired stock 
quotes, weather for a region, or ticket availabil-
ity for flights.
A Web site is a collection of related Web 
pages and associated items, such as documents 
and pictures, stored on a Web server. A Web 
server is a computer that delivers requested 
Web pages to your computer. The same Web 
server can store multiple Web sites. Some 
industry experts use the term Web 2.0 to refer 
to Web sites that provide a means for users to 
share personal information (such as social net-
working Web sites), allow users to modify Web 
site content (such as wikis, which are discussed 
later in this chapter), and have application soft-
ware built into the site for visitors to use (such 
as e-mail and word  processing programs). Read 
Looking Ahead 2-1 for a look at Web 3.0.
Browsing the Web
A Web browser, or browser, is application 
software that allows users to access and view 
Web pages or access Web 2.0 programs. To 
m
sn.com
207.68.172.234
Step 1 
Start the Web browser software by clicking the 
Web browser icon on the taskbar or typing the Web 
browser name in the search box on the Start menu.
Step 2 
Behind the scenes, the
Web browser looks up 
its home page setting. 
For illustration purposes 
only, the screen on the 
right shows the home 
page setting is msn.com.
Step 3
The Web browser 
communicates with a 
server maintained by your 
Internet access provider. 
The server translates the 
domain name of the home
page to an IP address and
then sends the IP address 
to your computer.
Step 4 
The Web browser uses the IP address to contact the Web 
server associated with the home page and then requests the
home page from the server. The Web server sends the home page
to the Web browser, which formats the page for display on your screen.
msn.com
How a Web Browser Displays a Home Page
Figure 2-6 This figure shows how a Web browser displays a home page.
Internet Explorer Web 
browser name in search 
results on Start menu
search box
Internet Explorer 
Web browser icon 
on taskbar
Web 3.0 to Reinvent the Virtual World
The Web has evolved through  versions 1.0 and 2.0, and work is underway 
to develop Web 3.0, also known as the Semantic Web. Some research-
ers predict that this next  generation of the Web will perform 
practically any task imaginable. For example, your computer 
will be able to scan a Web page much as you do to look for 
specific useful information. If you need the location of the 
nearest eye doctor and the time when your brother’s flight 
from Chicago actually will land, Web 3.0 first will provide those facts 
and then search your calendar, checking to see if your schedule allows 
time for the doctor’s appointment before picking up your brother at the 
airport. In essence, the Web will become one huge searchable database, 
and automated agents of every type will retrieve the data we need to live 
productive lives.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/looking and then 
click Web 3.0.
LOOKING AHEAD 2-1
browse the Web, you need a computer or mobile 
device that is connected to the Internet and has a 
Web browser. The more widely used Web brows-
ers for personal computers are Internet Explorer, 
Firefox, Opera, Safari, and Google Chrome.
With an Internet connection established, you 
start a Web browser. The browser retrieves and 
displays a starting Web page, sometimes called the 
browser’s home page (Figure 2-6). The initial home 
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   81 11/09/10   6:03:10 PM
82 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
page that is displayed is one selected by your 
Web browser. You can change your browser’s 
home page at anytime.
Another use of the term, home page, refers 
to the first page that a Web site  displays. Similar 
to a book cover or a table of  contents for a Web 
site, the home page provides information about 
the Web site’s purpose and content. Many Web 
sites, such as iGoogle, allow you to personalize 
the home page so that it contains areas of inter-
est to you. The home page usually contains links 
to other documents, Web pages, or Web sites. A 
link, short for hyperlink, is a built-in connection to 
another related Web page or part of a Web page.
Internet-enabled mobile devices such as smart 
phones use a special type of browser, called a 
microbrowser, which is designed for their small 
screens and limited computing power. Many Web 
sites design Web pages specifically for display on 
a microbrowser (Figure 2-7).
For a computer or mobile device to display 
a Web page, the page must be downloaded. 
Downloading is the process of a computer or 
device receiving information, such as a Web 
page, from a server on the Internet. While a 
browser downloads a Web page, it typically 
displays an animated logo or icon in the 
browser window. The animation stops when 
the download is complete. The time required 
to download a Web page varies depending on 
the speed of your Internet  connection and the 
amount of graphics involved.
Figure 2-7 Sample 
microbrowser screen shown 
on this iPhone.
Which Web browser currently has the 
highest market share?
Windows Internet Explorer (IE) currently is the 
most popular browser, with approximately 
68 percent of the market share. The chart below 
illustrates the market share of the more popular 
Web browsers. 
Source: Market Share by Net Applications
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch2/faq and then click Browser 
Market Share.
FAQ 2-3
22%
6%
4%
68%
Internet Explorer Firefox Safari Other
Market Share
Web Addresses
A Web page has a unique address, called 
a URL (Uniform Resource Locator) or Web 
address. For example, the home page for the 
United States National Park Service Web site 
has http://www.nps.gov as its Web address. A 
Web browser retrieves a Web page using its 
Web address.
If you know the Web address of a Web page, 
you can type it in the Address bar at the top 
of the browser window. For example, if you 
type the Web address http://www.nps.gov/
grsm/planyourvisit/wildlifeviewing.htm in the 
Address bar and then press the enter key, the 
browser downloads and displays the Web page 
shown in Figure 2-8.
A Web address consists of a protocol, domain 
name, and sometimes the path to a specific Web 
page or location on a Web page. Many Web 
page addresses begin with http://. The http, 
which stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol, is a 
set of rules that de fines how pages transfer on 
the Internet.
To help minimize errors, many browsers and 
Web sites do not require you enter the http:// and 
www portions of the Web address in the Address 
bar. If you enter an incorrect Web address, the 
browser may display a list of  similar addresses or 
related Web sites from which you can select.
 iPhone
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
iPhone.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   82 11/09/10   6:03:18 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 83
When you enter the Web address, 
http://www.nps.gov/grsm/planyourvisit/
wildlifeviewing.htm in the Web browser, it 
sends a request to the Web server that contains 
the nps.gov Web site. The server then retrieves 
the Web page named wildlifeviewing.htm that 
is located in the grsm/planyourvisit path and 
delivers it to your browser, which then  displays 
the Web page on the screen.
To save time, many users create bookmarks 
for their frequently visited Web pages. A 
bookmark, or favorite, is a saved Web address 
that you access by clicking its name in a list. 
That is, instead of entering a Web address to 
display a Web page, you can click a previously 
saved bookmark.
When you enter a Web address in a browser, 
you request, or pull, information from a Web 
server. Some Web servers also can push content 
to your computer at regular intervals or when-
ever updates are made to the site. For example, 
some Web servers provide the capability of 
 displaying current sporting event scores or 
weather reports on your  computer screen.
For information about useful Web sites and 
their associated Web addresses, read the Making 
Use of the Web feature that follows this chapter.
Navigating Web Pages
Most Web pages contain hypertext or 
 hypermedia links. Hypertext refers to links in 
text-based documents, whereas  hypermedia 
combines text-based links with graphic, 
audio, and video links. Links allow you to 
obtain information in a nonlinear way. That 
is, instead of accessing topics in a specified 
order, you move directly to a topic of interest. 
Branching from one related topic to another 
in a nonlinear fashion is what makes links so 
powerful. Some people use the phrase,  surfing 
the Web, to refer to the activity of using links 
to explore the Web. 
Figure 2-8 After entering http://www.nps.gov/grsm/planyourvisit/wildlifeviewing.htm as the Web address 
in the Address bar, this Web page at the United States National Park Service Web site is displayed.
http://www.nps.gov/grsm/planyourvisit/wildlifeviewing.htm
Address bar
Web page that 
is displayed after 
the Web address 
is entered
 protocol domain name path Web page name
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   83 11/09/10   6:03:25 PM
84 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
ETHICS & ISSUES 2-1
Should the Government Allow You to Sign Up for a Do-Not-Track List?
When you visit a Web site that includes an 
 advertisement, someone probably is record-
ing the fact that you visited that Web site 
and viewed the advertisement with your 
browser. Over time, companies that special-
ize in tracking who views which online 
advertisements can amass an enormous 
amount of information about your online 
Web surfing habits. Through tracking the 
Web sites a user visits, the products they 
buy, and the articles they read, a company 
may attempt to profile the visitor’s beliefs, 
associations, and habits. Although a user 
may think he or she is anonymous while 
navigating the Web, the company can 
attempt through various means to link the 
user’s true identity with the user’s online 
profile. The company can sell online profiles, 
with or without the user’s true identity, to 
other advertisers or organizations. Some 
privacy groups have called for the govern-
ment to allow consumers to sign up for a 
do-not-track list modeled after the popular 
do-not-call list.
Should organizations be allowed to track your 
Web surfing habits? Why or why not? Should 
organizations be allowed to associate your real 
identity with your online identity and profit 
from the information? Should the government 
force companies to give you the option of not 
being tracked? Why or why not? What are the 
benefits and dangers of online tracking?
A link can be text or an image. Text links may 
be underlined and/or  displayed in a color differ-
ent from other text on the Web page. Pointing to, 
or positioning the pointer on, a link on the screen 
typically changes the shape of the pointer to a 
small hand with a pointing index finger. Pointing 
to a link also sometimes causes the link to change 
in appearance or play a sound. For example, an 
underline may disappear, the text may change 
color, the image may change, etc. The Web page 
shown in Figure 2-9 contains a variety of link 
types, with the pointer on one of the links.
Each link on a Web page corresponds to a 
Web address or a document. To activate a link, 
you click it, that is, point to the link and then 
press the left mouse button. Clicking a link 
causes the Web page or document associated 
with the link to be displayed on the screen. The 
linked object might be on the same Web page, 
a different Web page at the same Web site, or 
a separate Web page at a different Web site in 
another city or country. To remind you visually 
that you have clicked a link, a text link often 
changes color after you click it. 
Most current Web browsers support tabbed 
browsing, where the top of the browser displays 
a tab (similar to a file folder tab) for each Web 
page you open (shown in Figure 2-9). To move 
from one open Web page to another, you click 
the tab in the Web browser. Tabbed browsing 
allows users to have multiple home pages that 
automatically open when the browser starts. You 
also can organize tabs in a group, called a tab 
group, and save the group as a favorite, so that 
at any time you can display all tabs at once.
Because some Web sites attempt to track your 
browsing habits or gather personal information, 
some current Web browsers include a feature 
that allows you to disable and/or more tightly 
control the dissemination of your browsing 
habits and personal information. Read Ethics & 
Issues 2-1 for a related discussion.
Figure 2-9 This 
browser window has 
several open tabs. The 
current tab shows a 
Web page that has 
various types of links.
multiple tabs open in 
browser window
links
links pointer
 Tabbed Browsing
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
Tabbed Browsing.
link
link
link
link
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   84 11/09/10   6:03:30 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 85
Searching the Web
The Web is a worldwide resource of 
 information. A primary reason that people use 
the Web is to search for specific information, 
including text, pictures, music, and video. 
The first step in successful searching is to 
identify the main idea or concept in the topic 
about which you are seeking information. 
Determine any synonyms, alternate spellings, 
or variant word forms for the topic. Then, use 
a search tool to locate the information.
Two types of search tools are search engines 
and subject directories. A search engine is 
a program that finds Web sites, Web pages, 
images, videos, news, maps, and other infor-
mation related to a specific topic. A subject 
directory classifies Web pages in an organized 
set of categories, such as sports or shopping, 
and related subcategories.
Some Web sites offer the functionality of 
both a search engine and a subject directory. 
The table in Figure 2-10 lists the Web 
addresses of several popular  general-purpose 
search engines and subject directories. 
Search Engines A search engine is helpful 
in locating  information for which you do not 
know an exact Web address or are not seeking 
a particular Web site. Thousands of search 
engines are available. Some search through 
Web pages for all types of information. Other 
search engines can restrict their searches to 
a specific type of information, such as the 
 following items:
• Images — pictures, diagrams, and drawings.
• Videos — home videos, music videos, 
television programs, and movie clips.
• Audio — music, songs, recordings, and 
sounds.
• Publications — news articles, journals, and 
books.
• Maps — maps of a business or address, or 
driving directions to a destination.
• People or Businesses — addresses and 
telephone numbers.
• Blogs — specific opinions and ideas of others.
Search engines require that you enter a word 
or phrase, called search text or search query, 
that describes the item you want 
to find. Each word in the search 
text is known as a keyword. Your 
search text can be broad, such 
as spring break destinations, 
or more specific, such as Walt 
Disney World. Search engines 
often respond with thousands 
of results, whose content varies 
depending on the type of infor-
mation you are seeking. Some 
results are links to Web pages or 
articles; other results are media, 
such as images or videos. You 
may find that many items that 
appear in the search results have 
little or no bearing on the item 
you are seeking. You can elimi-
nate the superfluous items in 
your search results by carefully 
crafting search text that limits 
the search. 
If you misspell search text, 
many search engines identify 
alternative search text. Some 
also provide suggested keywords, 
links, and/or images as you 
begin typing your search text.
Widely Used Search Tools
Search Tool Web Address
Search 
Engine
Subject
Directory
A9 a9.com X
AlltheWeb alltheweb.com X
AltaVista altavista.com X
AOL Search search.aol.com X
Ask ask.com X
Bing bing.com X
Cuil (pronounced cool) cuil.com X
Dogpile dogpile.com X
Excite excite.com X X
Gigablast gigablast.com X X
Google google.com X X
Lycos lycos.com X
MSN msn.com X X
Open Directory 
Project
dmoz.org X X
WebCrawler webcrawler.com X
Yahoo! yahoo.com X X
Figure 2-10 Popular search engines and subject directories.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   85 11/09/10   6:03:37 PM
86 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Figure 2-11 shows one way to use the 
Google search engine to search for the text, 
Aspen Colorado ski resorts. The results of the 
search, called hits, shown in Step 3 include 
nearly 150,000 links to Web pages that refer-
ence Aspen Colorado ski resorts. Each hit in 
the list has a link that, when clicked, displays an 
associated Web site or Web page. Most search 
engines sequence the hits based on how close 
the words in the search text are to one another 
in the titles and descriptions of the hits. Thus, 
the first few links probably  contain more rel-
evant information. Read Ethics & Issues 2-2 for 
a related discussion. 
Step 1 
Type the search engine’s Web address (in this case, google.com) 
in the Address bar in the Web browser.
Step 2
Press the ENTER key. When the Google home page is displayed, 
type  Aspen Colorado ski resorts as the search text 
and then point to the Google Search button.
Step 3 
Click the Google Search button. When the results of the search are 
displayed, scroll through the links and read the descriptions. Point to 
the Aspen Snowmass link.
Step 4 
Click the Aspen Snowmass link to display a Web page with a description and 
links to skiing in Aspen.
How to Use a Search Engine
Figure 2-11 This figure shows how to use a search engine.
Address bar
results of search
Aspen Snowmass link
Address bar search text
Google Search 
button
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   86 11/09/10   6:03:37 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 87
Some Web browsers contain an Instant Search 
box that, when filled in, uses a predefined or 
default search engine to perform searches 
(Figure 2-12). Using the Instant Search box 
eliminates the steps of displaying the search 
engine's Web page prior to entering the search 
text.
If you enter a phrase with spaces between the 
words in the search text, most search engines 
display results (hits) that include all of the 
words, except for common words (e.g., to, the, 
and). The table in Figure 2-13 lists some opera-
tors you can include in your search text to refine 
your search. Instead of using operators to refine 
your search text, many search engines have an 
Advanced Search feature that displays a form 
that assists with refining your search.
ETHICS & ISSUES 2-2
Is It Ethical to Manipulate Search Engine Results?
Search engines attempt to present the 
most relevant and popular results to 
users when they perform searches. Search 
engines use special software to create 
indexes of topics from as many Web sites 
as possible. One key piece of information 
used by search engines to determine the 
relevance and popularity of a Web site is 
to examine how many other Web pages 
link to the Web site. Some individuals and 
groups take advantage of that fact and 
attempt to skew search results by creat-
ing hundreds or thousands of Web sites 
that link to a Web site that is the target 
of the effort. The practice of attempting 
to skew search engine results is known 
as Google bombing. One example of this 
is political activists Google bombing their 
opponents. When a person searches for a 
particular word or phrase with a negative 
connotation, the search results become 
skewed to return results about a political 
opponent of the Google bomber. A Google 
bomb can promote a product or service, or 
disparage a competing product or service. 
Google bombing often is used in a humor-
ous manner. Comedians and television 
personalities sometimes request that their 
audience engage in some particular Google 
bomb. Opponents of Google bombing state 
that the practice lessens the public’s trust 
in search engines and causes the search 
engines to be less accurate. 
Is Google bombing ethical? Why or why 
not? How should Google bombers be 
handled? Why? Can Google bombing be 
stopped? Why or why not? Is there an 
ethical difference between Google bombs 
that attack a rival and those that are self-
promoting? Why? 
Figure 2-13 Use search engine operators to help refine a search.
Search Engine Operators
Operator Description Examples Explanation
Space 
or +
Display hits that include specific 
words.
art + music
art music
Results have both words art and music — in any order.
OR Display hits that include only one 
word from a list.
dog OR puppy
dog OR puppy OR canine
Results have either the word dog or puppy.
Results have the word dog or puppy or canine.
( ) Combine hits that include specific 
words with those that include only 
one word from a list.
Kalamazoo Michigan 
(pizza OR subs)
Results have both words Kalamazoo Michigan and either 
the word, pizza, or the word, subs.
- Exclude a word from the search 
results.
automobile 
 -convertible
Results include automobile but do not include convertible.
“ “ Search for an exact phrase in a 
certain order.
“19th century literature” Results have the exact phrase, 19th century literature.
* Substitute characters in place of the 
asterisk.
writer* Results include any word that begins with writer 
(e.g., writer, writers, writer’s).
Instant Search box Search button
Figure 2-12 Using the Instant Search box combines Steps 1 and 2 
in Figure 2-11.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   87 11/09/10   6:03:44 PM
88 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Other techniques you can use to improve 
your searches include the following:
• Use specific nouns.
• Put the most important terms first in the 
search text.
• List all possible spellings, for example, email, 
e-mail.
• Before using a search engine, read its Help 
information.
• If the search is unsuccessful with one search 
engine, try another.
Some search engines that work with 
navigation devices are location based, mean-
ing they display results related to the device’s 
current geographical position. For example, 
your mobile device can display all gas stations 
within a certain distance of your current 
location.
Many search engines use a program called 
a spider to build and maintain lists of words 
found on Web sites. When you enter search 
text, the search engine scans this prebuilt list 
for hits. The more sophisticated the search 
engine combined with precise search criteria, 
the more rapid the response and effective 
the search.
To learn more about searching for informa-
tion, complete the Learn How To 2 activity on 
pages 120 and 121.
Subject Directories A subject directory 
provides categorized lists of links arranged by 
subject (Figure 2-14). Using this search tool, 
you locate a particular topic by clicking links 
through different  levels, moving from the 
general to the specific. Each time you click a 
category link, the subject  directory displays a 
list of subcategory links, from which you again 
choose. You  continue in this fashion until the 
search tool  displays a list of Web pages about 
the desired topic. 
The major disadvantage 
with a subject directory is 
that users have difficulty 
deciding which categories 
to choose as they work 
through the menus of 
links presented.
Types of Web Sites
Thirteen types of Web 
sites are portal, news, 
informational, business/
marketing, blog, wiki, 
online social network, 
educational, entertain-
ment, advocacy, Web 
application, content 
aggregator, and personal 
(Figure 2-15). Many Web 
sites fall in more than one 
of these categories.
How many words do people 
typically use in search text?
According to research 
performed by OneStat, 
Internet users most 
often use only two 
words in their search 
text. The chart to the 
right illustrates the 
percentage of searches 
performed with search 
text of various lengths.
 Source: OneStat
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/faq and then 
click Search Text.
FAQ 2-4
One Word Two Words Three Words
Four Words Five Words Other
15%
27%
7% 15%
32%
4%
Search Text Length
Figure 2-14 A subject directory provides categorized lists of links.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   88 11/09/10   6:03:45 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 89
Portal A portal is a Web site that offers 
a  variety of Internet services from a single, 
convenient location (Figure 2-15a). Most 
portals offer these free services: search 
engine; news; sports and weather; Web 
publishing; reference tools such as yellow 
pages, stock quotes, and maps; shopping; 
and e-mail and other communications 
services. 
Many portals have online communities. 
An online community is a Web site that 
joins a  specific group of people with simi-
lar interests or relationships. These com-
munities may offer online photo albums, 
chat rooms, and other services to facilitate 
communications among members.
Popular portals include AltaVista, AOL, 
Excite, GO.com, iGoogle, Lycos, MSN, and 
Yahoo!. A wireless portal is a portal designed 
for Internet-enabled mobile devices.
News A news Web site contains newsworthy 
material including stories and articles relat-
ing to current events, life, money, sports, and 
the weather (Figure 2-15b). Many 
magazines and newspapers sponsor 
Web sites that  provide  summaries 
of printed articles, as well as articles 
not included in the printed versions. 
News papers and television and radio 
stations are some of the media that 
maintain news Web sites.
Informational An informational 
Web site contains factual informa-
tion (Figure 2-15c). Many United 
States government agencies have 
informational Web sites providing 
information such as census data, 
tax codes, and the congressional 
budget. Other organizations provide 
information such as public transportation 
schedules and published research findings.
Business/Marketing A business/marketing 
Web site contains content that promotes or sells 
products or services (Figure 2-15d). Nearly every 
enterprise has a business/marketing Web site. 
Allstate Insurance Company, Dell Inc., General 
Motors Corporation, Kraft Foods Inc., and Walt 
Disney Company all have business/marketing 
Web sites. Many of these enterprises also allow 
you to purchase their products or services online.
Figure 2-15 Types of Web sites. (continued on next page)
Figure 2-15b (news)
Figure 2-15c (informational)
Figure 2-15d (business/marketing)
Figure 2-15a (portal)
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   89 11/09/10   6:03:51 PM
90 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Blog A blog, short for Weblog, is an informal Web 
site consisting of time-stamped articles, or posts, in 
a diary or journal format, usually listed in reverse 
chronological order (Figure 2-15e). A blog that 
contains video clips is called a video blog, or vlog. 
A microblog allows users to publish short messages, 
usually between 100 and 200 characters, for others 
to read. Twitter is a popular microblog. The term 
blogosphere refers to the worldwide collection of blogs, 
and the  vlogosphere refers to all vlogs worldwide.
Blogs reflect the interests, opinions, and person-
alities of the author, called the blogger or  vlogger 
(for vlog author), and sometimes site  visitors. 
Blogs have become an important means of 
worldwide communications. Busi nesses create 
blogs to communicate with employees, customers, 
and vendors. Teachers create blogs to collaborate 
with other teachers and students. Home users 
create blogs to share aspects of their personal life 
with family, friends, and others.
Wiki A wiki is a collaborative Web site that allows 
users to create, add to, modify, or delete the Web site 
content via their Web browser. Many wikis are open 
to modification by the general  public. Wikis usually 
collect recent edits on a Web page so that some-
one can review them for accuracy. The difference 
between a wiki and a blog is that users cannot modify 
original posts made by the blogger. A popular wiki is 
Wikipedia, a free Web encyclopedia (Figure 2-15f). 
Read Ethics & Issues 2-3 for a related discussion.
Online Social Network An online social 
 network, also called a social networking Web site, 
is a Web site that encourages members in its online 
community to share their interests, ideas, stories, 
photos, music, and videos with other  registered 
users (Figure 2-15g). Most include chat rooms, 
newsgroups, and other communications services. 
ETHICS & ISSUES 2-3
As wikis have grown in number, size, and 
popularity, some educators and librarians 
have shunned the sites as valid sources 
of research. While many wikis are tightly 
controlled with a limited number of 
contributors and expert editors, these 
usually focus on narrowly-defined, 
specialized topics. Most large online 
wikis, such as Wikipedia, often involve 
thousands of editors, many of whom 
remain anonymous. Recently, television 
station reporters purposefully vandalized 
entries on Wikipedia for John Lennon 
and Elvis Presley in an attempt either 
to discredit Wikipedia or to test how 
quickly corrections are made. Editors 
quickly corrected the information. In 
other situations, rival political factions 
falsified or embellished wiki entries 
in an attempt to give their candidate 
an advantage. Some wiki supporters 
argue that most wikis provide adequate 
controls to correct false or misleading 
content quickly and to punish those who 
submit it. One popular wiki now requires 
an experienced editor to verify changes 
made to certain types of articles. Some 
propose that wikis should be used as a 
starting point for researching a fact, but 
that the fact should be verified using 
traditional sources. 
Should wikis be allowed as valid sources 
for academic research? Why or why not? 
Would you submit a paper to your instruc-
tor that cites a wiki as a source? An ency-
clopedia? Why or why not? What policies 
could wikis enforce that could garner 
more confidence from the public? If a wiki 
provided verification of the credentials of 
the author, would you trust the wiki more? 
Why or why not?
Should You Trust a Wiki for Academic Research?
Figure 2-15 Types of Web sites. (continued)
Figure 2-15e (blog)
Figure 2-15f (wiki)
Figure 2-15g (online social network)
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   90 11/09/10   6:03:58 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 91
Popular social  networking Web sites include MySpace 
and Facebook, with Facebook alone boasting more 
than 300 million active users. In some social network-
ing Web sites, such as Second Life, users assume an 
imaginary identity and interact with other users in a 
 role-playing type of environment. 
A media  sharing Web site is a specific type of 
online social network that enables members to share 
media such as photos, music, and videos. Flickr, Fotki, 
and Webshots are popular photo sharing communities; 
PixelFish and YouTube are popular video sharing 
 communities.
Educational An educational Web site offers 
exciting, challenging avenues for formal and infor-
mal teaching and learning (Figure 2-15h). On 
the Web, you can learn how airplanes fly or how 
to cook a meal. For a more structured learning 
experience, companies provide online training to 
employees; and colleges offer online classes and 
degrees. Instructors often use the Web to enhance 
classroom teaching by publishing course materials, 
grades, and other pertinent class information.
Entertainment An entertainment Web site 
offers an interactive and engaging environment 
(Figure 2-15i). Popular entertainment Web sites 
offer music, videos, sports, games,  ongoing Web 
episodes, sweepstakes, chat rooms, and more. 
Sophis ticated enter tainment Web sites often partner 
with other technologies. For example, you can cast 
your vote about a topic on a  tele vision show.
Advocacy An advocacy Web site contains content 
that describes a cause, opinion, or idea (Figure 2-15j). 
These Web sites usually present views of a particular 
group or association. Sponsors of advocacy Web sites 
include the Democratic National Committee, the 
Republican National Committee, the Society 
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and 
the Society to Protect Human Rights.
Web Application A Web application, or Web 
app, is a Web site that allows users to access and 
interact with software through a Web browser 
on any computer or device that is connected to 
the Internet. Some Web applications provide 
free access to their software (Figure 2-15k). 
Others offer part of their software free and 
charge for access to more comprehensive fea-
tures or when a particular action is requested. 
Examples of Web applications include Google 
Docs (word processing, spreadsheets, presenta-
tions), TurboTax Online (tax  preparation), and 
Windows Live Hotmail (e-mail). Figure 2-15 Types of Web sites. (continued on next page)
Figure 2-15h (educational)
Figure 2-15i (entertainment)
Figure 2-15j (advocacy)
Figure 2-15k (Web application)
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   91 11/09/10   6:04:00 PM
92 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Content Aggregator A content aggregator is a 
business that gathers and organizes Web content 
and then distributes, or feeds, the content to sub-
scribers for free or a fee (Figure 2-15l). Examples 
of  distributed content include news, music, video, 
and pictures. Subscribers select content in which 
they are interested. Whenever the selected content 
changes, it is downloaded automatically (pushed) 
to the subscriber’s computer or mobile device.
RSS 2.0, which stands for Really Simple 
Syndication, is a specification that some con-
tent aggregators use to distribute content to 
 subscribers. Atom is another  specification some-
times used by content  aggregators to distribute 
content. Some current browsers include a feature, 
such as Internet Explorer’s WebSlices, that enables 
content aggregators to mark sections of their 
Web pages as feeds to which users can subscribe.
Personal A private individual or family not 
usually associated with any organization may 
maintain a personal Web site or just a single 
Web page (Figure 2-15m). People publish per-
sonal Web pages for a variety of reasons. Some 
are job hunting. Others simply want to share 
life experiences with the world. 
Evaluating a Web Site
Do not assume that information presented on 
the Web is correct or accurate. Any person, com-
pany, or organization can publish a Web page 
on the Internet. No one oversees the content of 
these Web pages. Figure 2-16 lists guidelines for 
assessing the value of a Web site or Web page 
before relying on its content.
Multimedia on the Web
Most Web pages include more than just 
 formatted text and links. The more exciting 
Web pages use multimedia. Multimedia refers 
to any application that combines text with 
graphics, animation, audio, video, and/or virtual 
reality. Multimedia brings a Web page to life, 
increases the types of information available on 
the Web, expands the Web’s potential uses, and 
makes the Internet a more entertaining place to 
explore. Multimedia Web pages often require 
specific hardware and software and take more 
time to download because they contain large 
graphics files and video or audio clips. Many 
Web sites have an option that allows visitors to 
disable multimedia, for example, if they have a 
slower-speed Internet connection.
The sections that follow discuss how the 
Web uses graphics, animation, audio, video, and 
 virtual reality.
Criteria for Evaluating 
a Web Site’s Content
Evaluation 
Criteria Reliable Web Sites
Affiliation A reputable institution should support the 
Web site without bias in the information.
Audience The Web site should be written at an 
appropriate level.
Authority The Web site should list the author and 
the appropriate credentials.
Content The Web site should be well organized 
and the links should work.
Currency The information on the Web page should 
be current.
Design The pages at the Web site should download 
quickly, be visually pleasing, and easy to
navigate.
Objectivity The Web site should contain little 
advertising and be free of preconceptions.
Figure 2-16 Criteria for evaluating a Web site’s 
content.
Figure 2-15 Types of Web sites. (continued)
Figure 2-15l (content aggregator)
Figure 2-15m (personal)
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   92 11/09/10   6:04:04 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 93
Graphics A graphic, or graphical image, 
is a digital representation of nontext 
information such as a drawing, chart, or 
photo. Today, many Web pages use color-
ful graphical designs and images to con-
vey messages (Figure 2-17).
The Web contains countless images 
about a variety of subjects. You can 
download many of these images at no 
cost and use them for noncommercial 
purposes. Recall that downloading is the 
process of transferring an object from 
the Web to your computer. For example, 
you can insert images into greeting 
cards, announcements, and other docu-
ments. Read Innovative Computing 2-1 
to find out how astronomers share 
graphics of the universe.
Of the graphics formats that exist on 
the Web (Figure 2-18), the two more 
common are JPEG and GIF formats. 
JPEG (pronounced JAY-peg) is a format 
that compresses graphics to reduce their 
file size, which means the file takes up less 
storage space. Smaller file sizes result in 
faster downloading of Web pages because 
small files transmit faster than large files. 
The more compressed the file, the smaller 
the image and the lower the quality. The 
goal with JPEG graphics is to reach a bal-
ance between image quality and file size. 
Digital photos often use the JPEG format.
GIF (pronounced jiff ) graphics also 
use com pression techniques to reduce 
file sizes. The GIF format works best for 
images that have only a few distinct col-
ors, such as company logos. The newer 
PNG (pronounced ping) graphics format 
improves upon the GIF format, and thus 
may eventually replace the GIF format.
The BMP and TIFF 
formats listed in Figure 
2-18 may require special 
viewer software, and they 
have larger file sizes. 
Thus, these formats are 
not used on the Web as 
frequently as JPEG, GIF, 
and PNG formats.
Figure 2-17 This Web page uses colorful graphical designs and images to 
convey its messages. 
View the Wonders of Space 
through the WorldWide Telescope
The phrase, reach for the stars, takes on a new meaning when 
using Microsoft’s WorldWide Telescope. Users can access the 
Telescope from a Web browser or download free software. 
They then can view a variety of multimedia, including high-
resolution graphics from telescopes located on Earth and in 
space, with Web 2.0 services to allow people to explore the 
final frontier from their computers.
Users can pan and zoom around the night sky by look-
ing through a specific telescope, such as the Hubble Space 
Telescope, and view the universe in the past, present, or future. 
In addition, they can browse graphics of a specific planet, the 
Milky Way Galaxy, black holes, and other celestial bodies in our 
solar system, galaxy, and beyond. They also can select different 
wavelengths, such as X-ray or visible light, to search for objects. Astronomers 
and educators also have created narrated tours of the sky to help interpret 
the images.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/innovative and then click 
WorldWide Telescope.
INNOVATIVE COMPUTING 2-1
Graphics Formats Used on the Web
Abbreviation Name Uses
BMP Bitmap Desktop background, scanned images
GIF Graphics Interchange Format Simple diagrams, shapes, images with few colors
JPEG Joint Photographic Experts Group Digital camera photos
PNG Portable Network Graphics Web graphics
TIFF Tagged Image File Format Photos used by  printing industry
Figure 2-18 The Web uses graphics file formats for images. 
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   93 11/09/10   6:04:07 PM
94 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Some Web sites use thumbnails on their pages 
because graphics can be time-consuming to dis-
play. A thumbnail is a small version of a larger 
graphic. You usually can click a thumbnail to 
display a larger image (Figure 2-19).
Animation Many Web pages use animation, 
which is the appearance of motion created by 
displaying a series of still images in sequence. 
Animation can make Web pages more visu-
ally interesting or draw attention to important 
information or links. For example, text that 
animates by scrolling across the screen can serve 
as a ticker to display stock updates, news, sports 
scores, weather, or other  information. Web-based 
games often use  animation.
Web page developers add animation to Web 
pages using a variety of techniques. Web page 
authoring programs, such as Adobe Flash and 
Microsoft Expression Web, enable Web site 
developers to combine animation and interactiv-
ity in Web pages. Developers unfamiliar with 
Web page authoring programs can create an 
animated GIF, which combines  several GIF 
images in a single GIF file.
Audio On the Web, you can listen to audio 
clips and live audio. Audio includes music, 
speech, or any other sound. Simple applica-
tions consist of individual audio files available 
for download to a computer or device. Once 
downloaded, you can play (listen to) the  contents 
of these files. Some common Web audio file 
formats are listed in Figure 2-20. Audio files are 
compressed to reduce their file sizes. For exam-
ple, the MP3 format reduces an audio file to 
about one-tenth its original size, while preserv-
ing much of the original quality of the sound. 
Some music publishers have Web sites that 
allow users to download sample tracks free to 
persuade them to buy all the songs contained 
on the CD. Others allow a user to purchase and 
download an entire CD (Figure 2-21). It is legal 
to download copyrighted music only if the song’s 
copyright holder has granted permission for 
users to download and play the song. 
To listen to an audio file on your computer, 
you need special software called a player. Most 
current operating systems contain a player, for 
example, Windows Media Player. Some audio 
files, however, might require you to download 
a player. Players available for download include 
iTunes and RealPlayer. You can download the 
players free from the Web; some are plug-ins, 
which are discussed later in this chapter.
Some applications on the Web use streaming 
audio. Streaming is the process of transferring 
data in a continuous and even flow. Streaming 
allows users to access and use a file while it 
is transmitting. For example, streaming audio 
enables you to listen to music as it downloads 
to your computer. Many radio and television 
stations use streaming audio to broadcast music, 
interviews, talk shows, sporting events, music 
videos, news, live concerts, and other segments.
Podcasting is another popular method of 
 distributing audio. A podcast is recorded audio, 
usually an MP3 file, stored on a Web site that 
can be downloaded to a computer or a por-
table media player such as an iPod. Examples of 
 podcasts include music, radio shows, news  stories, 
classroom lectures, political messages, and tele-
vision commentaries. Podcasters register their 
podcasts with content aggregators. Subscribers 
select podcast feeds they want to be downloaded 
automatically whenever they connect. Most smart 
phone users who subscribe to a wireless Internet 
service provider can listen to streaming audio and 
podcasts.
Figure 2-19 
Clicking the thumbnail 
in the top screen 
displays a larger image 
in a separate window.
searches for 
images only
search text
thumbnail
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   94 11/09/10   6:04:12 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 95
Step 1 
Display the iTunes
program on the 
screen. Search for, 
select, and pay for 
the music you want 
to purchase from
the iTunes Music
Store, which is
integrated in the
iTunes program.
Step 2 
Download the music from the iTunes Music Store server to
your computer’s hard disk.
Step 3a
Listen to the music from your computer’s hard disk.
Step 3b
Download music from 
your computer’s hard 
disk to a portable media 
player. Listen to the music 
through earbuds attached
to the portable media player.
How to Purchase and Download Music Using iTunes
Figure 2-21 This figure shows how to purchase and download music using iTunes.
Audio Web File Formats
Format Description Format Description
AAC Advanced Audio Coding WAV Windows waveform
AIFF Audio Interchange File Format WMA   Windows Media Audio 
(part of Windows Media framework)
ASF  Advanced Streaming (or Systems) Format 
(part of Windows Media framework)
RA  RealAudio sound file 
(supported by RealPlayer)
MP3  Moving Pictures Experts Group Audio Layer 3 
(MPEG-3)
QT  QuickTime audio, video, or 3-D  animation
Ogg  Free, unpatented audio and video format
Figure 2-20 Popular Web audio file formats.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   95 11/09/10   6:04:18 PM
96 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
 YouTube
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch2/weblink and then click 
YouTube.
Video On the Web, you can view video clips 
or watch live video. Video consists of images 
displayed in motion. Most video also has accom-
panying audio. You can use the Internet to watch 
live and/or pre recorded coverage of your favorite 
television programs or enjoy a live performance 
of your favorite vocalist. You can upload, share, or 
view video clips at a video sharing Web site such as 
YouTube (Figure 2-22). Educators, politicians, and 
businesses are using video blogs and video pod-
casts to engage students, voters, and consumers.
Simple video applications on the Web consist of 
individual video files, such as movie or television 
clips, that you must download completely before 
you can play them on the computer. Video files 
often are compressed because they are quite large 
in size. These clips also are short in length, usually 
less than 10 minutes, because they can take a long 
time to download. The Moving Pictures Experts 
Group (MPEG) defines a popular video compres-
sion standard, a widely used one called MPEG-4 or 
MP4. Another popular video format is Adobe Flash.
As with streaming audio, streaming video allows 
you to view longer or live video images as they 
download to your computer. Widely used stan-
dards supported by most Web browsers for 
transmitting streaming video data on the Internet 
are AVI (Audio Video Interleaved), QuickTime, 
Windows Media Format, and RealVideo. Like 
RealAudio, RealVideo is  supported by RealPlayer.
Figure 2-22 A video of a horse race.
video
How are social networking Web sites 
and Internet video affecting Internet 
traffic?
A report from Cisco Systems states that 
Internet traffic will double every two years 
until 2012. The volume of Internet traffic is 
increasing mostly because of Internet vid-
eos and social networking. In addition, the 
increased use of video conferencing by busi-
ness users also accounts for the increase in 
traffic.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch2/faq and then click Internet 
Traffic.
FAQ 2-5
thumbnail
Virtual Reality Virtual reality (VR) is the 
use of computers to simulate a real or imagined 
 environment that appears as a three-dimensional 
(3-D) space. VR involves the display of 3-D 
images that users explore and manipulate 
 interactively.
Using special VR software, a Web developer 
creates an entire 3-D environment that contains 
infinite space and depth, called a VR world. A 
VR world, for example, might show a house for 
sale. Potential buyers walk through rooms in the 
VR house by moving an input device forward, 
backward, or to the side.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   96 11/09/10   6:04:21 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 97
Games and simulations on 
optical disc or on the Web 
often use VR (Figure 2-23). 
Many  practical  applications 
of VR also exist. Science 
educa tors create VR models 
of molecules, organisms, and 
other structures for students 
to examine. Companies use 
VR to showcase products 
or create advertisements. 
Architects create VR mod-
els of buildings and rooms 
so that clients can see how 
a completed construction 
project will look before it 
is built.
Plug-ins Most Web browsers have the 
 capability of displaying basic multimedia 
elements on a Web page. Sometimes, a browser 
might need an additional program, called a 
plug-in. A plug-in, or add-on, is a program 
that extends the capability of a browser. You 
can download many plug-ins at no cost from 
various Web sites (Figure 2-24). Some plug-
ins run on all sizes of personal computers and 
mobile devices. Others have special versions for 
mobile devices.
Web Publishing
Before the World Wide Web, the means to 
share opinions and ideas with others easily and 
inexpensively was limited to the media, classroom, 
work, or social environments. Generating an 
advertisement or publication that could reach a 
massive audience required much expense. Today, 
businesses and individuals convey information 
to millions of people by creating their own Web 
pages. The content of the Web pages ranges from 
news stories to product information to blogs.
Figure 2-24 Most plug-ins can be downloaded free from the Web. 
Popular Plug-Ins
Plug-In Application Description Web Address
Acrobat Reader
 
View, navigate, and print Portable Document Format (PDF) files — documents 
formatted to look just as they look in print
adobe.com
Flash Player
 
View dazzling graphics and animation, hear outstanding sound and music, 
display Web pages across an entire screen
adobe.com
Java
 
Enable Web browser to run programs written in Java, which add interactivity 
to Web pages
java.com
QuickTime
 
View animation, music, audio, video, and VR panoramas and objects directly 
on a Web page
apple.com
RealPlayer
 
Listen to live and on-demand near-CD-quality audio and newscast-quality video, 
stream audio and video content for faster viewing, play MP3 files, create music CDs
real.com
Shockwave Player
 
Experience dynamic interactive multimedia, 3-D graphics, and streaming audio adobe.com
Silverlight
 
Experience high-definition video, high-resolution interactive multimedia, and 
streaming audio and video
microsoft.com
Windows Media Player
 
Listen to live and on-demand audio, play or edit WMA and MP3 files, burn CDs, 
and watch DVD movies
microsoft.com
Figure 2-23 Residents (users) of the Second Life online social network 
interact with other online residents (users) in a VR world.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   97 11/09/10   6:04:23 PM
98 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Instructions: Find the true statement below. 
Then, rewrite the remaining false statements 
so that they are true.
1. A blog is a Web site that uses a regularly 
updated journal format to reflect the 
interests, opinions, and personalities of 
the author and sometimes site visitors.
2. You can assume that information on the 
Web is correct and accurate.
3. Audio and video files are downloaded to 
reduce their file sizes.
4. Popular portals include iTunes, RealPlayer, 
and Windows Media Player.
5. The more widely used search engines for 
personal computers are Internet Explorer, 
Firefox, Opera, Safari, and Google Chrome.
6. To develop a Web page, you have to be a 
computer programmer.
7. To improve your Web searches, use general 
nouns and put the least important terms 
first in the search text.
 Quiz Yourself Online: To further check 
your knowledge of pages 80 through 98, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/quiz and then 
click Objectives 5 – 9.
QUIZ YOURSELF 2-2Web publishing is the development and 
maintenance of Web pages. To develop a 
Web page, you do not have to be a computer 
programmer. For the small business or home 
user, Web publishing is fairly easy as long as 
you have the proper tools. To learn more 
about how to publish a document on the 
Web, complete the Learn How To 3 activity 
on page 121. 
The five major steps in Web publishing are 
as follows:
 1. Plan a Web site. 
Think about issues that could affect the 
design of the Web site. Identify the purpose 
of the Web site and the characteristics of 
the people whom you want to visit the Web 
site. Determine ways to differentiate your 
Web site from other similar ones.
 2. Analyze and design a Web site. 
Design the layout of elements of the Web 
site such as links, text, graphics, animation, 
audio, video, and virtual reality. Required 
hardware may include a digital camera, 
Web cam, scanner, sound card, and 
microphone. 
 3. Create a Web site. 
Use a word processing program to 
create basic Web pages that contain text 
and graphics. Use Web page authoring 
software to create more sophisticated Web 
sites that include text, graphics, animation, 
audio, video, and special effects. For 
advanced features such as managing users, 
passwords, chat rooms, and e-mail, you 
may need to purchase specialized Web site 
management software.
 4. Deploy a Web site. 
Transfer the Web pages from your 
computer to a Web server. Many Internet 
access providers offer their customers 
storage space on a Web server. Another 
option is a Web hosting service, which 
provides storage space on a Web server 
for a reasonable monthly fee. To help 
others locate your Web page, register 
your Web address with various search 
engines to ensure your site will appear 
in the hit lists for searches for certain 
keywords.
 5. Maintain a Web site. 
Visit the Web site regularly to ensure the 
Web site contents are current and all links 
work properly. 
E-Commerce
E-commerce, short for electronic commerce, is a 
business transaction that occurs over an electronic 
network such as the Internet. Anyone with access 
to a computer or mobile device, an Internet con-
nection, and a means to pay for purchased goods 
or services can participate in e-commerce. Some 
people use the term  m-commerce (mobile com-
merce) to identify e-commerce that takes place 
using mobile devices.
Popular uses of e-commerce by consumers 
include retail, finance, travel, entertainment, 
and health. Users can purchase just about any 
product or service on the Web, including grocer-
ies, flowers, books, computers, music, movies, cars, 
airline tickets, and concert tickets. They also can 
pay bills, invest in stocks, make airline reserva-
tions, reserve a hotel or car, and fill  prescriptions.
Three types of e-commerce are business-
to-consumer, consumer-to-consumer, and 
business-to-business. Business-to-consumer (B2C) 
e-commerce consists of the sale of goods and 
services to the general public. For example, 
 Web Page Authoring 
Software
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch2/weblink and then 
click Web Page Authoring 
Software.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   98 11/09/10   6:04:27 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 99
Apple has a B2C Web site. Instead of visiting a 
retail store to purchase an iPod, customers can 
order one directly from Apple’s Web site.
A customer (consumer) visits an online busi-
ness through an electronic storefront, which 
contains product descriptions, images, and a 
shopping cart. The shopping cart allows the 
 customer to collect purchases. When ready to 
complete the sale, the customer enters personal 
data and the method of payment, which should 
be through a secure Internet connection. E-retail, 
short for electronic retail, occurs when businesses 
use the Web to sell products (Figure 2-25).
Step 1
The customer 
displays the 
e-retailer’s 
electronic 
storefront.
Step 5
The e-retailer’s 
Web server sends 
confirmation to 
the customer, 
processes the 
order, and then 
sends it to the 
fulfillment center.
Step 6
The fulfillment center 
packages the order, 
prepares it for shipment, 
and then sends a report 
to the server where 
records are updated.
Step 7
While the order travels to the customer, 
shipping information is posted on the Web.
Step 2
The customer 
collects purchases 
in an electronic 
shopping cart.
Step 8
The order is 
delivered to the 
customer, who 
may be required 
to sign a 
handheld 
computer or 
document to 
acknowledge 
receipt.
Step 4 
The bank 
performs security 
checks and sends 
authorization back 
to the e-retailer.
Step 3
The customer enters
payment information 
on a secure Web site.
The e-retailer sends
financial information
to a bank.
An Example of E-Retail
Figure 2-25 This figure shows an example of e-retail.
Is it safe to shop online?
Not always. Although 78 percent of shoppers find online 
shopping convenient, about 75 percent of surveyed individu-
als are hesitant to enter their personal or credit card informa-
tion online. It always is best to conduct online transactions 
with well-established companies. If possible, research these 
companies and read about others’ online shopping experi-
ences before making a purchase. If you never have heard of 
a particular online business, do not entrust them with your 
credit card information. 
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/faq and 
then click Online Shopping.
FAQ 2-6
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   99 11/09/10   6:04:27 PM
100 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce occurs 
when one consumer sells directly to another, such 
as in an online auction. With an online auction, 
users bid on an item being sold by someone else. 
The highest bidder at the end of the bidding 
period purchases the item. eBay is one of the more 
popular online auction Web sites.
As an alternative to entering credit card, bank 
account, or other financial information online, 
some shopping and auction Web sites allow con-
sumers to use an online payment service such as 
PayPal or Google Checkout. To use an online pay-
ment service, you create an account that is linked 
to your credit card or funds at a financial institu-
tion. When you make a purchase, you use your 
online payment service account, which transfers 
money for you without revealing your financial 
information. Read Innovative Computing 2-2 
to find out how shoppers can experience 3-D 
online stores.
Most e-commerce, though, actually takes 
place between businesses, which is called 
 business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce. Busi nesses 
often provide goods and services to other busi-
nesses, such as online advertising, recruiting, 
credit, sales, market research, technical support, 
and training. For example, some MasterCard 
and Visa credit card companies provide corpora-
tions with Web-based purchasing, tracking, and 
 transaction downloading capabilities.
Other Internet Services
The Web is only one of the many services on the 
Internet. The Web and other Internet services 
have changed the way we communicate. We use 
computers and mobile devices to send e-mail 
messages to the president, have a discussion with 
experts about the stock market, chat with some-
one in another country about genealogy, and talk 
about homework assignments with classmates via 
instant messages. Many times, these communica-
tions take place completely in writing — without 
the parties ever meeting each other. Read Ethics 
& Issues 2-4 for a related discussion.
The following pages discuss these Internet 
services: e-mail, mailing lists, instant messaging, 
chat rooms, VoIP (Voice over IP), newsgroups and 
 message boards, and FTP (File Transfer Protocol).
 Google Checkout
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
Google Checkout.
Shopping Becomes a Virtual Experience
Part of retail shopping at the mall or the grocery store 
is the ability to browse aisles, view labels, and compare 
products side by side. Online shoppers may be able to 
share these shopping experiences in three-dimensional 
environments complete with shelving, signs, overhead 
lighting, and outdoor plazas.
Software manufacturer Kinset, Inc. is 
leading the 3-D e-commerce develop-
ment. Taking its cue from video games 
and the Second Life VR world Web site, 
Kinset has launched its product to big-
name retailers, including Brookstone. 
Shoppers download and then install this 
software, connect to the Internet, and 
then begin their  shopping experience.
When shoppers position their mouse pointer over an 
item, the information about the product is displayed. 
Pressing a specific key adds the item to a shopping cart, 
and another key brings the shopper to the checkout screen.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
innovative and then click Online Shopping.
INNOVATIVE COMPUTING 2-2
ETHICS & ISSUES 2-4
Internet features, such as e-mail, instant messages, 
and chat, have become some of today’s most 
popular methods of communications. Millions of 
people around the world send and receive various 
forms of Internet messages. The Internet links the 
geographically distanced, connects the economi-
cally separated, enables the physically challenged, 
and encourages the publicly timid. Almost all 
office workers are prolific users of Internet com-
munications because their job depends on a great 
deal of collaboration with co-workers, manage-
ment, vendors, and other departments.
 Because of the ease of use of such forms of 
communications, people are writing more than 
ever before — but is it good writing? The care-
fully crafted letters of an era gone by, handwritten 
in beautiful penmanship, have been replaced by 
messages stylistically equivalent to notes on the 
refrigerator. The immediacy of the Internet often 
results in messages that are ill conceived, casually 
spelled, poorly worded, grammatically flawed, and 
tritely expressed. Despite experts suggesting that 
users always should proofread messages care-
fully before sending them, communications often 
are  misinterpreted or come across as being rude. 
Should employers require that  employees 
adhere to e-mail authoring policies? In general, 
has e-mail’s impact on communications been 
positive or negative? Why? Would you judge 
somebody by the quality of his or her e-mail 
message? Why or why not? Could someone’s 
professional reputation be enhanced or hindered 
by the quality and effectiveness of his or her 
Internet communications?
Should You Be Judged by Your 
Internet Communications?
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   100 11/09/10   6:04:29 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 101
E-Mail
E-mail (short for electronic mail ) is the 
 transmission of messages and files via a computer 
network. E-mail was one of the original services 
on the Internet, enabling scientists and research-
ers working on government-sponsored projects 
to communicate with colleagues at other loca-
tions. Today, e-mail is a primary  communications 
method for both personal and business use. 
You use an e-mail program to create, send, 
receive, forward, store, print, and delete e-mail 
messages. Outlook and Windows Live Mail are 
two popular desktop e-mail programs; Gmail 
and Windows Live Hotmail are two popular 
free e-mail Web applications. The steps in 
Figure 2-26 illustrate how to send an e-mail 
message using Outlook. 
Step 1
Start an e-mail program and point to the New Mail Message button.
Step 2
Click the New Mail Message button to display the Message window.
Step 3 
Enter the recipient’s e-mail address, the subject, and the message
in the Message window.
Step 4
Click the Attach File button on the Message tab to attach a JPEG file 
containing a photo to the message. Click the Send button to 
send the message.
Step 5
When Dale receives the e-mail
message, she opens the JPEG file 
to view the photo.
How to Send an E-Mail Message Using Outlook
Figure 2-26 This figure shows how to send an e-mail message using Outlook.
New Mail 
Message button
icon for JPEG file 
attached to message
Attach File button
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   101 11/09/10   6:04:32 PM
102 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
The message can be simple text or can 
include an attachment such as a word process-
ing document, a graphic, an audio clip, or a 
video clip. To learn more about how to attach 
a file to an e-mail message, complete the Learn 
How To 1 activity on page 120.
Just as you address a letter when using the 
postal system, you address an e-mail message 
with the e-mail address of your intended recipi-
ent. Likewise, when someone sends you a mes-
sage, he or she must have your e-mail address. 
An e-mail address is a combination of a user 
name and a domain name that identifies a user 
so that he or she can receive Internet e-mail.
A user name is a unique combination of 
characters, such as letters of the alphabet 
and/or numbers, that identifies a specific user. 
Your user name must be different from the 
other user names in the same domain. For 
example, a user named Kiley Barnhill whose 
server has a domain name of scsite.com might 
want to select kbarnhill as her user name. If 
scsite.com already has a kbarnhill (for Ken 
Barnhill), Kiley will have to select a different 
user name, such as kileybarnhill or k_barnhill.
Sometimes, organizations decide user names 
for new users. In many cases, however, users 
select their own user names, often selecting a 
nickname or any other combination of char-
acters for their user name. Many users select a 
combination of their first and last names so that 
others can remember it easily.
In an Internet e-mail address, an @ (pronounced
at) symbol separates the user name from the 
domain name. Your service provider supplies the 
domain name. A possible e-mail address for Kiley 
Barnhill would be kbarnhill@scsite.com, which 
would be read as follows: K Barnhill at s c site 
dot com. Most e-mail programs allow you to cre-
ate an address book, or contacts folder, which 
contains a list of names and e-mail addresses.
Figure 2-27 illustrates how an e-mail  message 
may travel from a sender to a receiver using a 
desktop e-mail program. When you send an 
Step 1 
Using an e-mail program, 
you create and send 
a message.
Step 3 
Software on the outgoing 
mail server determines the 
best route for the data and
sends the message, which 
travels along Internet routers 
to the recipient's incoming
mail server.
Step 4
When the recipient uses an e-mail program to check
for e-mail messages, the message transfers from the 
incoming mail server to the recipient's computer.
Step 2
Your e-mail program contacts software on 
your service provider’s outgoing mail server.
Internet router
Internet router
Internet service 
provider’s incoming 
mail server
Figure 2-27 This figure shows how an e-mail message may travel from a sender to a receiver.
How an E-Mail Message May Travel from a Sender to a Receiver
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   102 11/09/10   6:04:35 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 103
 E-Mail
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
E-Mail.
Can my computer get a virus through e-mail?
Yes. A virus is a computer program that can damage files and the operating system. One way that virus 
authors attempt to spread a virus is by sending virus-infected e-mail attachments. If you receive an e-mail 
attachment, you should use an antivirus program to verify that it is virus free.
 For more information, read the High-Tech Talk article on page 178, the section about viruses and 
antivirus programs in Chapter 8, and visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/faq and then click Viruses.
FAQ 2-7
Figure 2-28 When you join a mailing list, you and all others on the mailing list receive e-mail messages from the Web site.
e-mail message, an out going mail server that 
is operated by your Internet access provider 
 determines how to route the message through 
the Internet and then sends the message. SMTP 
(simple mail transfer protocol) is a communi-
cations protocol used by some outgoing mail 
servers.
As you receive e-mail messages, an incoming 
mail server — also operated by your Internet 
access provider — holds the  messages in your 
mailbox until you use your e-mail program 
to retrieve them. POP3, the latest version of 
POP (Post Office Protocol ), is a communications 
protocol used by some incoming mail servers. 
Most e-mail programs have a mail notification 
alert that informs you via a message and/or 
sound when you receive new mail.
Mailing Lists
A mailing list, also called an e-mail list or 
distribution list, is a group of e-mail names and 
addresses given a single name. When a mes-
sage is sent to a mailing list, every person on 
the list receives a copy of the message in his 
or her mailbox. For example, your credit card 
company may add you to its mailing list in 
order to send you special offers. To add your 
e-mail name and address to a mailing list, you 
subscribe to it (Figure 2-28). To remove your 
name, you unsubscribe from the mailing list.
Thousands of mailing lists exist about a vari-
ety of topics in areas of entertainment, business, 
computers, society, culture, health, recreation, 
and education. Many vendors use mailing lists 
to communicate with their customer base.
click button to 
join mailing list
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   103 11/09/10   6:04:39 PM
104 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging (IM) is a real-time 
Internet communications service that notifies 
you when one or more people are online and 
then allows you to exchange messages or files or 
join a private chat room with them. Real time 
means that you and the people with whom 
you are conversing are online at the same time. 
Some IM services support voice and video con-
versations (Figure 2-29). Many IM services also 
can alert you to information such as calendar 
appointments, stock quotes, weather, or sports 
scores. They also allow you to send photos 
Step 3
You send instant messages, voice,
and/or video communications 
to an online buddy.
Step 4
Your instant message, voice, 
and/or video travels through 
a messaging server and
then to the online buddy’s 
computer.
Step 5
Your online buddy replies.
Step 1
Log in to the IM server.
Step 2 
The server determines if 
any of your established
friends, family, or coworkers, 
called buddies, are online.
messaging server
IM server
An Example of Instant Messaging
Figure 2-29 This figure shows an example of instant messaging.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   104 11/09/10   6:04:41 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 105
or other documents to a recipient, listen to 
 streaming music, and play games with another 
online party. For IM to work, both parties must 
be online at the same time. Also, the receiver of 
a message must be willing to accept messages. 
To use IM, you may have to install instant 
 messenger software on the computer or mobile 
device, such as a smart phone, you plan to use. 
Some operating systems, such as Windows, 
include an instant messenger. Popular IM soft-
ware includes AIM (AOL Instant Messenger), 
Google Talk, MySpace IM, Windows Live 
Messenger, and Yahoo! Messenger. 
Few IM programs follow IM standards. To 
ensure successful communi cations, all individu-
als on the  contact list need to use the same or a 
 compatible instant messenger.
Chat Rooms
A chat is a real-time typed conversation that 
takes place on a computer. A chat room is a loca-
tion on an Internet server that permits users to 
chat with each other. Anyone in the chat room 
can participate in the conversation, which usually 
is specific to a particular topic. 
As you type on your keyboard, a line of char-
acters and symbols is displayed on the computer 
screen. Others connected to the same chat room 
server also see what you have typed (Figure 
2-30). Some chat rooms support voice chats 
and video chats, in which people hear or see each 
other as they chat.
 Chat Rooms
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
Chat Rooms.
Figure 2-30 As you type, the words and 
symbols you enter are displayed on the computer 
screens of other people in the same chat room. 
To save time many chat and IM users type 
abbreviations and acronyms for phrases, such as 
‘r u there?’, which stands for ‘Are you there?’.
How popular are various online 
communications methods?
A research study conducted by Ipsos revealed 
that e-mail is expected to remain the preferred 
method of online communications during the 
next several years, at least. Methods of online 
communications expected to become more 
popular in the future include (listed from most 
popular to least popular) video conferencing, 
instant messaging, and text messaging.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch2/faq and then click Online 
Communications.
FAQ 2-8
To start a chat session, you connect to a chat 
server through a program called a chat client. 
Today’s browsers usually include a chat client. If 
yours does not, you can download a chat client 
from the Web. Some Web sites allow users to 
conduct chats without a chat client.
Once you have installed a chat client, you 
can create or join a conversation on the chat 
server to which you are connected. The chat 
room should indicate the discussion topic. The 
person who creates a chat room acts as the 
operator and has responsibility for monitor-
ing the conversation and disconnecting anyone 
who becomes disruptive. Operator status can be 
shared or  transferred to someone else.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   105 11/09/10   6:04:43 PM
106 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Internet
telephone
cable/DSL modem
personal computer
VoIP broadband router
Figure 2-31 One type of equipment configuration for a user making a call via VoIP.
VoIP
VoIP, (Voice over IP, or Internet Protocol) 
also called Internet telephony, enables users to 
speak to other users over the Internet. That is, 
VoIP uses the Internet (instead of the pub-
lic switched telephone network) to connect 
a calling party to one or more local or long-
distance called parties.
To place an Internet telephone call, you 
need a high-speed Internet connection 
(such as a DSL or cable modem); Internet 
telephone service; a microphone or telephone, 
depending on the Internet telephone service; 
and Internet telephone software or a VoIP 
router, or a  telephone adapter, depending on 
the Internet telephone service. VoIP services 
also are available on some mobile devices 
that have wireless Internet service. Calls to 
other parties with the same Internet telephone 
service often are free, while calls that connect 
to the telephone  network typically cost about 
$15 to $35 per month.
As you speak in a microphone connected to 
your computer or a telephone connected to the 
VoIP router or telephone adapter, the Internet 
telephone software and the com puter’s sound 
card or the VoIP router or telephone adapter 
convert your spoken words (analog signals) to 
digital signals and then transmit the digitized 
audio over the Internet to the called parties. 
Software and equipment at the receiving end 
reverse the process so that the receiving parties 
can hear what you have said. Figure 2-31 
illustrates one possible  configuration for VoIP.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   106 11/09/10   6:04:47 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 107
Newsgroups and Message Boards
A newsgroup is an online area in which users 
have written discussions about a par ticular sub-
ject (Figure 2-32). To participate in a discussion, 
a user posts a message, called an article, to the 
newsgroup, and other users in the newsgroup 
read and reply to the message. A thread or 
threaded discussion consists of the original article 
and all subsequent related replies.
A computer that stores and distributes news-
group messages is called a news server. Some 
newsgroups require you to enter a user name 
and password to participate in the discussion. 
For example, a newsgroup for students taking 
a college course may require a user name and 
password to access the newsgroup. This ensures 
that only  students in the course participate in the 
discussion.
To participate in a newsgroup, typically you 
use a program called a newsreader. Windows Live 
Mail includes a newsreader. Some Web sites, such 
as Google Groups, that sponsor newsgroups have 
a built-in newsreader.
A popular Web-based type of discussion 
group that does not require a newsreader is a 
message board. Many Web sites use message 
boards instead of newsgroups because they are 
easier to use.
FTP
FTP (File Transfer Protocol ) is an Internet 
 standard that permits file uploading and down-
loading with other computers on the Internet. 
Uploading is the opposite of down loading; that 
is, uploading is the process of transferring doc-
uments, graphics, and other objects from your 
computer to a server on the Internet. Web page 
authors, for example, often use FTP to upload 
their Web pages to a Web server. 
Many operating systems include FTP capabili-
ties. If yours does not, you can download FTP 
programs from the Web, usually for a small fee.
An FTP server is a computer that allows users 
to upload and/or download files using FTP. An 
FTP site is a collection of files including text, 
graphics, audio clips, video clips, and program 
files that reside on an FTP server. Many FTP 
sites have anonymous FTP, whereby anyone can 
transfer some, if not all, available files. Some 
FTP sites restrict file transfers to those who 
have authorized accounts (user names and pass-
words) on the FTP server.
Large files on FTP sites often are compressed 
to reduce storage space and download time. 
Before you can use a compressed (zipped) file, 
you must uncompress (unzip) it. Chapter 8 
 discusses utilities that zip and unzip files.
 FTP
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click FTP.
Figure 2-32 Users in a newsgroup read and reply to other users’ messages.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   107 11/09/10   6:04:48 PM
108 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Netiquette
Netiquette, which is short for Internet etiquette, 
is the code of acceptable behaviors users should 
follow while on the Internet; that is, it is the 
conduct expected of individuals while online. 
Netiquette includes rules for all aspects of the
Internet, including the World Wide Web, 
e-mail, instant messaging, chat rooms, FTP, and 
newsgroups and message boards. Figure 2-33 
outlines some of the rules of netiquette. Read 
Ethics & Issues 2-5 for a related discussion.
Figure 2-33 Some of the rules of netiquette.
NETIQUETTE — Golden Rule: Treat others as you would 
like them to treat you.
1. In e-mail, chat rooms, and newsgroups:
• Keep messages brief. Use proper grammar, 
spelling, and punctuation.
• Be careful when using sarcasm and humor, as it 
might be misinterpreted. 
• Be polite. Avoid offensive language.
• Read the message before you send it.
• Use meaningful subject lines.
• Avoid sending or posting fl ames, which are 
abusive or insulting messages. Do not par ticipate 
in fl ame wars, which are exchanges of fl ames.
• Avoid sending spam, which is the Internet’s version 
of junk mail. Spam is an unsolicited e-mail message 
or newsgroup posting sent to many recipients or 
newsgroups at once. 
• Do not use all capital letters, which is the equivalent 
of SHOUTING!
• Use emoticons to express emotion. Popular 
emoticons include
 :)  Smile :|  Indifference :o  Surprised
 :(  Frown :\  Undecided
• Use abbreviations and acronyms for phrases:
 btw by the way 
imho in my humble opinion
 fyi for your information 
ttfn ta ta for now
 fwiw for what it’s worth 
tyvm thank you very much
• Clearly identify a spoiler, which is a message that 
reveals a solution to a game or ending to a movie or 
program.
2. Read the FAQ (frequently asked questions), if one 
exists. Many newsgroups and Web pages have an 
FAQ.
3. Do not assume material is accurate or up-to-date. Be 
forgiving of other’s mistakes.
4. Never read someone’s private e-mail.
ETHICS & ISSUES 2-5
Recently, several high-profile 
cases highlighted the issue of 
cyberbullying. Cyberbullying is 
the harassment of computer 
users, often teens and pre-
teens, through various forms of 
Internet communications. The 
behavior typically occurs via 
e-mail, instant messaging, and 
chat rooms, and can result in 
a traumatic experience for the 
recipient. The bullying may be in 
the form of threats, spreading of 
rumors, or humiliation. Usually, 
the perpetrators of cyberbullying 
remain anonymous. Many people 
believe that the anonymous 
nature of the Internet directly 
leads to this unscrupulous behav-
ior. Some government officials 
and advocacy groups have asked 
for laws that would ban anony-
mous comments in chat rooms 
and require that Internet access 
providers verify and record 
the true identity of all users. 
Others have proposed that it be 
illegal to sign up for an e-mail 
account or instant messaging 
account with a fake screen name. 
Opponents of such plans claim 
that anonymity and privacy are 
too important to give up. They 
state, for example, that the right 
to be  critical of the government 
in an  anonymous forum is a 
basic right. The rights of every-
one should not be infringed upon 
due to bad behavior of a small 
group of people. 
Would banning anonymous 
 comments reduce cyberbullying? 
Why or why not? What are the 
positive and negative aspects of 
the freedom to remain anony-
mous on the Internet? What 
other measures can be taken 
to reduce cyberbullying? What 
role can parents play in reducing 
cyberbullying?
Would Banning Anonymous Comments Reduce Cyberbullying?
 Cyberbullying
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
weblink and then click 
Cyberbullying.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   108 11/09/10   6:04:51 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 109
Chapter Summary
This chapter presented the history and structure 
of the Internet. It discussed the World Wide 
Web at length, including topics such as brows-
ing, navigating, searching, Web publishing, and 
e-commerce. It also introduced other services 
Instructions: Find the true statement below. Then, rewrite the remaining false statements so that 
they are true.
1. A chat room is a location on an Internet server that permits users to chat with each other.
2. An e-mail address is a combination of a user name and an e-mail program that identifies a user so that 
he or she can receive Internet e-mail.
3. Business-to-consumer e-commerce occurs when one consumer sells directly to another, such as in an 
online auction.
4. FTP is an Internet standard that permits file reading and writing with other computers on the Internet.
5. Spam uses the Internet (instead of the public switched telephone network) to connect a calling party 
to one or more called parties.
6. Netiquette is the code of unacceptable behaviors while on the Internet.
7. VoIP enables users to subscribe to other users over the Internet.
 Quiz Yourself Online: To further check your knowledge of pages 98 through 108, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch2/quiz and then click Objectives 10 – 12.
QUIZ YOURSELF 2-3
Do you wonder how music on the radio sounds so 
perfectly in tune, how animated motion pictures are 
created, or how one controls lighting during a con-
cert? Not only does the entertainment industry rely on 
computers to advertise and sell their services on the 
Internet, computers also assist in other aspects, includ-
ing audio and video composition, lighting control, com-
puterized animation, and computer gaming. 
As mentioned in this chapter, entertainment Web 
sites provide music and movies you can purchase and 
download to your computer or mobile device; live news 
broadcasts, performances, and sporting events; games 
you can play with other online users; and much more. 
As early as 1951, computers were used to record and 
play music. Today, computers play a much larger role in 
the music industry. For example, if you are listening to 
a song on the radio and notice that not one note is out 
of tune, it is possible that software was used to change 
individual notes without altering the rest of the song. 
Many years ago, creating cartoons or animated 
motion pictures was an extremely time-consuming 
task because artists were responsible for sketching 
thousands of drawings by hand. Currently, artists use 
computers to create these drawings in a fraction of the 
time, which significantly can reduce the time and cost 
of development. 
Computers also are used in the game industry. While 
some game developers create games from scratch, oth-
ers might use game engines that simplify the develop-
ment process. For example, LucasArts created the GrimE 
game engine, which is designed to create adventure 
games.
During a concert, lighting technicians use computer 
programs to turn lights off and on, change color, or 
change location at specified intervals. In fact, once a 
performance begins, the technicians often merely are 
standing by, monitoring the computer as it performs 
most of the work. A significant amount of time and 
effort, however, is required to program the computer to 
perform its required tasks during a live show. 
The next time you listen to a song, watch a movie, 
play a game, or attend a concert, think about the role 
computers play in contributing to your entertainment.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
work and then click Entertainment.
Entertainment
Computer Usage @ Work 
available on the Internet, such as e-mail, mailing 
lists, instant messaging, chat rooms, VoIP, news-
groups and message boards, and FTP. Finally, 
the  chapter listed rules of netiquette.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   109 11/09/10   6:04:52 PM
110 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Every computer on the Internet has a 
unique address, called an IP address, that 
distinguishes it from other computers on 
the Internet. Currently, two versions of IP 
addresses exist: IPv4 (Internet Protocol Version 
4) and IPv6 (Internet Protocol Version 6). An 
IPv4 address has two parts that identify a 
specific computer: one part to identify the net-
work where that computer resides and a sec-
ond part to pinpoint the specific computer or 
host within that network. An IPv6 address has 
three parts: a global prefix to identify the net-
work, a subnet to identify the location within 
the network, and the interface ID to identify 
the specific computer or host (Figure 2-34). 
Today, IPv4 addresses are more commonly 
used. For this reason, the terms IP address 
and IPv4 address are used interchangeably.
A typical IPv4 address — such as 
72.14.207.99 — has four groups of num-
bers that range from 0 through 255. This 
form of the IP address sometimes is called 
a dotted decimal number or dotted quad. 
The four groups of numbers in the dotted 
quad are called octets, because they each 
have 8 bits when viewed in binary form 
for a total of 32 bits in the IP address. For 
instance, the binary form of 72.14.207.99 is 
01001000.00001110.11001111.01100011. 
For more information about how the binary 
system works, see Appendix C.
Because each of the 8 bits can be 1 or 0, 
the total possible combinations per octet 
are 28, or 256. Combining the four octets 
of an IP address provides a possible 232 or 
4,294,967,296 unique values. The actual num-
ber of available addresses is about 3 billion, 
because some values are reserved for special 
use and are, therefore, off limits. 
IP addresses, which are assigned by InterNIC 
(The Internet's Network Information Center), 
belong to one of three network classes: A, B, 
or C. In a Class A network, the first octet of the 
IPv4 address is assigned a number between 
1 and 127. Large enterprises typically are 
assigned a Class A network, which can contain 
more than 16 million hosts; this allows net-
work administrators to assign a value of their 
choice to the remaining three octets. Class B 
networks contain a number between 128 and 
191 in the first octet. The second octet also is 
fixed, but the organization can assign values of 
its choice to the third and fourth octets. Class 
B networks have more than 65,000 hosts. 
Class C networks begin with a value between 
192 and 223 and allow only the fourth octet 
to be customized. Class C networks can have 
only 254 hosts. Class D and E networks also 
exist, although they rarely are used.
To request data such as a Web page from 
a computer on the Internet, you need only an 
IP address. For instance, if you type the IPv4 
address 72.14.207.99 in your Web browser’s 
Address bar, the browser will display the 
home page on the machine hosting the 
Google Web site. Remembering an IP address 
is difficult at best — so you probably would 
just type the domain name, www.google.com, 
in the browser. The browser then contacts 
a domain name server (DNS) to resolve 
the human-readable domain name into a 
machine-readable IP address. Each domain 
name server houses a simple database that 
maps domain names to IP addresses. The DNS 
would resolve the human-readable domain 
name, www.google.com, into a machine-
readable IP address, 72.14.207.99. 
Domain names are helpful because they 
are easier for people to remember than 
IP addresses. You can learn more about a 
domain using the whois form at the Network 
Solutions Web site (www.netsol.com and 
then click the WHOIS link). If you type a 
domain name, such as google.com, the form 
displays the registration information for that 
domain, including its IP address.
Like all other computers, your computer 
must have an IP address to connect to the 
Internet or another computer that has an 
IP address. Servers generally have static IP 
addresses, because they usually are con-
nected to the Internet and their IP addresses 
do not change often. When you connect to 
the Internet using your home computer, you 
most likely are using a temporary or dynamic 
IP address. Your access provider uses the 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) 
to assign your computer a temporary dynamic 
IP address from a pool of IP addresses. The 
dynamic IP address is unique only for that 
session. Once you disconnect, the DHCP 
server releases that IP address back in the IP 
address pool so that it can assign it to the 
next requesting computer. Even if you imme-
diately reconnect, the DHCP server might not 
assign you the same IP address. Using DHCP 
and dynamic IP addresses means an Internet 
access provider needs only one IP address for 
each modem it supports, rather than one for 
each of its millions of customers.
Billions of IP addresses sounds like a lot. 
But, because so many computers and other 
devices connected to the Internet need 
unique IP addresses, a growing shortage of 
IP addresses exists. The newer IP address-
ing scheme is IPv6, also called IPng (IP Next 
Generation, which) will lengthen IP addresses 
from 32 bits to 128 bits and increase the 
number of available IP addresses to a whop-
ping 3.4 x 1038, or 340,000,000,000,000,
000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000. Software 
is available that will install IPv6 on most cur-
rent computers, although many networks and 
Internet service providers do not yet require 
its use. In fact, it could be many years before 
IPv6 completely replaces IPv4.
Do you want to know the IP address cur-
rently assigned to your computer? Click the 
Start button on the Windows taskbar and then 
click Control Panel. Click Network and Internet 
and then click View Network Status and Tasks. 
Finally, click View status and then click Details.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch2/tech and then click IP 
Addresses.
High-Tech Talk
A Computer’s Internet Protocol (IP) Address
 
IPv4 Class A address  72.14.207.99
IPv6 address  2001:0db8:3c4d:0015:0000:0000:abcd:ef12
 Global Prefix Subnet Interface ID
4 Octets
8 Hexadecimal Strings
Host AddressNetwork Address
Figure 2-34 Components of IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   110 11/09/10   6:04:54 PM
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 111
Millions of products are traded daily on eBay auctions, 
whether it is across town or across the globe. The more 
than 88 million registered worldwide shoppers generate 
at least $1.8 billion in annual revenue through pur-
chases on the main Web site, eBay, along with items on 
Shopping.com, tickets on StubHub, classifieds on Kijiji, 
and other e-commerce venues.
The shoppers likely pay for their merchandise using 
PayPal, another eBay service. This merchant service 
allows buyers to transfer money from savings accounts 
or use their credit card without having to expose the 
account number to the seller. Other eBay companies 
are Rent.com, which offers listings for apartments and 
houses, and Shopping.com, which allows consumers to 
find and compare products. In 2009, eBay introduced a 
program to more easily identify its top-rated sellers. It 
also invited buyers and sellers to become members of 
the eBay Green Team, which encourages and promotes 
environmentally friendly business practices.
Being the creator of the World Wide Web is an 
impressive item on any resume, and it certainly helped 
Tim Berners-Lee become the 3Com Founders Professor of 
Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
in 2008. As a professor in the electrical engineering and 
computer science departments, he researches social and 
technical collaboration on the Internet.
Berners-Lee’s interest in sharing information via Web 
servers, browsers, and Web addresses developed in 1989 
while working at CERN, the European Organization for 
Nuclear Research, in Geneva, Switzerland. He continued 
to improve his design of a program that tracked random 
associations for several years and then became the 
director of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), a 
forum to develop Web standards, in 1994.
Queen Elizabeth bestowed the Order of Merit – the 
highest civilian honor – upon the British-born Berners-Lee 
in 2007.
MARK ZUCKERBERG  Facebook Founder and CEO
As one of the youngest self-made billionaires in history, 
Mark Zuckerberg could have his choice of the finest 
things in life. Instead, he lives very modestly and walks 
to Facebook’s Palo Alto headquarters.
Both Microsoft and AOL had recruited Zuckerberg dur-
ing his senior year in high school in New Hampshire. He 
declined their job offers and decided to attend Harvard. 
In college, he and some friends developed several 
projects, laying the foundation that led to Facebook’s 
eventual start. Harvard administrators claimed these 
Web sites violated students’ privacy. He, however, had 
instant success launching Facebook from his dorm room, 
and the Web site’s popularity quickly spread to other Ivy 
League and Boston-area colleges and then worldwide. 
He left his studies at Harvard University in 2004 and 
moved to California.
Today, Zuckerberg says he spends the majority of his 
time running the $15 billion company on very little sleep.
Technology Trailblazers
Companies on the Cutting Edge
Google founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page have done 
very little advertising, but their Web site has become a 
household word, largely on favorable word-of-mouth 
reviews. They launched the Web site in 1998 in a friend’s 
garage with the goal of providing the best possible 
experience for their loyal users who are looking for 
information presented clearly and quickly.
Google regularly scans more than one trillion Web 
pages in search of unique phrases and terms. Its 
thousands of connected computers deliver organized 
search results for the hundreds of millions of queries 
users input daily. In 2009, the company updated 
its Google Earth product to allow users to explore 
the Moon, and also updated its popular advertising 
product, AdWords. Among its other services are Google 
Docs and YouTube.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/companies.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/trailblazers.
GOOGLE  Popular Search Engine and Services
eBAY  World’s Largest Online Marketplace
TIM BERNERS-LEE  Creator of the World Wide Web
1439079420_Ch02_FINAL.indd   111 11/09/10   6:05:00 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
112 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
The Chapter Review reinforces the main concepts presented in this chapter. 
 To listen to an audio version of this Chapter Review, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch02/review. 
To obtain help from other students about any concept in this chapter, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch02/forum and post your thoughts and questions.
Chapter Review
1. How Did the Internet Evolve? The Internet, also called 
the Net, is a worldwide collection of networks that links 
millions of businesses, government agencies, educational 
institutions, and individuals. The Internet has its roots 
in ARPANET, a network started in 1969 to link scientifi c 
and academic researchers across the United States. In 
1986, the National Science Foundation connected its 
huge network, called NSFnet, to ARPANET, creating a 
confi guration of complex networks and hosts that became 
known as the Internet. Today, more than 550 million host 
computers connect to the Internet.
2. What Are the Various Types of Internet Connections, 
and What Are the Differences between Broadband and 
Dial-Up Connections? Many home and small business 
users opt to connect to the Internet via high-speed 
broadband Internet connections. DSL (digital subscriber 
line) provides Internet connections using regular 
copper telephone lines. Cable Internet service provides 
high-speed Internet access through the cable television 
network via a cable modem. Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) 
uses fi ber-optic cable to provide high-speed Internet 
 access. Fixed wireless provides high-speed Internet con-
nections using a dish-shaped antenna to communicate 
via radio signals. A cellular radio network offers high-
speed Internet connections to devices with built-in 
compatible technology or computers with wireless 
modems. A Wi-Fi network uses radio signals. Satellite 
Internet service provides high-speed Internet connections 
via satellite. Some homes and small businesses connect 
to the Internet with dial-up access. Dial-up access, which 
is slower-speed technology, takes place when the modem 
in your computer connects to the Internet via a standard 
telephone line that transmits data and information using 
an analog (continuous wave) pattern. 
3. What Are the Types of Internet Access Providers? An 
access provider is a business that provides access to 
the Internet free or for a fee. An ISP (Internet service 
provider) is a regional or national access provider. An 
online service provider (OSP) provides Internet 
access in addition to members-only features. A wireless 
 Internet service provider provides wireless Internet 
access to desktop and notebook computers and mobile 
devices with built-in wireless capabilities (such as Wi-Fi) 
or to  computers using wireless modems or wireless 
access devices.
 4. What Is the Purpose of an IP Address, and What Is Its 
Relationship to a Domain Name? An IP address 
(Internet Protocol address) is a number that uniquely iden-
tifi es each  computer or device connected to the Internet. 
The Internet relies on IP addresses to send data to com-
puters at specifi c locations. The IP address usually consists 
of four groups of numbers, each separated by a period. 
A domain name is the text version of an IP address.
 Visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/quiz and then click 
Objectives 1 – 4.
 5. What Is the Purpose of a Web Browser, and What Are 
the Components of a Web Address? A Web browser, 
or browser, is application software that allows users 
to access and view Web pages or access Web 2.0 pro-
grams. With an Internet connection established, you 
start a Web browser, which then retrieves and displays a 
starting Web page, sometimes called a home page. The 
home page usually contains links to other Web pages. 
A link, short for hyperlink, is a built-in connection to 
another related Web page or part of a Web page. A 
Web page has a unique address called a URL (Uniform 
Resource Locator), or Web address. A Web address con-
sists of a protocol, a domain name, and sometimes the 
path to a specifi c Web page or location on a Web page.
 6. How Do You Use a Search Engine to Search for 
Information on the Web, and What Is the Difference 
between a Search Engine and a Subject Directory? 
A search engine is a program that fi nds Web sites, Web 
pages, images, videos, news, maps, and other informa-
tion related to a specifi c topic. To use a search engine, 
you enter a word or phrase, called search text or  a 
search query, that describes the item you want to fi nd. 
Each word in the search text is known as a keyword. 
The search engine displays a list of hits. When clicked, 
each hit displays an associated Web site or Web page. A 
 subject directory classifi es Web pages in an organized 
set of categories and related subcategories. By clicking 
links, you move through levels 
to display a list of Web 
pages about a 
desired topic.
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   112 11/09/10   6:14:06 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 113
Chapter Review
 7. What Are the Types of Web Sites? A portal is a Web 
site that offers a variety of Internet services from a single 
 location. A news Web site contains newsworthy material. 
An informational Web site contains factual information. 
A business/marketing Web site promotes or sells products 
or services. A blog, short for Weblog, is an informal Web 
site consisting of time-stamped articles, or posts, in a diary 
or journal format, usually listed in reverse chronological 
order. A wiki is a collaborative Web site that allows users 
to create, add to, modify, or delete the Web site content 
via their Web browser. An online social network, or 
social networking Web site, encourages members to 
share their interests, ideas, stories, photos, music, and 
videos with other registered users. An educational Web 
site offers avenues for teaching and learning. An entertain-
ment Web site provides an interactive and engaging envi-
ronment. An advocacy Web site describes a cause, opinion, 
or idea. A Web application, or Web app, is a Web site that 
allows users to access and interact with software through a 
Web browser or any computer or device connected to the 
Internet. A content aggregator is a business that gathers and 
organizes Web content and then distributes, or feeds, the 
content to  subscribers for free or a fee. A personal Web 
site is maintained by a private individual or family.
 8. How Do Web Pages Use Graphics, Animation, Audio, 
Video, Virtual Reality, and Plug-Ins? Some Web pages 
use multimedia, which combines text with graphics, 
animation, audio, video, and/or  virtual reality. A graphic 
is a digital representation of nontext information such as 
a drawing, chart, or photo. Animation is the appearance 
of motion created by displaying a series of still images 
in sequence. Audio includes music, speech, or any other 
sound. Video consists of full-motion images played 
back at various speeds. Virtual reality (VR) is the use 
of computers to simulate an environment that appears 
as three-dimensional space. A plug-in, or add-on, is a 
program that extends a browser’s capability to display 
multimedia elements.
 9. What Are the Steps Required for Web Publishing? 
Web publishing is the development and maintenance 
of Web pages. The fi ve major steps to Web publishing 
are: (1) plan a Web site, (2) analyze and design a Web 
site, (3) create a Web site, (4) deploy a Web site, and 
(5) maintain a Web site.
 Visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/quiz and then click 
Objectives 5 – 9.
 10. What Are the Types of E-Commerce? E-commerce, 
short for electronic commerce, is a business transaction that 
occurs over an electronic network such as the Internet. 
Business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce consists of the sale 
of goods and services to the general public. Consumer-
to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce occurs when one consumer 
sells directly to another, such as in an online auction. 
Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce takes place between 
businesses that exchange goods and  services.
 11. How Do E-Mail, Mailing Lists, Instant Messaging, Chat 
Rooms, VoIP, Newsgroups and Message Boards, and FTP 
Work? E-mail (short for  electronic mail) is the trans-
mission of messages and fi les via a computer network. 
A mailing list is a group of e-mail names and addresses 
given a single name, so that everyone on the list receives 
a message sent to the list. Instant messaging (IM) is a 
real-time Internet  communications service that notifi es 
you when one or more people are online. A chat room 
is a location on an Internet server that permits users to 
conduct real-time typed conversations. VoIP (Voice over 
IP, or Internet Protocol), also called Internet telephony, 
enables users to speak to other users over the Internet, 
instead of the public switched telephone network. A 
 newsgroup is an online area in which users have written 
discussions about a particular subject. A  message board 
is a Web-based type of discussion group that is easier 
to use than a newsgroup. FTP (File Transfer Protocol) is 
an Internet standard that permits fi le uploading and 
 downloading with other computers on the Internet.
 12. What Are the Rules of Netiquette? Netiquette, which 
is short for Internet  etiquette, is the code of acceptable 
behaviors users should follow while on the Internet. 
Netiquette rules include: keep messages short, be 
polite, avoid sending flames or spam, use emoticons 
and acronyms, clearly identify a spoiler, read the FAQ, 
do not assume material is accurate or up-to-date, and 
never read someone’s private e-mail.
 Visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/quiz and then click 
Objectives 10 – 12.
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   113 11/09/10   6:14:10 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
114 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
You should know the Primary Terms and be familiar with the Secondary Terms. The list below helps focus 
your study. 
 To see an example of and a definition for each term, and to access current and additional information 
from the Web, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/terms.
Key Terms
Primary Terms
(shown in bold-black characters in the chapter)
Secondary Terms
(shown in italic characters in the chapter)
access provider (77)
address book (102)
animation (94)
audio (94)
blog (90)
browser (81)
chat (105)
chat room (105)
DNS server (80)
domain name (79)
downloading (82)
e-commerce (98)
electronic storefront (99)
e-mail (101)
e-mail address (102)
e-mail program (101)
emoticons (108)
FTP (107)
graphic (93)
home page (82)
instant messaging (IM) (104)
Internet (74)
IP address (79)
ISP (Internet service 
provider) (78)
link (82)
mailing list (103)
media sharing Web site (91)
message board (107)
microblog (90)
MP3 (94)
multimedia (92)
netiquette (108)
newsgroup (107)
online auction (100)
online community (89)
online service provider 
(OSP) (78)
online social network (90)
player (94)
plug-in (97)
portal (89)
real time (104)
RSS 2.0 (92)
search engine (85)
search text (85)
shopping cart (99)
social networking Web site 
(90)
streaming (94)
subject directory (85)
subscribe (103)
surfing the Web (83)
tabbed browsing (84)
traffic (76)
unsubscribe (103)
uploading (107)
URL (82)
user name (102)
video (96)
video blog (90)
virtual reality (VR) (96)
VoIP (106)
Web (80)
Web 2.0 (81)
Web address (82)
Web application (91)
Web browser (81)
Web page (80)
Web publishing (98)
Web server (81)
Web site (81)
Wi-Fi (76)
wiki (90)
wireless Internet service 
provider (78)
World Wide Web (80)
add-on (97)
animated GIF (94)
anonymous FTP (107)
ARPA (75)
ARPANET (75)
Atom (92)
blogger (90)
blogosphere (90)
bookmark (83)
broadband (76)
buddies (104)
business-to-business (B2B) 
e-commerce (100)
business-to-consumer (B2C) 
e-commerce (98)
cable Internet service (76)
ccTLD (80)
cellular radio network (76)
chat client (105)
click (84)
consumer-to-consumer (C2C) 
e-commerce (100)
content aggregator (92)
dial-up access (76)
domain name system (DNS) (80)
DSL (76)
dynamic Web page (81)
electronic commerce (98)
electronic mail (101)
e-retail (99)
FAQ (108)
favorite (83)
Fiber to the Premises (FTTP) (76)
file (77)
fixed wireless (76)
flame wars (108)
flames (108)
FTP server (107)
GIF (93)
graphical image (93)
gTLD (80)
hits (86)
host (75)
hot spots (76)
http (82)
hyperlink (82)
hypermedia (83)
hypertext (83)
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (82)
ICANN (80)
instant messenger (105)
Internet backbone (78)
Internet telephony (106)
IPv6 (80)
JPEG (93)
keyword (85)
m-commerce (98)
microbrowser (82)
MP4 (96)
MPEG (96)
MPEG-4 (96)
national ISP (78)
Net (74)
newsreader (107)
NSFnet (75)
PNG (93)
podcast (94)
POP3 (103)
Post Office Protocol (103)
pull (83)
push (83)
Really Simple Syndication (92)
regional ISP (78)
registrar (80)
satellite Internet service (76)
search query (85)
SMTP (103)
spam (108)
spider (88)
spoiler (108)
static Web page (81)
streaming audio (94)
streaming video (96)
thread (107)
threaded discussion (107)
thumbnail (94)
top-level domain (TLD) (80)
Uniform Resource Locator (82)
vlog (90)
vlogger (90)
vlogosphere (90)
Voice over IP (106)
VR world (96)
W3C (76)
Web app (91)
Weblog (90)
WebSlices (92)
wireless portal (89)
WWW (80)
blog (90)
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   114 11/09/10   6:14:12 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 115
The Checkpoint exercises test your knowledge of the chapter concepts. The page number containing the 
answer appears in parentheses after each exercise. The Beyond the Book exercises will help broaden your 
understanding of the concepts presented in this chapter.
 To complete the Checkpoint exercises interactively, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/check.
Checkpoint
_____ 1. A single government agency owns and controls the Internet. (76)
_____ 2.  DSL provides high-speed Internet connections through the cable television network. (76)
_____ 3.  In general, the first portion of each IP address identifies the network and the last portion identifies the specific 
computer. (79)
_____ 4. A Web 2.0 Web site can never allow users to modify Web site content. (81)
_____ 5. A Web page has a unique address, called a URL or Web address. (82)
_____ 6. Hypertext combines text-based links with graphic, audio, and video links. (83)
_____ 7.  The major disadvantage with a subject directory is that users have difficulty deciding which categories to choose as 
they work through the menus of links presented. (88)
_____ 8.  Most social networking Web sites include chat rooms, newsgroups, and other communications services. (90)
_____ 9.  Streaming disallows users from accessing and using a file while it is transmitting. (94)
_____ 10. A plug-in is a program that extends the capability of an add-on. (97)
_____ 11. Most e-commerce actually takes place between consumers, which is called consumer-to-consumer e-commerce. (100)
_____ 12.  Flames are abusive or insulting messages. (108)
True/False Mark T for True and F for False.
Multiple Choice Select the best answer. 
 1. _____ offers high-speed Internet connections to devices 
with built-in compatible technology or computers with 
wireless modems. (76)
 a. Cable Internet service
 b. A digital subscriber line
 c. A cellular radio network
 d. Fiber to the Premises (FTTP)
 2. As with an IP address, the components of a domain 
name are separated by _____. (79)
 a. commas
 b. periods
 c. colons
 d. semicolons
 3. _____ combines text-based links with graphic, audio, 
and video links. (83)
 a. Hypertext
 b. Multi-linking
 c. Hypermedia
 d. Tabbed browsing
 4. All of the following techniques can be used to improve 
Web searches except _____. (88)
 a. put the most important terms last
 b. read a search engine’s Help information
 c. list all possible spellings
 d. if a search is unsuccessful, try another search engine
 5. A _____ is a Web site that allows users to post short text 
updates, usually between 100 and 200 characters. (90)
 a. microblog
 b. wiki
 c. portal
 d. podcast
 6. A(n) _____ is a small version of a larger graphic. (94)
 a. thumbnail
 b. MP3
 c. wiki
 d. portal
 7. _____ is the process of transferring documents, graphics, 
and other objects from your computer to a server on the 
Internet. (107)
 a. Downloading
 b. Social networking
 c. Uploading
 d. Blogging
 8. _____ is the code of acceptable behaviors users should 
follow while on the Internet. (108)
 a. Post Office Protocol
 b. The Golden Rule
 c. Netiquette
 d. An FAQ
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   115 11/09/10   6:14:14 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
116 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Checkpoint
 a. built-in connection to another related Web page or part of a Web page
 b.  a two-letter country code for international Web sites outside the 
United States
 c. enables users to speak to other users over the Internet
 d. format that reduces an audio file to about one-tenth its original size
 e. new IP addressing scheme that may increase the number of available IP 
addresses
 f. translates the domain name to its associated IP address
 g. software used to listen to an audio file on a computer
 h. identifies the type of organization associated with a domain
 i. program that finds Web sites, Web pages, images, videos, news, maps, and 
other information related to a specific topic
 j.  full-motion images that are played back at various speeds
Matching Match the terms with their definitions. 
_____ 1. gTLD (80)
_____ 2. ccTLD (80)
_____ 3. DNS Server (80)
_____ 4. IPv6 (80)
_____ 5. link (82)
_____ 6. search engine (85)
_____ 7. MP3 (94)
_____ 8. player (94)
_____ 9. video (96)
_____ 10. VoIP (106)
 1. Describe three different types of broadband Internet services. ____________ What is the difference between a 
regional ISP and a national ISP? ____________
 2. How is a static Web page different from a dynamic Web page? ____________ What is a Web site? ____________
 3. What is a Web application? ____________What are some features and examples of Web applications? ____________
 4.  What are three types of specifications used by content aggregators to distribute content? ____________ How might 
you evaluate the accuracy of a Web site? ____________
 5. What is Web publishing? ____________ What are the five major steps in Web publishing? ____________
Short Answer Write a brief answer to each of the following questions.
 1.  Ethics & Issues — Select an Ethics & Issues in this 
chapter (84, 87, 90, 100, 108), find a recent newspaper/
magazine article that supports one point of view 
presented, and then evaluate the article.
 2.  Computer Usage @ Work — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to locate three additional unique 
usages of computer technology in the entertainment 
industry (109). What makes the use of these 
technologies unique to the entertainment industry?
 3.  Companies on the Cutting Edge and Technology 
Trailblazers — Use the Web or a recent business 
newspaper/magazine to locate an interesting fact about 
Google, eBay, Tim Berners-Lee, or Mark Zuckerberg 
that was not presented in the chapter (111).
 4.  High-Tech Talk — Locate a recent newspaper/magazine 
article that discusses topics related to A Computer’s 
Internet Protocol (IP) Address (110). Would you 
recommend the article you found? Why or why not?
 5.  FAQs and Web Links — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to locate three additional facts 
about an FAQ (77, 78, 82, 88, 96, 99, 103, 105) and 
Web Link (76, 78, 82, 84, 96, 98, 100, 103, 105, 107, 
108) that were not presented in the chapter.
 6.  Looking Ahead — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to discover additional uses of 
the technology presented in Web 3.0 to Reinvent the 
Virtual World (81).
 7. Innovative Computing — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to locate two additional 
interesting facts about View the Wonders of Space 
through the WorldWide Telescope (93) and Shopping 
Becomes a Virtual Experience (100).
 8.  Making Use of the Web — Visit three of the Research 
Web Sites (126) and outline the information on each 
Web site and the possible uses for each Web site.
Beyond the Book Follow the book element instructions below; then present your findings (brief report, presentation, discussion, or other means).
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   116 11/09/10   6:14:14 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 117
The Learn It Online exercises are interactive Web exercises designed to reinforce and expand your 
understanding of the chapter concepts. The descriptions below briefly summarize each exercise.
 To access the Learn It Online exercises and for specific exercise instructions, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch2/learn.
Learn It Online
1  At the Movies — Tell Your Stories via Vlog
Watch a movie to learn about how to post your 
thoughts to a vlog and then answer questions about 
the movie. 
2  Video and Audio: You Review It — VoIP
Search for, choose, and write a review of a video, 
podcast, or vodcast that discusses Voice over IP. 
3  Student Edition Labs — Connecting to 
the Internet, Getting the Most out of the 
Internet, and E-mail
Enhance your understanding and knowledge 
about the Internet and e-mail by completing the 
Connecting to the Internet, Getting the Most out 
of the Internet, and E-mail Labs.
4  Practice Test
Take a multiple choice test that checks your 
knowledge of the chapter concepts and review 
the resulting study guide.
5  Who Wants To Be a Computer Genius2?
Play the Shelly Cashman Series version of this 
popular game by answering questions to find out 
if you are a computer genius. Panic buttons are 
available to provide assistance during game play.
6  Wheel of Terms
Identify important key terms presented in this 
chapter by playing the Shelly Cashman Series 
version of this popular game. 
7  DC Track and Field
Practice or compete against other students in three 
track and field events by answering multiple choice, 
true/false, and short answer questions related to 
concepts discussed in this chapter.
8  You’re Hired!
Embark on the path to a career in computers by 
answering questions and solving puzzles related to 
concepts discussed in this chapter. 
9  Crossword Puzzle Challenge
Complete an interactive crossword puzzle to 
reinforce concepts presented in this chapter. 
10  Windows Exercises
Step through the Windows 7 exercises to learn 
about Internet properties, dial-up networking 
connections, and using Help to understand 
the Internet.
11  Exploring Computer Careers
Read about a career as a Web developer, search 
for related employment advertisements, and then 
answer related questions.
12  Web Apps — Windows Live Hotmail
Learn how to sign up for a free e-mail account, add 
a contact to your address book, and send an e-mail 
message. 
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   117 11/09/10   6:14:15 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
118 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
The Problem Solving @ Home exercises extend your knowledge of the 
chapter concepts by seeking solutions to practical computer problems that 
you may encounter at home or school. The Collaboration exercise should be 
completed with a team.
 To discuss the Problem Solving @ Home exercises with other students, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/forum and post your thoughts or questions.
10. Finding Trustworthy Sources Your history professor asked all of the students in her class to write a five-page 
paper about the Boston Tea Party. Instead of using books, you decide to find all of the relevant information you 
need on the Internet. After reading this chapter, you realize that not all Internet sources may be trustworthy, and 
that you must search the Internet for accurate Web sites. Form a team of three people and use various search 
engines to search for Web sites that discuss the Boston Tea Party. One team member should use the Google 
search engine, one team member should use the Yahoo! search engine, and one team member should use the 
Bing search engine. Which search engine displayed the most results overall? Which search engine returned the 
most relevant, trustworthy results? What search text did everyone use to narrow the search results to the most 
relevant Web sites? Did any of the search engines recommend alternate search text that might help to find 
relevant information?
1. Page Not Displayed When you type the Web 
address of your favorite news Web site in the 
Address bar of the Web browser, you immediately 
see an error message stating that the Web page 
cannot be displayed. You did not have problems 
accessing the Internet yesterday. Before calling 
technical support, how will you attempt to 
troubleshoot the problem?
2. Slow Internet Connection You 
just installed VoIP telephone service 
in your house. Each time you are on 
the telephone, however, you notice 
that your Internet connection slows 
down signif icantly. What could be 
causing this?
3. No Wireless Connection When you return home 
to visit your parents and turn on your new notebook 
computer, it does not connect automatically to their 
wireless network. What is your next step?
4. Eliminating Pop-Ups Each time you attempt to 
visit a Web site, many pop-up windows open on 
your computer. In fact, you some times close up to 
10 windows that automatically appear. You used 
to browse the Web without this nuisance, but it is 
worsening by the day. What steps will you take to 
eliminate these pop-up windows?
5. Incorrect Home Page After starting your Web 
browser, you notice that your home page has 
changed. You display the Internet Options dialog 
box to change your home page back to its previous 
setting, close your browser, and then start the 
browser again. Surprisingly, your Web browser 
still navigates to a Web site other than the one you 
chose. What is your next step?
 6. Images Not Being Displayed When you 
navigate to a Web page, you notice that no images 
are displaying. You successfully have viewed Web 
pages with images in the past and are not sure why 
images suddenly are not displayed. What steps w ill 
you take to view the images?
 7. Incorrect Search Engine A class project requires 
that you conduct research on the Web. After typing 
the Web address for Google’s home page and pressing 
the enter key, your Web browser redirects you to a 
different search engine. What could be wrong?
 8. Unsolicited Friend Requests You recently 
signed up for an account on the MySpace social 
networking Web site. When you log in periodically, 
you find that people you do not know are requesting 
to be your friend. How should you respond?
 9. New Browser Windows While browsing the 
Web, each time you click a link, the link’s destination 
opens in a new browser window. You prefer to have 
each link open in a new tab so that your taskbar does 
not become cluttered. How will you resolve this?
In the real world, practical problems often can be solved in multiple ways. Provide one solution to each of the following 
problems using available resources, such as articles on the Web or in print, blogs, podcasts, videos, television, user guides, 
other individuals, and electronics and computer stores. You may need to use multiple resources to obtain an answer. 
Present your solutions in the form requested by your instructor (brief report, presentation, discussion, or other means).
Collaboration
Problem Solving @ Home
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   118 11/09/10   6:14:16 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 119
The Problem Solving @ Work exercises extend your knowledge of the 
chapter concepts by seeking solutions to practical computer problems 
that you may encounter at work. The Collaboration exercise should be 
completed with a team.
 To discuss the Problem Solving @ Work exercises with other students, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/forum and post your thoughts or questions.
Problem Solving @ Work
 1.  Plug-In Required Upon viewing a Web page, 
a message appears stating that you do not have 
the proper plug-in required to view the page’s 
multimedia content. What is your next step?
 2.  Blocked Instant Messenger Today, you started a 
new job. After setting up your new computer, you 
download your favorite IM (instant messaging) 
program successfully and without issue. After 
attempting to enter your user name and password, 
however, the program does not connect to the IM 
service. You are certain that your user name and 
password are correct, so what else might be causing 
this?
 3.  Access Denied During your lunch hour, you 
decide to search the Web for possible vacation 
destinations. After visiting several airline and hotel 
Web sites, you attempt to visit the Web site for a 
Caribbean resort. Much to your surprise, the Web 
browser informs you that the Web site has been 
blocked. Why might this happen?
 4. Sporadic E-Mail Message Delivery The e-mail 
program on your computer has been delivering 
new messages only every hour, on the hour. 
Historically, new e-mail messages would arrive 
and be displayed immediately upon being sent by 
the sender. Furthermore, your coworkers claim 
that they sometimes do not receive your e-mail 
messages until hours after they are sent. What 
might be the problem?
 5.  E-Mail Message Formatting A friend sent 
an e-mail message containing a photo to your 
e-mail account at work. Upon receiving the  e-mail 
message, the photo does not display. You also 
notice that e-mail messages never display any 
formatting, such as different fonts, font sizes, and 
font colors. What might be causing this?
 6.  Automatic Response When you return from 
vacation, a colleague informs you that when she 
sent e-mail messages to your e-mail address, she 
would not always receive your automatic response 
stating that you were out of the office. Why might 
your e-mail program not respond automatically to 
every e-mail message received?
 7. Suspicious Web Site Visits The director of your 
company’s Information Technology department 
has sent you an e-mail message 
stating that you have been 
spending an excessive amount 
of time viewing Web sites 
not related to your job. You 
periodically visit Web sites not 
related to work, but only on 
breaks, which the company 
allows. How does he know your 
Web browsing habits? How will 
you respond to this claim?
 8. Wrong Web Site When attempting to visit 
your friend’s Web site from your office computer, 
another Web site displays in its place. What might 
be wrong? What steps can you take so that you can 
visit his Web site?
In the real world, practical problems often can be solved in multiple ways. Provide one solution to each of the following 
problems using available resources, such as articles on the Web or in print, blogs, podcasts, videos, television, user guides, 
other individuals, and electronics and computer stores. You may need to use multiple resources to obtain an answer. 
Present your solutions in the form requested by your instructor (brief report, presentation, discussion, or other means). 
Collaboration
 9. Computers in Entertainment The drama department at a local high school is considering developing a 
movie and has asked for your help. The drama teacher would like to incorporate technology wherever possible, 
in hopes that it would decrease the costs of the movie’s production. Form a team of three people to help determine 
what technology can be used to assist in the movie’s production.  One team member should research the type 
of technology that can be used during the filming process. Another team member should research the types of 
hardware and software available for editing footage, and the third team member should research the hardware 
and software requirements for creating the media to distribute the finished product.
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   119 11/09/10   6:14:19 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
120 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
The Learn How To activities step you through fundamental technology skills when using a computer. 
The Learn How To exercises enable you to become more proficient with these skills.
 Premium Activity: To relate this Learn How To activity to your everyday life, see a visual demonstration 
of the activity, and then complete a short assessment, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/howto.
Learn How To
Learn How To 1: Attach a File to an E-Mail Message
In addition to searching the Web for information using 
search engines such as Google and Yahoo!, some Web sites 
are designed specifically to search for other information such 
as driving directions, addresses, and telephone numbers.
Search for Driving Directions
 1. Start your Web browser, type mapquest.com in 
the Address bar, press the enter key to display the 
MapQuest home page, and then click the Directions tab.
 2. Type the starting address (or intersection), city, state, and 
ZIP code (if you know it) in the appropriate text boxes in 
the Starting Location area of the Directions page.
 3. Type the ending address (or intersection), city, state, and 
ZIP code (if you know it) in the appropriate text boxes 
in the Ending Location area of the Directions page.
 4. Click the Get Directions button to display the driving 
directions.
Search for the Address and Telephone Number 
of a Business
 1. If necessary, start your Web browser. Type 
yellowpages.com in the Address bar, and then 
press the enter key to display the Yellow Pages Local 
Directory home page.
 2. Type the name of the business in the Find text box, 
and type the city, state, and ZIP (if you know it) in the 
Location text box.
 3. Click the FIND button to display the search results.
 4. Close your Web browser.
Exercises
 1. Start your e-mail program. Compose a new e-mail message to your instructor, and attach a file containing your current course schedule. 
Verify that your message has been received and then close your e-mail program.
 2. Locate three free e-mail Web applications. How many file attachments do these e-mail programs allow you to attach to one e-mail 
message? Is a maximum file size specified for an e-mail attachment? Can you pay to upgrade your e-mail account so that these 
restrictions are lifted? Submit these answers to your instructor.
Learn How To 2: Search the Web for Driving Directions, Addresses, 
and Telephone Numbers
When you send an e-mail message, it sometimes is 
 necessary to attach a file to supplement the body of the 
e-mail  message. Most e-mail programs allow you to attach 
a file to your e-mail messages easily, but many do not allow 
you to attach files exceeding a specified size limit (which 
varies by your e-mail  service). You can attach a file to an 
e-mail message by completing the following steps:
 1. Start your e-mail program and compose a new e-mail 
message to your recipient. Make sure that you have a 
descriptive subject and that you explain in the e-mail 
message that you are attaching a file.
 2. To attach a file, locate and click the Attach File button or 
link. If you are unable to locate this button, you may find 
an icon with a picture of a paperclip or a menu command 
to attach a file. Some e-mail programs also may have a 
text box in the new message window with an adjacent 
Browse button. In this case, click the Browse button.
 3. Locate and click the file you wish to attach and then 
click the Open (or Insert or Select) button (Figure 2-35).
 4. Verify that your e-mail message contains the attachment 
and then click the Send button.
When the recipient opens the e-mail message, he or she 
also will be able to open the attachment.
Figure 2-35
current location
Open button
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   120 11/09/10   6:14:22 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 121
Learn How To
Exercises
 1. If necessary, start Internet Explorer by clicking the Start button, and then click Internet Explorer on the Start menu. Type 
mapquest.com in the Address bar, and then press the ENTER key. Search for driving directions between your address and 
the address of a friend or family member. How many miles are between the two addresses? How long would it take you to drive 
from your address to the other address? Write a paragraph explaining whether you would or would not use MapQuest to retrieve 
driving directions. Submit this paragraph to your instructor.
  2. Use the Web to search for another Web site that provides driving directions. Use the Web site to search for directions between the 
same two locations from Exercise 1. Are the driving directions the same as the ones that MapQuest provided? If not, why might they 
be different? Which Web site did you use? Do you prefer this Web site to MapQuest? Why or why not? Write a paragraph with your 
answers and submit it to your instructor.
  3. Think about a company for which you would like to work. In your Web browser, display the Yellow Pages Web page (yellowpages.com) 
and then search for the address and telephone number of this company. If Yellow Pages does not display the desired information, 
what other Web sites might you be able to use to search for the address and telephone number for a company?
Learn How To 3: Publish Your Resume on the Web
Publishing your resume on the Web is a great way to distribute 
your resume to multiple people. To publish your resume on the 
Web, complete the following steps:
 1. Using Microsoft Word, create a new resume or open an 
existing resume that you wish to publish on the Web. 
When you have finished creating the resume, click the 
Office Button and then click Save As on the menu.
 2. Click the Desktop button in the Save As dialog box, type 
resume in the File name text box, click Web page in the 
‘Save as type’ list, and then click the Save button.
 3. Quit Microsoft Word.
 4. Start your Web browser and then type 50Webs.com in 
the Address bar. When the Web page is displayed, click 
one of the SIGN UP buttons (Figure 2-36).
 5. Select the free Web hosting plan, click the ‘Use a 
subdomain’ option button, and then click the NEXT 
button.
 6. Type the required information to sign up for the free plan. 
Make note of the subdomain you choose for your Web site. 
For example, if you type resume as your subdomain, your 
Web site address will be http://resume.50webs.com. 
 7. Click the check box to agree to the Terms and 
Conditions, and then click the Signup button. 50Webs 
will send your user name and password to the e-mail 
address you specified while signing up.
 8. Click the Start button and then click Computer on 
the Start menu. In the Address bar, type ftp://
subdomain.50webs.com (where subdomain should be 
replaced with the name of the subdomain you chose in 
Step 6). Type your user name and password in the Log 
On As dialog box, and then click the Log On button.
 9. Double-click your Web site folder, and then drag your 
resume file from the desktop to the window containing 
your Web site files. If a resume_files folder exists on your 
desktop, you also should drag that folder to the window 
containing your Web site files.
 10. In your Web browser, type http://
subdomain.50webs.com/resume.htm 
(subdomain should be replaced with your chosen 
subdomain from Step 6).
Exercise
 1. Use Microsoft Word to create a Web page that you would like others to see when they visit your new Web site. Include your name, 
e-mail address, and any other information that you would not object to making public. Save the file as a Web page using the file name, 
index.htm. Upload the file to the 50Webs.com Web server and then send the Web page address to your instructor.
SIGN UP 
button
Figure 2-36
50Webs home page
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   121 11/09/10   6:14:24 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
122 Chapter 2 The Internet and World Wide Web
Web Research The Web Research exercises broaden your understanding of the chapter concepts by 
presenting questions that require you to search the Web for answers.
 To discuss the Web Research exercises with other students, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
forum and post your thoughts or questions.
1  Search Sleuth 
Use one of the search engines listed in Figure 2-10 
in Chapter 2 on page 85 or your own favorite search 
engine to find the answers to the following ques-
tions. Copy and paste the Web address from the 
Web page where you found the answer. Some ques-
tions may have more than one answer. If required, 
submit your answers to your instructor. (1) What 
were the title, date of publication, and purpose of the 
Internet Engineering Task Force’s RFC 1 document? 
(2) What is the mission of the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C)? (3) What topic does the film 
Adina’s Deck address? (4) What are the current figures 
on the Reporters Without Borders’ Press Freedom 
Barometer? (5) What was eBay’s original name, and 
what was the first item offered for auction? (6) Why 
did ConnectU sue Facebook in 2008 and 2004? 
(7) What is the cost to use Google’s 411 service?
2  Green Computing 
EcoSearch is a search engine dedicated to  supporting 
the Earth’s natural resources. Visit this Web site 
(ecosearch.org), use your word processing program to 
answer the following questions, and then, if required, 
submit your answers to your instructor. (1) From 
what company do the search results come? (2) Click 
the Learn More link on the page. What charities does 
EcoSearch support? (3) How can you get involved to 
help EcoSearch? (4) Click the EcoSearch Home link 
at the bottom of the page to return to the EcoSearch 
home page. In the text box, type ecosearch 
donate profits and then click the Search  button. 
Click several of the resulting links and review the 
information. Write 
a 50-word sum-
mary of the infor-
mation, including 
what percent of 
EcoSearch pro-
ceeds is donated to charities and how much money 
EcoSearch expects to donate each year.
3  Social Networking 
MySpace is considered one of the pioneering Web 
sites that helped popularize the online social network-
ing phenomenon. Calling itself “a place for friends,” 
it allows the millions of registered members to create 
profiles for free and then invite friends to join their 
networks. The growth of this Web site has helped it 
emerge as one of the more popular search engines. 
Visit the MySpace site (myspace.com), type the name 
of your favorite musical artist or group in the search 
text box, and then click the Search button. How many 
search results were found? Visit some of these profiles. 
Which music videos, playlists, and ringtones are fea-
tured? How do you create and edit your own playlists 
and add a song to your profile? Then click the Safety 
Tips link at the bottom of the page and read the 
guidelines for posting information and reporting inap-
propriate content. Summarize the music profiles you 
viewed and the guidelines. If required, submit your 
summary to your instructor.
4  Blogs 
Many of the best blogs in the blogosphere have 
received awards for their content and design. For 
example, loyal blogging fans nominate and vote for 
their favorite blogs by visiting the Blogger’s Choice 
Awards Web site (bloggerschoiceawards.com). Visit 
this Web site, click the Best Blog Design, Best Blog 
About Blogging, and Best Education Blog links, and 
view some of the blogs receiving the largest number 
of votes. Then visit other award sites, including the 
Interactive Media Awards (interactivemediaawards
.com), Bloggies (bloggies.com), and the Best of Blogs 
(thebestofblogs.com). Which blogs, if any, received 
multiple awards on the different Web sites? Who casts 
the votes? What criteria are used to judge these blogs?
5  Ethics in Action 
Some Internet access providers have admitted they 
monitored their users’ Web surfing activities without 
giving notice of this eavesdropping practice. Embarq 
and Charter Communications secretly tested adver-
tising technology to gather data about specific Web 
searches and then display advertisements relating to 
these searches. Privacy experts claim these Internet 
access providers’ practices violate federal privacy 
laws, including the wiretapping statute. Locate news 
articles discussing the Internet access providers’ Web 
eavesdropping. Then locate Web sites that oppose 
this practice. Summarize the views of the advertisers 
and the privacy proponents. If required, submit your 
summary to your instructor. 
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   122 11/09/10   6:14:28 PM
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 The Internet and World Wide Web Chapter 2 123
Critical Thinking The Critical Thinking exercises challenge your assessment and decision-making skills by 
 presenting real-world situations associated with the chapter concepts. The Collaboration 
 exercise should be completed with a team. 
 To discuss the Critical Thinking exercises with other students, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch2/
forum and post your thoughts or questions.
Collaboration
To evaluate the situations below, use personal experiences and available resources such as articles on the Web or in print, 
blogs, podcasts, videos, television, user guides, other individuals, and electronics and computer stores. You may need to use 
multiple resources to form conclusions and make recommendations. 
1. Class Discussion — Browser Comparison   
Although Internet Explorer may be the most widely 
used Web browser, it is not the only Web browser 
in use. Evaluate and compare reviews of other Web 
browsers such as Google Chrome, Safari, or Firefox 
with Internet Explorer. Discuss the major differences 
between the browsers you researched and Internet 
Explorer. Examples of differences might include the 
number and types of features, how they display Web 
pages, and the speed at which they perform. Include in 
your  discussion which browser you would recommend 
and the reasons for your recommendation.
2. Class Presentation — Brick-and-Click 
Businesses Many retailers, such as Best Buy, 
Barnes and Noble, and Toys R Us, are brick-and-
click businesses. That is, they allow  customers to 
conduct complete transactions at a physical location 
as well as online at a Web site. Choose a local brick-
and-click business in which you have shopped at the 
physical location and then visit the Web site of the 
same business. Compare the type, availability, and 
cost (include tax and shipping) of products or services 
available. Analyze the advantages and disadvantages of 
dealing with the physical location versus the Web site 
of a brick-and-click business and then present your 
recommendation of whether you would rather shop at 
the physical location or at the Web site. Note the factors 
that influenced your  decision. Next, locate a company 
that only conducts business online, but sells the same 
products as the brick-and-click business. How do the 
prices compare? Would you prefer to shop using this 
Web site instead?
3. Research — Acceptable Use Policy Most 
schools and businesses provide free Internet access 
to students and employees while they are at school 
or at work. While the school’s or business’s intention 
is for the Internet to be used for academic or work-
related purposes, employees 
and students often find it easy 
to become involved with other 
activities on the Internet not 
related to their job or academics, 
which can degrade Internet access 
for others, or lead to poor job 
performance. For these reasons, 
many schools and businesses 
create an Acceptable Use Policy 
that outlines how students and employees should use 
the Internet. It also may outline consequences for 
unauthorized Internet use. Locate two Acceptable 
Use Policies that are published online. Compare 
these two policies, find two additional Acceptable Use 
Policies online, and then create a policy you believe 
would be fair to employees of a small business. Be 
sure to include guidelines for Internet use during 
breaks, use of IM programs, and the use of Web sites 
that are not related to their job.
4. Web Site Evaluation You are vice president of operations for a major luxury hotel chain. You and three teammates 
want to start a new chain of discount hotels called Sleepy Hollow. You have made a plan that includes opening hotels 
initially in Seattle, Kansas City, Nashville, and Dallas. You plan to offer comfortable rooms, wireless Internet access,  
a business center, and a hot breakfast buffet. Besides offering reservations over the telephone, you want to develop a 
Web site that will allow customers to negotiate a nightly rate as their check-in time approaches. With your teammates, 
evaluate existing major hotel Web sites by listing the advantages and disadvantages of each. Assign each member the task 
of evaluating two of the following hotel chains: Marriot, Hilton, Holiday Inn, Ramada, Super 8, Motel 6, Days Inn, and 
Radisson. Team members should print the home page of the hotel chain to which they are assigned and evaluate their 
respective hotels’ Web sites, paying particular attention to the following areas: (1) design of the Web site, (2) ease of use, 
(3) reservations, (4) awards programs, (5) special offers, (6) online Help, (7) information about the hotel, and (8) contact 
information for the hotel. Prepare a report and/or presentation summarizing your evaluations and ranking the sites in 
terms of their effectiveness. Be sure to include brief explanations supporting your rankings.
1439079420_Ch02EOC_FINAL.indd   123 11/09/10   6:14:33 PM

