Semantic Web (2014) 1–27 1
IOS Press
Semantic Technologies for Historical
Research: A Survey
Editor(s): Aldo Gangemi, LIPN Université Paris13-CNRS-Sorbonne Cité, France and ISTC-CNR Roma, Italy
Solicited review(s): Monica Wachowicz, University of New Brunswick, Canada; Jack Owens, Idaho State University, USA; Aldo Gangemi,
LIPN Université Paris13-CNRS-Sorbonne Cité, France and ISTC-CNR Roma, Italy
Albert Meroño-Peñuela a,b, Ashkan Ashkpour c, Marieke van Erp d, Kees Mandemakers c,
Leen Breure e, Andrea Scharnhorst b, Stefan Schlobach a, and Frank van Harmelen a
a Department of Computer Science, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081HV Amsterdam, NL
E-mail: {albert.merono, k.s.schlobach, frank.van.harmelen}@vu.nl
b Data Archiving and Networked Services, Anna van Saksenlaan 10, 2593HT Den Haag, NL
E-mail: {albert.merono, andrea.scharnhorst}@dans.knaw.nl
c International Institute of Social History, Cruquiusweg 31, 1019AT Amsterdam, NL
E-mail: {ashkan.ashkpour, kma}@iisg.nl
d Faculty of Arts, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081HV Amsterdam, NL
E-mail: marieke.van.erp@vu.nl
e Universiteit Utrecht, Princetonplein 5, De Uithof, 3584 CC Utrecht, NL
E-mail: l.breure@uu.nl
Abstract. During the nineties of the last century, historians and computer scientists created together a research agenda around
the life cycle of historical information. It comprised the tasks of creation, design, enrichment, editing, retrieval, analysis and
presentation of historical information with help of information technology. They also identified a number of problems and
challenges in this field, some of them closely related to semantics and meaning. In this survey paper we study the joint work of
historians and computer scientists in the use of Semantic Web methods and technologies in historical research. We analyse to
what extent these contributions help in solving the open problems in the agenda of historians, and we describe open challenges
and possible lines of research pushing further a still young, but promising, historical Semantic Web.
Keywords: Semantic Web, Historical research, Digital Humanities
1. Introduction
Historians have a long tradition in using comput-
ers for their research [16]. The field of historical re-
search is currently undergoing major changes in its
methodology, largely due to the advent and availability
of high-quality digital data sources. More recently, the
Web has shaken the paradigm of research data publi-
cation, particularly since the inception of the Seman-
tic Web [13] and the Linked Data principles [43]. This
paper looks forward on how Semantic Web technol-
ogy has been applied to historical data, and how these
technologies can facilitate, boost and improve research
by historians. This survey revisits the open problems
in historical data and historical research, and analyses
current contributions, namely papers, projects, online
resources and tools, that apply semantic technologies
to solve such problems. We study how successful these
solutions have been and propose some challenges for
the future.
Historical research is an interesting domain for the
Semantic Web. Historical data are extremely context
dependent, and always open to a variety of possible in-
terpretations. Availability on the Web of historical re-
1570-0844/14/$27.50 c© 2014 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved
2 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
search data, which concerns the study and understand-
ing of our past, is growing. The Semantic Web is an
evolution of the existing Web (based on the paradigm
of the document) into a Semantic Web (based on the
paradigm of structured data and meaning). It is not a
separate Web but an extension of the current one, in
which information is given well-defined meaning, bet-
ter enabling computers and people to work in coopera-
tion. This survey studies the crossroads of the Seman-
tic Web and history as research domains.
We consider surveying the state of the art in Seman-
tic Web and history a fundamental task for both fields.
First, it is necessary as a knowledge organisation task,
in order to articulate research and discern contribu-
tions. Second, it fosters development of semantic tech-
nology and history, both individually and as a unique
field, and helps on building research agendas. Other at-
tempts on gathering research efforts on Semantic Web
and history exist, but most of them study specific his-
tory subfields [75,97,131] or analyse concrete task-
oriented tools [37,76] and methodologies [43,50,51].
Moreover, none of them consist in surveys or litera-
ture reviews. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first survey reviewing contributions on history and the
Semantic Web as generic fields of research.
The elaboration of the study in this paper is not free
of obstacles. The first of them is the large amount of
research contributions to survey, which had to be fil-
tered to fit strictly the Semantic Web goals and the his-
torical research goals in order to be feasible. By his-
torical research we mean strictly research performed
by historians, and talk about history as a research do-
main. Thus, we exclude other fields of the humanities
in which historical research is also performed, such as
art history or history of literature. Nevertheless, in the
end the number of contributions amount to more than
a hundred. Secondly, and even though the corpus of
available literature is large, we also encountered dif-
ficulties on accessing some of the sources. To solve
this, we combined the contributions with the knowl-
edge of domain experts, conducting eight interviews
with pioneers in this area. Third, structuring and artic-
ulating all this work is an arduous task that requires
a lot of schemas, tables and discussions. Finally, the
clash of the vocabularies used by two different re-
search communities, usually pointing at similar issues,
is problematic. To bridge different jargon we devote
some space to cover existing classifications of histori-
cal data, especially discussing terms like structure, and
we map historical data problems in terms of Semantic
Web solutions.
The paper delivers four contributions. First, it de-
scribes a classification of historical data depending on
several factors, merging existing distinctions by his-
torians with structural approaches from computer sci-
ence. Second, it articulates the research conducted in
the emerging field of historical Semantic Web in terms
of several tasks, and depicts the current landscape on
advances in representing historical data with semantic
technology. Third, we map the open problems of his-
torical data with the solutions provided by the surveyed
research. Finally, we show some open challenges for
the future, considering first the not (or only partially)
solved problems, and secondly Semantic Web facilities
still to be explored in historical research.
While we concentrate on historical research, simi-
lar solutions emerge also in other humanities fields at
the turn to e-humanities or Digital Humanities [15,95].
As historical research overlaps with literary studies,
ancient language studies, archaeology, art history and
other humanities fields, these areas of encounter are
also predestined candidates for the travel of generic
methods developed from a semantic technology per-
spective for historical research to other humanities
fields [64].
The survey is organized as follows. In Section 2 we
introduce some background on historical research and
the Semantic Web. In Section 3 we study the ecosys-
tem of historical data. We describe the life cycle of
historical information, propose a classification for his-
torical sources, and show open problems of historical
data. In Section 4 we articulate contributions that apply
semantic technologies to historical research. In Sec-
tion 5 we answer the question on how the contribu-
tions presented in Section 4 solve the open problems
we describe in Section 3. In Section 6 we show the
challenges that are still left to solve. Finally, in Section
7 we discuss our findings and establish some conclu-
sions.
2. Background
2.1. Historical research
The field of historical research concerns the study
and the understanding of the past. The field is currently
undergoing major changes in its methodology, largely
due to the advent of computers and the Web [16].
Computer science has inspired historians from the
start. History and computing or Humanities computing
were labels used before the inception of the Web [63].
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 3
Many pioneers in computer aided historical analysis
have a background both in history and in informatics,
and reflected early on about the usefulness of compu-
tational and digital techniques for historical research
[16]. Ever since the advent of computing, historians
have been using it in their research or teachings in one
way or the other. The first revolution in the 1960s al-
lowed researchers to harness the potential of compu-
tational techniques in order to analyze more data than
had ever been possible before, enabling verification
and comparisons of their research data but also giv-
ing more precision to their findings [3]. However this
was a marginal group within the historical research: in
general, the usage of computers by humanists could be
described as occasional [34]. The emphasis was more
on providing historians with the tools to do what they
have always done, but now in a more effective and ef-
ficient way. Concretely,
– databases and document management systems fa-
cilitated the transition from historical documents
to historical knowledge through text analysis;
– statistical methods were used predominantly for
testing hypotheses, although with time were more
valued as a descriptive or exploratory tool than as
an inductive method;
– image management aided historians to digitize,
enrich, retrieve images and visualize data [16].
Although computing tools are currently embedded
in the daily life of most researchers, the use of these
tools did not revolutionized all sciences equally. Ac-
cordingly, history failed to acknowledge many of the
tools computing had come up with [16]. Instead of
improving the quality of the work of historians and
assisting them in their processes, software developed
for historians often requires attending several summer
schools [17]. Currently there are still many challenges
and information problems in historical research. These
difficulties mainly range from textual, linkage, struc-
turing, interpretation, to visualization problems [16].
Despite these challenges, computing in history and
in the broader sense the humanities, also brought
some significant contributions in certain fields like lin-
guistics (corpus annotations, text mining, historical
thesauri etc..), archaeology (impossible without ge-
ographic information systems (GIS) nowadays), and
other fields using sources that have been digitized
for historical (comparative) research and converted to
databases [16]. The use of electronic tools and me-
dia is incredibly valuable and important for opening
up various sources for research which would other-
wise remain unused. Open access to research data has
always been an issue, especially in the humanities.
However, over the past years various efforts have been
made in opening up these black boxes and making
them available for researchers. These different sources
contain rich information from various fields, which are
often digital in nature in the form of databases, text
corpora or images. These sources, in practice isolated
databases, often contain a lot of semantics, but their
data models were asynchronously designed, making
them difficult to compare. So, while more and more
sources are being digitized, more attention has to be
given to the development of computational methods to
process and analyze all these different types of infor-
mation [41].
A key issue for historians and other humanities re-
searchers when dealing with historical data for com-
parative research concerns the lack of consistency and
comparability across time and space, due to changing
meanings, various interpretations of the same histor-
ical situations or processes, changing classifications,
etc.
Though not all research dreams materialized in the
way initially envisioned [56], the inception of the Web
allowed historians to aim for world-wide, large scale
collaborations, especially in the area of economic and
social history. This kind of web based cooperation al-
lows to collect, distribute, annotate and analyze histor-
ical information all around the globe [29].
Changes in historical research are closely connected
to the emergence of new scientific methods, and this
co-evolution holds for decades and centuries. Statis-
tics has influenced many fields including history, and
paved the ground for quantitative studies [57]. How-
ever, these kind of historical studies became more and
more the domain of sociologists, economists and de-
mographers than scientists educated as historians [91].
Late important changes are consequences of recent
technological trends connected to the emergence of the
Web [71] and the inception of Semantic Web technolo-
gies [5].
2.2. The Semantic Web
The advent of the Semantic Web poses new per-
spectives, challenges and research opportunities for
historical research. Envisioned in 2001 by Berners-
Lee, Hendler and Lassila [13], the Semantic Web was
conceived as an evolution of the existing Web (based
on the paradigm of the document) into a Semantic
Web (based on the paradigm of structured data and
4 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
meaning). By that time, most of the contents of the
Web were designed for humans to read, but not for
computer programs to process meaningfully. Although
computer programs could parse the source code of
Web pages to extract layout information and text, com-
puters had no mechanism to process the semantics. In
other words, the Semantic Web is not a separate Web
but an extension of the current one, in which infor-
mation is given well-defined meaning, better enabling
computers and people to work in cooperation [13].
More practically, the Semantic Web can be defined
as the collaborative movement and the set of standards
that pursue the realization of this vision. The World
Wide Web Consortium [14] (W3C) is the leading inter-
national standards body, and the Resource Description
Framework [135] (RDF) is the basic layer in which the
Semantic Web is built on. RDF is a set of W3C specifi-
cations designed as a metadata data model. It is used as
a conceptual description method: entities of the world
are represented with nodes (e.g. Dante Alighieri or
The Divine Comedy), while the relationships between
these nodes are represented through edges that connect
them (e.g. Dante Alighieri wrote The Divine Comedy).
These statements about nodes and edges are expressed
as triples. A triple consists of a subject, a predicate,
and an object, and describes a fact in a very similar way
as natural language sentences do (e.g. subject: Dante
Alighieri; predicate: wrote; object: The Divine Com-
edy). Subjects and predicates must be URIs (Uniform
Resource Identifiers, the strings of characters used to
identify and name a web resource like a web page),
while objects can be either URIs or literals (like inte-
ger numbers or strings) [43]. RDF can be considered
a knowledge representation paradigm where facts and
the vocabularies used to describe them have the form
of a graph. This setting makes RDF very suitable for
data publishing and querying on the Web, especially
when (a) the dataset does not follow a static schema;
and (b) there is an interest of linking the dataset to
other datasets.
Efforts on standardization have produced ontologies
and vocabularies to describe multiple domains. An on-
tology is an explicit specification of a conceptualiza-
tion [40] and contains the classes, properties and indi-
viduals that characterize a given domain, such as his-
tory. In the Semantic Web, the design of ontologies is
done using the Web Ontology Language [132] (OWL).
OWL consists of several language variants built upon
different modalities of Description Logics [9] (DL), a
family of formal knowledge representation languages.
Such languages allow reasoning, that is, to extract or
deduce consequences and new knowledge from the
original.
A large number of RDF datasets have been pub-
lished and interlinked on the Web, using these on-
tologies and vocabularies and following the Linked
Data principles [12]. In the middle of the document-
Web and the data-Web, formats and vocabularies for
rich structured document markup (such as RDFa [134]
or schema.org [94]) are enabling software agents to
crawl semantics from web pages, bridging the gap be-
tween the Web for humans and the Web for machines.
These efforts have evolved the Web into a global data
space [43] where data can be queried e.g. using the
SPARQL query language (SPARQL Protocol and RDF
Query Language) [136]. Although the transition from
the document-Web to the database-Web exists in the
form of these standards and technologies, the simple
idea of the Semantic Web remains largely unrealized
[98].
3. Historical data
Since the introduction of computers in the field, his-
torical research has produced high-quality digital re-
sources [16]. Historical datasets encompass texts, im-
ages, statistical tables and objects that contain infor-
mation about events, people and processes throughout
history. Converted or born-digital, historical datasets
are now analyzed at big scale and published on the
Web. Their temporal perspective makes them valuable
resources and interesting objects of study.
In this section we describe the ecosystem where his-
torical information lives. First we introduce the life cy-
cle of historical information, which is the framework
we use to study how historical data is created, en-
riched, edited, retrieved, analysed, and presented. Then
we propose a classification of historical data depend-
ing on several factors. Finally, we revisit the traditional
open problems of historical data. Some of these prob-
lems have found solutions in current Semantic Web de-
velopments we present in Section 4.
3.1. The life cycle
The main object of study in historical research is
historical information, and the multiple ways to create,
design, enrich, edit, retrieve, analyse and present his-
torical information with help of information technol-
ogy. It is important to distinguish historical informa-
tion from raw data in historical sources. These data are
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 5
selected, edited, described, reorganized and published
in some form, before they become part of the histo-
rian’s body of scientific knowledge. We use the life cy-
cle of historical information proposed by Boonstra et
al. [16] to study the workflow of historical information
in historical research.
Historical objects go through distinct phases in his-
torical research. In each phase, these objects are trans-
formed in order to produce an outcome meeting spe-
cific historical requirements. The phases can be laid
out as the workflow of a historical information life cy-
cle (see Figure 1). The phases, although sequentially
presented, do not always have to be passed through in
rigorous order; some can be skipped if necessary. The
phases are also quite comparable with the practice in
other fields of science.
Fig. 1. The life cycle of historical information (Boonstra et al. [16]).
The phases in the life cycle are: (1) creation; (2) enrichment; (3)
editing; (4) retrieval; (5) analysis; and (6) presentation.
The life cycle of historical information consists of
six phases:
1. Creation. The first stage of the life cycle is the
creation stage. The main aspect of this stage con-
sists of the physical creation of digital data, in-
cluding the design of the information structure
and the research project. Examples of activities
in this phase would be the data entry plan, digiti-
sation of documents (through e.g. OCR), or con-
sidering the appropriate database software.
2. Enrichment. The main goal of this phase is to
enrich the data created in the previous step with
metadata, describing the historical information
in more detail, preferably using standards such
as Dublin Core [28], and intelligible to retrieval
software. This phase also comprises the linkage
of individual data that belongs together in the his-
torical reality, because these data belong to the
same person, place or event.
3. Editing. Editing includes the actual encoding of
textual information, like inserting mark-up tags
or entering data in the fields of database records,
with the intention of changing or adding histori-
cal data of convenience. All data transformations
through algorithmic processes prior to analysis
also belong to this phase. Editing also extends to
annotating original data with background infor-
mation, bibliographical references and links to
related passages.
4. Retrieval. In this phase information is retrieved,
that is, selected, looked up, and used. The re-
trieval stage mainly involves selection mech-
anism look-ups such as SQL-queries for tra-
ditional databases or Xpath [137] and Xquery
[138] for XML-encoded texts.
5. Analysis. Analyzing information means quite
different things in historical research. It varies
from qualitative comparison and assessment of
query results, to advanced statistical analysis of
data sets.
6. Presentation. Historical information is to be
communicated in different circumstances through
multiple forms of presentation. It may take very
different shapes, varying from electronic text
editions, online databases, virtual exhibitions to
small-scale visualizations. It can happen fre-
quently in other phases as well.
In the middle of the historical information life cycle,
three aspects are identified which are central to history
and computing, but also in the humanities in general:
– Durability ensures the long term deployment of
the produced historical information.
– Usability refers to the ease of efficiency, effective-
ness and user satisfaction.
– Modeling denotes to more general modeling of
research processes and historical information sys-
tems.
3.2. A classification of historical data
The continuous usage of computing in different ar-
eas of historical research has produced digital histori-
6 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
cal data with different formats, perspectives and goals.
To be used in the Semantic Web, these historical data
have to be represented semantically, using the current
standards (see Section 2.2). In this section we propose
a classification of historical data in order to bridge the
gap between the data representation tradition in histor-
ical research, and the standard modelling paradigms of
the Semantic Web [5,43].
3.2.1. Primary and secondary sources
Historical sources can be characterized and divided
in many ways. A basic distinction used by historians is
between primary and secondary sources.
Primary sources are original materials created at the
time under study [11]. They present information in its
original form, neither interpreted, condensed nor eval-
uated by other writers, and describe original think-
ing and data [8]. Examples of primary sources are
scientific journal articles reporting experimental re-
search results, persons with direct knowledge of a sit-
uation, government documents, legal documents (e.g.
the Constitution of Canada), original manuscripts, di-
aries (e.g. the Diary of Anne Frank) and creative work.
Primary sources can be distinguished into administra-
tive sources and narrative sources, like biographies or
chronicles. Administrative sources contain records of
some administration (census, birth, marriage and death
rolls, administrative accounts of taxes and expenses,
resolutions minutes of administrative bodies, deeds,
contracts, etc.). Typically, historians want to extract
the facts in order to gather statistical data. Narrative
sources are full text documents containing a descrip-
tion of the past, made by an author being an eyewit-
ness: think of diaries, chronicles, newspaper articles,
diplomatic reports, political pamphlets, etc. Historians
may be interested in both, factual information and the
author’s vision and the bias.
Secondary sources are materials that have been writ-
ten by historians or their predecessors about the past
[127]. They describe, interpret, analyze and evaluate
the primary sources. Usually, secondary sources gather
modified, selected, or rearranged information of pri-
mary sources for a specific purpose or audience [8].
Examples of secondary sources are bibliographies, en-
cyclopedias, review articles and literature reviews, or
works of criticism and interpretation.
Since historical data have not been produced under
the controlled conditions of an experiment, historical
research always has something of the work of a detec-
tive, and certain details (read: annoying inconsisten-
cies) cannot be destroyed or manipulated. These de-
tails may contain relevant information. On the other
hand, to be able to extract statistical information and
come up with more general statements, some formal-
ization, relating information and harmonizing expres-
sions of what is later used as variables is needed. Har-
monization, the process of making data-sources uni-
formly accessible without altering its original form, is
closely related to issues of standardization and formal-
ization [65].
3.2.2. Intended further processing
Some historians [16] propose to structure historical
data depending on their required further machine pro-
cessing. They distinguish between textual data, quan-
titative data and visual data. Textual data comprises
the whole set of unstructured historical sources, such
as letters, memoranda or biographies, all in a form of
free text. Quantitative data can be seen as historical
sources aiming at a quantitative analysis, like church
registers, census tables and municipality micro-data.
Finally, visual data gathers all kinds of historical ev-
idence not encoded by text or numbers, such as pho-
tographs, video footage and sound records.
3.2.3. Source oriented vs. goal oriented
Researchers make the distinction between source
oriented and goal oriented historical data [16]. When
dealing with historical data it is important to decide
in an early stage whether the data should be mod-
eled according to a source or goal oriented approach.
The source oriented approach aims to postpone en-
forcing any standards or classifications, resemble the
underlying source data as close as possible (schema
free representation) and hence allow room for multi-
ple interpretations of the data. Another approach is the
goal or model oriented approach. Historical data is of-
ten plagued with inconsistencies, changing structures
and classifications, redundant or erroneous data and
so forth. The goal oriented perspective therefore advo-
cates the use of more sound data models to start with.
This means restructuring the data according to certain
views or goals which are mainly dependent on expert
knowledge. Accordingly, this perspective commits to a
certain data model in an early stage.
3.2.4. Level of structure
At the end of the creation phase (see Section 3.1)
one may expect to have a historical dataset suitable for
further processes. However, the nature of the steps to
be taken thereafter may strongly depend on the way
the resulting dataset is structured. Indeed, attaching
Semantic Web technologies to these historical sources
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 7
(e.g. to extract RDF triples from them, or enrich them
semantically) is strongly dependent on their level of
structure. We propose the historical data classification
shown in Figure 2. We distinguish three levels of in-
ner structure in historical datasets: structured, semi-
structured and unstructured. Each level of structure
can be divided into several types of structure.
Structured data. Structured data refers to sources
that have a clearly defined data model. A data model
is an abstract model that documents and organizes
data for communication, and is used as a plan for
developing applications. An example of a structured
dataset would be census material published in rows
and columns, or a database of historical events. Well
known generic examples of such a structure are sources
encoded as relational databases, XML files, spread-
sheet workbooks or RDF datasets. It is easy to see that
all these examples meet a certain abstract model for
the data they represent (relational schemas, DTD con-
straints, tabular formats and RDF triple statements).
Structured historical data are usually managed with re-
lational databases, graph/tree representations and tab-
ular representations. Relational databases are the most
well-known way of committing to some schema for
representing historical objects and their relationships.
Because their structure, relational databases are ideal
for goal or model-oriented representation of historical
data [16] with some concrete conception of reality in
mind.
Relational databases. Relational databases have
their own languages (SQL) and systems (MySQL, Mi-
crosoft SQL Server, PostgreSQL, Microsoft Access,
Oracle, etc.) to represent and store historical data.
They all follow the relational model [26]. Some issues,
especially when trying to integrate data from differ-
ent databases and modelled with different conceptual
schemas, appear often in historical datasets encoded
this way.
Graph/tree representations. Relying on graph the-
ory, graph databases offer mechanisms for storage
and retrieval of data with less constrained consistency
models than traditional relational databases. They pro-
vide variable performance and scalability, but high
flexibility and complexity support. AllegroGraph, IBM
DB2, OpenLink Virtuoso and OWLIM are typical ex-
amples. To exchange historical data in graph form,
RDF (see Section 2.2) is used. Graph/tree data is found
in historical samples that come in formats such as
XML (trees), RDF (graphs) or JSON (JavaScript Ob-
ject Notation). Although they are conceived for mod-
eling data in very disparate models (a tree, a graph and
nested dictionaries, respectively) and purposes (e.g.
JSON is mainly used for data interchange between web
applications and services), these formats also follow
some assumptions to put structure on historical data.
Tabular representations. Some historical datasets
are encoded in tabular form. Tables consist of an or-
dered set of rows and columns, the latter typically
identified with a name. The intersection of a row and
a column is a cell. Depending on the specific encod-
ing (Comma-separated values (CSV), Microsoft Excel
spreadsheets, etc.) tables can offer variable features.
Tables are used to store all kinds of historical data, es-
pecially meso, macro and microdata about individuals,
registries, or historical population censuses.
Semi-structured data. Semi-structured data appear
more often as an intermediate representation between
unstructured and structured historical data than as raw
historical data. Typical technologies applied here are
markup languages, such as XML, to denote special
characteristics of historical texts in specific regions of
the corpus. Annotated corpora are the most important
example of semi-structured data. They usually consist
of raw historical texts with annotations on well-defined
text regions, usually implemented with a markup lan-
guage, like XML.
Unstructured data. In case a data model such as
we described for structured data does not exist, we talk
about unstructured data. In unstructured data there is
scarce or no structure at all. The typical example is
unconstrained, raw corpora encoded in plain text files.
Unstructured sources are the most common represen-
tation of historical data, typically transcriptions of his-
torical texts. Objects with a high variety of historical
nature can be included in this category: letters, books,
memoranda, acts, etc.
The use of the terms structured and unstructured in
computer science to describe datasets is very different
from the use of those notions in history, where admin-
istrative sources are often labeled as structured and the
textual secondary sources as unstructured. Also nar-
rative sources have internal structures, which can be
made explicit. From the 19th century onwards histori-
ans have made scholarly source editions, which con-
tain structured and annotated information. Nowadays
the printed source editions are replaced and supple-
mented by databases and XML-based digital editions.
So, structured or unstructured are relative notions: ad-
ministrative sources usually have an obvious struc-
tured layout, while narrative sources have a latent, at
first sight hidden structure, which is made explicit as
soon as they appear in a scholarly source edition. So,
8 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
Fig. 2. Classification of historical data according to their level of structure. Dotted arrows indicate the direction of usual transformations in
workflows that identify historical entities (and their relations), from unstructured to structured representations.
both administrative and narrative sources can appear
in the form of structured or unstructured data in com-
puter science jargon.
3.2.5. Discussion
Although structure really matters for deciding what
specific computing technique or semantic model has to
be applied to the sources, being those sources adminis-
trative or narrative, deliberate or inadvertent, does not
really matter if their inner structure is clearly identi-
fied. Their belonging to one type of another may have
an influence at some point, but in general the procedure
to extract RDF triples from the sources strongly relies
on the type of source we have regarding their struc-
ture. The goal is a faithful representation of the source
in Semantic Web formats: a source-close representa-
tion allowing to model data as-is, meeting the same
requirements of faithfulness than critical source edi-
tions (which is the standard for historians). It is critical
for semantic representations to consider context and
source structure as critical editions do, because they
may be relevant for interpretation of the data. A dig-
itized, semantically-enabled historical source should
ideally preserve context and structure and support
goal-oriented extraction of data, in order to construct
historical facts in the framework of a certain research.
By means of dataset interlinking and appropriate de-
sign and usage of ontologies and vocabularies, context
and source structure should be able to be preserved
using semantic technologies. To this end, ontologies
can be contextualized to conciliate a party’s subjective
view of a domain [18].
3.3. Open problems
The classification proposed in Section 3.2.4 is not
strict and admits hybrid examples. For instance, anno-
tated digital text sources can be provided both as XML
files or stored in a relational database (e.g. for statisti-
cal analysis). Some authors classify sources that com-
bine primary and secondary sources like these as ter-
tiary sources [72].
Although many advances have been made in differ-
ent fields and computers are seen as valuable assets,
a high percentage of historians are unfamiliar with or
remain unconvinced that semantic technologies may
become a new methodological asset [3,103]. The rea-
son is that the weapon of choice of historians was and
remains mostly the database, particularly in relational
form [3]. This not only enabled historians to retain
some of the integrity of the original data sources, but
also paved way for rapid advances on issues such as
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 9
classifications and record linkage. Therefore, histori-
ans typically do research using their own datasets, re-
sulting in the creation of a vast amount of scattered
data and specific technological challenges. In this sec-
tion we revisit the traditional open problems of histor-
ical research derived from this tradition. In Section 5,
after presenting the state of the art in the application of
semantic technologies to historical research in Section
4, we point to the specific open problems described
here that are eventually solved with such technologies.
Historical data problems can be divided into four
main categories: information problems of historical
sources, information problems of relationship between
sources, information problems in historical analy-
sis, and information problems of the presentation of
sources [16].
3.3.1. Historical sources
The first set of open problems in historical research
happens in phase 1 of the historical data life cycle (see
Section 3.1). This is when the historical data are cre-
ated.
Manually encoded or OCR-scanned, the creation of
the dataset reveals the first barriers. Some characters,
words or entire phrases in the original material may be
lost or impossible to read or recognise by the human or
the computer. Moreover, different techniques may ex-
tract historical entities differently. An example would
be: what is the word that is written on this thirteenth-
century manuscript?
The next question usually is: what does it mean?
Background knowledge is provided by libraries in the
offline world. But the computer aiding tools also need
to have means to help the historian, using the Web as
channel and semantics as meaning.
Related to background knowledge is the provenance
of the data. Even if the source is clearly identified and
its meaning deciphered, the historian needs to know
more. To which issue does it relate? Why was it put
there? Why was the text written? Who was the author?
Who was supposed to read the manuscript? Why has it
survived?
Another main issue relates to the structuring prob-
lem of historical data [87]. How can historical ob-
jects be encoded in a database? Researchers have to
decide on what is an adequate data model for their
datasets. As historians often have no clear research
question when starting an investigation, it is neither
possible nor desirable to model the data according to
certain requirements in advance. Moreover, different
sources have been produced throughout different peri-
ods in history with different views and motives. His-
torical census data is a good example, having varying
structures and changing levels of detail which hinders
comparative social history research both in past and
present efforts [87].
The main discussion regarding this involves whether
to use a source or a goal oriented data model for his-
torical data (see Section 3.2.3). Researchers in favor of
the source oriented approach claim that a commitment
to a certain data model suitable for analysis should
be postponed to the final stages of a project, in order
to maintain flexibility and build on the data in a non
destructive manner. This is especially the case when
the database is supposed to be shared with other re-
searchers or used in the future [62].
3.3.2. Relationships between sources
As historical researchers deal with various isolated
sources, they face the problem of how to integrate
these dissimilar sources for their purposes. This typi-
cally happens in phase 2 (enrichment) of the life cy-
cle of historical information (see Section 3.1). An ex-
ample would be: is this Lars Erikson, from this regis-
ter, the same man as the Lars Eriksson from this other
register?
Quite often several sources are used in historical
research, which makes linking different sources an-
other key problem. Micro data of the same person
contained in different censuses, parish registers, mar-
riage or death certificates are a good example. Ob-
vious linkage problems are how to disambiguate be-
tween persons with the same name, how to man-
age changing names (e.g. in case of marriage of a
woman) and how to standardize spelling variations in
the names. In databases, several issues affect data com-
parability. Schema mismatch occurs when two differ-
ent databases cannot be compared because of semantic
differences in the concepts of their defining schemas.
For instance, two XML files conformant to different
DTD schemas may define and structure differently the
same historical entity. Additionally, value mismatch
occurs when the allowed values for columns or vari-
ables in two databases are different. It may also happen
across datasets despite being schema or vocabulary-
compatible. For instance, an attribute may encode the
variable social class with categories A,B,C, while
other dataset may do so with categories high, medium,
low.
Other problems relate to how to link historical data
with their spatial and temporal context. For example,
some historical facts may need to be linked with occu-
10 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
pational titles that evolve over time [45] or with coun-
tries with changing geographical boundaries (compare
for example the contemporary geographic position of
countries in Europe with the situation in 1930 and
in 1900; or the fact that the city of Rotterdam suf-
fered nine major changes in its composition between
1886 and 1941 [1]). As historical research often deals
with changes in time and space, historians require tools
which enable them to deal with these aspects. Accord-
ingly several techniques have been developed for his-
torical research, but the applicability of these has yet
to be determined [16].
3.3.3. Historical analysis
Historical analysis is a fundamental part of the life
cycle (see phase 5 in Section 3.1). It usually implies
data transformations that aid historians in guiding their
research. It also builds the bridge between their hy-
potheses and historical evidence.
The first issue in analysis is the massive treatment of
historical data processed in previous stages to satisfy
historical requirements, or to support a specific his-
torical interpretation. An example would be: from this
huge amount of digital records, is it possible to discern
patterns that add to our knowledge of history? Various
statistical techniques are borrowed from the social sci-
ences to this end, like multilevel regression, and other
techniques have been specifically developed for histor-
ical research, such as event history analysis. However,
addressing historical data analysis in a broad sense re-
mains essentially unsolved.
In historical research the meaning of data cannot ex-
ist without interpretations [16]. Due to drifting con-
cepts in history, different interpretations could exist
with regards to certain data [140]. However as inter-
pretation of data is a subjective matter, this information
should be added in a non destructive way, preserving
the original source data.
3.3.4. Presentation
Presentation is the final phase of the historical infor-
mation life cycle (see Section 3.1). Its goal is to use vi-
sualizations to aid the study and comprehension of his-
torical data. An example problem of such phase would
be: how do you put time-varying historical information
on a historical map?
Presentation of historical data must be adequate.
Different types of presentations are suitable at differ-
ent stages of a research project. Presentation may take
different shapes, varying from digitized documents,
poorly and well modelled databases, or visualizations
and representations on Geographic Information Sys-
tems (GIS). Currently there is a great need for tools
and methods to present changes over time and space.
4. Findings
In this section we review the current state of the art
in the application of semantic technologies to histori-
cal research, describing relevant contributions towards
a historical Semantic Web.
The contributions are classified in the categories of
scientific papers, research projects, online resources
(presentations, online articles), and tools, ontologies
and lexical resources (ontologies, demos, applications
or programming libraries). Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4 show
these contributions. Additionally, we map each contri-
bution to one or more specific tasks. These tasks are
shared areas of concern for both historical research
and the Semantic Web. We identify the following four
tasks: knowledge modelling, text processing and min-
ing, search and retrieval, and semantic interoperabil-
ity. We develop the work on each task in the follow-
ing sections. We group contributions that cover the full
spectrum of tasks under a final section in longitudinal
approaches.
4.1. Knowledge modelling
Under this category we study research that has been
conducted to model historical knowledge or histori-
cal facts using standard Semantic Web representations
(see Section 2.2). We group contributions to a seman-
tically enabled historical web by the following empha-
sis of research: historical ontologies, and linking his-
torical data.
4.1.1. Historical ontologies
Data models are necessary for giving structure to
any historical data, since they are the abstract mod-
els that document and organise data properly for com-
munication. Ontologies encode such models in the Se-
mantic Web [13] (see Section 2.2), and attention has
been given to the need of historical ontologies [51].
In historical research, ontologies are the providers of
metadata and background knowledge in phases 2 (en-
richment) and 3 (editing) of the historical information
life cycle (see Section 3.1). Semantic Wikis [88,101]
are a great resource for historians to collaboratively
build such ontologies.
We find a first category of such models in the form
of (typically XML-encoded) taxonomies for histori-
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 11
Paper title Knowledge
modelling
Text processing
& mining
Search &
Retrieval
Semantic
interoperability
Hacking History via Event Extraction [97] ◦ X X
Exploiting Semantic Web Technologies for Intelligent Ac-
cess to Historical Documents [50]
◦ X X
Historical Ontologies [51] X ◦
Virtual Knowledge in Family History. Visionary Tech-
nologies, Dreams and Research Agendas [56]
X
Past, present and future of historical information science
[16]
◦ ◦ ◦ X
Proposed category system for 1960-2000 Census occupa-
tions [68]
◦ X
The Comparability of Occupations and the Generation of
Income Scores [102]
◦ X
Challenges and Methods of International Census Harmo-
nization [31]
◦ X
Making Sense of Census Responses: coding complex vari-
ables in the 1920 PUMS [39]
◦ X
Semantic Networks and Historical Knowledge Manage-
ment: Introducing New Methods of Computer-based Re-
search [54]
X ◦
Queries in Context: Access to Digitized Historic Docu-
ments in a Collaboratory of the Humanities [126]
◦ X
Converting a Historical Architecture Encyclopedia into a
Semantic Knowledge Base [141]
◦ X X
Historical documents as monuments and as sources [27] ◦ X
Digital Hermeneutics: Agora and the Online Understand-
ing of Cultural Heritage [129]
◦ X X
Visualizing an Historical Semantic Web with Heml [89] X X
Exploring Historical RDF with Heml [90] X X
LODifier: Generating Linked Data from Unstructured
Text [7]
◦ X
CLIO - A Databank Oriented System for Historians [125] X ◦ X ◦
CensSys - A system for analyzing census-type data [73] ◦ ◦ X
A discursive analysis of itineraries in an historical and re-
gional corpus of travels: syntax, semantics, and pragmat-
ics in a unified type theoretical framework [69]
◦ X ◦
A Comparison of Knowledge Extraction Tools for the Se-
mantic Web [37]
X X
Table 1
Reviewed papers. The Xand ◦ signs indicate a strong and a medium
relationship, respectively, between the contributions (rows) and the
tasks (columns).
12 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
Project name Knowledge
modelling
Text processing
& mining
Search &
Retrieval
Semantic
interoperability
Agora [2] ◦ X X
BRIDGE [19] X X ◦
CHoral - access to oral history [24] X X ◦
Historical Timeline Mining and Extraction (HiTiME) [46] ◦ X X ◦
LINKing System for historical family reconstruction
(LINKS) [59]
X X
SCRipt Analysis Tools for the Cultural Heritage
(SCRATCH) [96]
◦ X X
FDR Pearl Harbor Project [85] X X X X
North Atlantic Population Project (NAPP) [70] ◦ ◦ X
Circulation of Knowledge and Learned Practices in the
17th-century Dutch Republic (CKCC) [25]
X ◦ ◦
Voyage of the Slave Ship Sally [93] ◦ X ◦
Multilingual Access to Large Spoken Archives (NSF-
ITR/MALACH) [61]
◦ ◦ X X
H-BOT [42] ◦ X X
Clergy of the Church of England Database (CCEd) [21] X X ◦
Armadillo: Historical Data Mining [6] X X X X
Historical Event Markup and Linking (HEML) [44] X X
SAILS [92] X X X
CLARIN-Verrijkt Koninkrijk [131] X X X X
Historical International Standard Classification of Occu-
pations (HISCO) [45]
X X
Historical Sample of the Netherlands (HSN) [48] ◦ X X
CEDAR [22] X ◦ X X
Linking History in Place [58] ◦ X X
Table 2
Reviewed projects. The Xand ◦ signs indicate a strong and a medium relationship, respectively, between the contributions (rows) and the tasks
(columns).
cal research. A taxonomy is a collection of controlled
vocabulary terms organized into a hierarchical struc-
ture, in general with less expressivity than an ontology.
The first important example of such knowledge orga-
nization is the CLIO system, a databank oriented sys-
tem for historians [125] appeared in 1980. CLIO in-
cluded a tag/content representation for historical data
that could be structured in complex hierarchies, sup-
porting the recoding of material with doubtful seman-
tics. CLIO remained as the system for organizing his-
torical knowledge until the inception of the Web.
More recently, the Semantic Web for Family His-
tory [82] exposes a set of genealogy markup languages
based on XML to semantically tag genealogical in-
formation on sources containing that kind of histori-
cal data. In the context of the Text Encoding Initia-
tive [119] (TEI) there is an important discussion about
building the bridge between XML (taxonomies) and
OWL (ontologies) in historical data. SIG: Ontologies
[78] contains a full log on contributions on how to
use ontologies with TEI formats; namely, how TEI-
XML encoded documents can refer to historical con-
cepts and properties that have been previously formal-
ized in an external OWL ontology.
The Historical Event Markup and Linking Project
[44,90] (HEML) was probably the first project with the
goal of creating a Semantic Web of history. Started in
2001, it explored the use of W3C markup technologies
to encode and visualize historical events on the Web.
Although in the beginning XML was the selected lan-
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 13
Resource name Knowledge
modelling
Text processing
& mining
Search &
Retrieval
Semantic
interoperability
Semantic Web approaches in Digital History: an Introduc-
tion [75]
X X
Fawcett: A Toolkit to Begin an Historical Semantic Web
[76]
X X X X
Spatial cyberinfrastructures, ontologies, and the humani-
ties [77]
X X X X
SIG Ontologies [78] X X
CultureSampo - Finnish Culture on the Semantic Web 2.0:
Thematic Perspectives for the End-user [79]
X X X X
Text Mining for Historical Documents: Topics and Papers
[80]
◦ X ◦
RDF vocabularies for historic placenames and relations
between them [81]
X X
The Semantic Web for Family History [82] X X X
Data portal for Social Sciences. Open data with SPARQL
endpoint [83]
X X X
Table 3
Online resources. The Xand ◦ signs indicate a strong and a medium relationship, respectively, between the contributions (rows) and the tasks
(columns).
guage to provide tagging and markup for describing
historical events, the project later experimented with
RDF to model and visualize them [89]. This transition
was also happening in the whole historical ontologies
community, as researchers better understood RDF and
its differences with XML.
The modelling and representation of events, often
defined as persons doing an activity in a certain place
and time, has received a lot of attention in the devel-
opment of historical ontologies, and most practical re-
sults show that the concept of the event is at the core
of historical knowledge modelling. Van Hage et al.
[130] design the Simple Event Model [110] (SEM), in-
tended to model events in the domains of history, cul-
tural heritage, multimedia and geography. Similarly,
the Event Ontology [33], inspired in the musical do-
main, models the representation of events as combina-
tions of persons, places, moments in time, and factors.
Finally, LODE: An ontology for Linking Open De-
scriptions of Events [60] is especially intended for the
publication of historical events as Linked Data. Inter-
estingly, these ontologies have a great overlap in their
conceptual modelling of events even coming from dif-
ferent domains. On the other hand, some studies point
out specific modelling needs for different historical do-
mains, stressing that historical ontologies should re-
flect how a particular time frame influences the defini-
tions of concepts [51].
Another big focus in historical ontologies is given
to geographical modelling. Owens et al. [84] describe
a geographically-integrated history, and stress the im-
portance of dynamics and semantics in Geographic In-
formation Systems (GIS). They set an agenda for his-
torical GIS systems that includes important seman-
tic modelling tasks involving ontologies and geogra-
phy for historical analysis. Moot et al. [69] depict
the interesting crossroad between text analysis, histor-
ical semantics and geography in a work that structures
geographical knowledge from a historical corpus of
itineraries. Vocabularies for historical place names are
under discussion [81]. Although not intended for his-
torical research, the GeoNames ontology [38] is the
reference for geographical modelling in the Semantic
Web.
Since entities like places, persons or events change
their over history and time, there is work raising the
importance of a change-aware modelling in ontolo-
gies [35,64,66]. In historical research and the Seman-
tic Web this is especially true for geographical names,
places and regions [49], but also for demographical,
social and economical indicators, such as occupations
[45].
4.1.2. Linking historical data
By understanding the use and advantages of seman-
tic technologies, practitioners and researchers of his-
14 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
Tool, ontology, lexical resource Knowledge
modelling
Text processing
& mining
Search &
Retrieval
Semantic
interoperability
NLP2RDF [105] ◦ X
SIMILE/Timeline [106] ◦ X
Gapminder [107] X X X
TokenX [108] ◦ X
TAPoR [109] X X
SEM event model [110] X ◦
OpenCYC [111] X X
XCES [112] X X
Dublin Core [28] X ◦
GATE [113] X
WordNet [114] ◦ X
Framenet [115] X X
SUMO [116] X ◦
MILO [117] X ◦
AskSam [118] X
TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) [119] X X
SGML [120] X X
TACT [121] X ◦
Wordcruncher [122] X
Atlas.ti [123] X ◦
NLTK [124] X
FRED [36] X X
WAHSP and BILAND [139] ◦ X
The Event Ontology [33] X ◦
LODE [60] X ◦
Semantic MediaWiki (SMW) [101] X X X
Europeana Data Model (EDM) [32] X ◦
Table 4
Tools, ontologies, and lexical resources. The Xand ◦ signs indicate a strong and a medium relationship, respectively, between the contributions
(rows) and the tasks (columns).
torical data can not only connect their own data sources
but moreover, also disseminate their data into the Se-
mantic Web and integrate it with other data sources
which were previously not possible or cumbersome.
The approaches reviewed in this section match the
historical data problem of the relationships between
sources (see Section 3.3.2). In most cases, the use of
semantic technologies solves it.
If one side of knowledge modelling stresses the im-
portance of ontologies and formalization of the seman-
tics of historical domains, the other side pursues the
usage of such ontologies to interlink related histori-
cal data on the Web. Some researchers in history have
centered their interest in how semantics can help relat-
ing and linking historical sources and entities: histor-
ical, semantic networks are a computer-based method
for working with historical data. Objects (e.g., peo-
ple, places, events) can be entered into a database and
connected to each other relationally. Both qualitative
and quantitative research could profit from such an ap-
proach [54]. Linking historical datasets appropriately
is an old and very well known problem in historical
research [16]. The landscape on current projects link-
ing historical data (typically extracted from unstruc-
tured sources) shows a tendency on publishing more
and more historical Linked Data in RDF.
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 15
There is a wide variety of project types looking for
that structure, though not doing so solely (or explic-
itly) in RDF. For instance, the Circulation of Knowl-
edge and Learned Practices in the 17th-century Dutch
Republic [25] (CKCC project) studies the epistolary
network for circulation of knowledge in Europe in the
17th century, extracting all entities and links from the
correspondence of scientific scholars of that time. The
LINKing System for historical family reconstruction
(LINKS) project [59] reconstructs the links between
individuals of historical families across several reg-
istries. The CCed [21] project follows a similar ap-
proach with clerical careers from the Church of Eng-
land Database. While these projects mine the histor-
ical sources for important historical personalities and
their relationships, other approaches, such the SAILS
[92] project, dive into more concrete historical events
and links various World War I naval registries together.
The common goal in these initiatives is to produce a
semantic network of historical data containing objects
like people, places and events connected to each other,
which clearly matches the intended purpose of histori-
cal ontologies (see Section 4.1.1), but also the general
mission of the Semantic Web [13] and Linked Data
[43].
Many other projects expose their domain specific
historical datasets using RDF. These datasets facilitate
their linkage to others using existing ontologies (see
Section 4.1.1), achieving shared goals with the old task
of historical record linkage. For instance, the Agora
project [2] aims at formally describing museum col-
lections and linking their objects with historical con-
text using the SEM [110] (Simple Event Model). His-
torical events are found elsewhere in historical data.
The FDR Pearl Harbor project links events, persons,
dates, and correspondence found on government let-
ters and memoranda on the surroundings of the Pearl
Harbor attack on 1941 between the US and Japanese
governments. All these entities are represented in RDF
to model a graph of historical knowledge about that
particular event. From a more socio-historical point of
view, the Verrijkt Koninkrijk [131] project links RDF
concepts found on a structured version of De Jong’s
studies on pillarization of the Dutch society after the
World War II. More focused on media, the Poli Media
project [86] mines the minutes of the general state de-
bates to link historical entities to the archives of his-
torical newspapers, radio bulletins and television pro-
grams. The goal is to create a unified historical search
environment, facilitating a cross-media analysis [55].
Some general purpose tools facilitate the creation of
historical Linked Data. The Fawcett toolkit [76] and
the Armadillo project [6] are good examples. The latter
exports RDF from any unstructured historical source,
producing an RDF graph of historical knowledge that
encodes the historical entities and their relationships
expressed in that source. Other tools like Open Refine
[74] or TabLinker [104] are tailored to produce such
Linked Data from structured sources like tables (see
Section 3.2).
4.2. Text processing and mining
In text processing and mining we revise work that
deals with processing unstructured text. Textual re-
sources play an important role in history research.
We especially survey work on automatically extract-
ing historical entities (such events or persons) via Nat-
ural Language Processing (NLP) techniques. The pur-
pose of NLP is to enable computers to derive meaning
from human, natural, or unstructured language input
(see Section 3.2).
Structuring historical information from textual re-
sources for further analysis is the bottom line of
many research projects. The interesting differences
come usually from the various source materials these
projects mine. The general public-aimed Agora project
[2] enriches museum collections with historical knowl-
edge in order to help users place museum objects
in their historical contexts. To this end, Agora em-
ploys information extraction techniques from statisti-
cal natural language processing to extract named en-
tities (actors, locations, times, event names) from tex-
tual resources such as Wikipedia and collection cat-
alogues which are used to populate SEM [110] (see
Section 4.1.1) instances. From the object descriptions,
also relevant historical entities are extracted which
can be linked to the events. To formalize this work-
flow, Segers et al. [97] present a prototype extraction
pipeline for extracting events and their properties from
text using off-the-shelf natural language processing
tools such as named entity recognition and pattern-
based approaches. The main problem they encounter
is that the notion of events is still ill-defined in NLP
research, and as such tools are not yet readily available.
Textual encoding of the media have also been
the source to extract historical knowledge in sev-
eral projects. The Bridge project [19] aims at bring-
ing more cohesion into Dutch television archives by
finding relevant links between the official archives
maintained at the Netherlands Institute for Sound and
16 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
Vision and other information sources such as pro-
gram guides and broadcasting organizations websites.
It is thus focused on improving access to television
archives for media professionals. In order to do so, rel-
evant entities are extracted from archives by using sta-
tistical NLP techniques. Furthermore, they will detect
interesting events in television archives by detecting
redundant stories, utilising the structure of the archive
to identify links between different entities [20]. The
Poli Media project [86] mines the text of minutes of
the general state debates to extract and link historical
entities from the archives of historical newspapers, ra-
dio bulletins and television programs.
The Historical Timeline Mining and Extraction
(HiTiME) project [46] is aimed at detecting and struc-
turing biographical events. To this end they analyze
biographies of persons from the Dutch union history
to create timelines that tell the life story of these per-
sons, and social networks of the persons they inter-
acted with. Van de Camp and Van den Bosch [128] de-
scribe an approach to build networks of historical per-
sons by mining biographies for person names and rela-
tionships between persons. They use standard named
entity recognition tools and utilise the inherent struc-
ture of biographies (the topic of the biography is a par-
ticular person, and any persons mentioned in this biog-
raphy should have something to do with this person)
to detect interpersonal relations.
Many ehumanities and ehistory projects are explor-
ing document summary techniques or document en-
richment techniques from NLP to aid search in their
archives. One of these techniques is topic modelling,
which can be used to add topic indicators to a docu-
ment, which may help cluster search results or create
more fine grained indexes of archive records. Wittek
and Ravenek [142] explore the state of the art in topic
modelling techniques to index 19,000 letters of corre-
spondences between 16th and 17th century Dutch sci-
entists.
Other high-level text analysis methods, such as
frequency-based corpus analysis to compare e.g. work
from different authors or investigation of other sty-
lometry characteristics, are also popular in the ehu-
manities domain [30]. These methods are not domain-
dependent and fit more easily into the ehumanities re-
searcher search-based toolbox.
The spectrum of tools to extract knowledge from
unstructured historical data is wide. Important contri-
butions are essentially domain-independent [7], thus
not particularly focused on historical text processing.
Gangemi [37] presents a recent and complete com-
parison of generic knowledge extraction tools for the
Semantic Web, which will aid historical researchers
working in the phases 2 (enrichment) and 3 (editing) of
the historical information life cycle (see Section 3.1).
4.3. Search and retrieval
In search and retrieval we include systems that ex-
ploit semantic formalisms as a new way of indexing,
querying and accessing historical data, instead of re-
lying on the traditional text-based or keyword-based
algorithms. This task matches the phase 4 (retrieval)
of the life cycle of historical information (see Section
3.1).
It is not a coincidence that a high number of con-
tributions that aim at extraction of structured entities
from historical data also point at some desired system
able to improve search and retrieval of such entities.
Indeed, by means of constructing a semantic graph
of historical knowledge, search and retrieval of that
knowledge, as well as indexing systems that give exact
pointers to the source in which particular historical en-
tities are mentioned, can be easily built and improved.
The Agora [2] (museum collections), BRIDGE [19]
(historical TV metadata), CHOoral [24] (historical au-
dio metadata), Historical Timeline Mining and Ex-
traction (HiTiME) [46] (biographical events), Verrijkt
Koninkrijk [131] (Dutch post-war social clusters con-
cepts) and FDR Pearl Harbor [85] (historical events
around Pearl Harbor attack on 1941) projects are all
good examples of this tendency. Once the knowledge
is successfully extracted from the historical sources
and formalized appropriately, entities structured this
way can be used for a graph-based search and retrieval,
for instance through SPARQL queries (see Section
2.2), although most systems use specific access meth-
ods [50]. Other projects, like the H-BOT [42] project,
use a natural language interface instead of a query sys-
tem for retrieval of such historical structured knowl-
edge.
Indexing of historical contents is another way of im-
proving search and retrieval of historical data. Index-
ing and historical data storage systems have a long tra-
dition in historical research [16]. CLIO [125] is a tra-
ditional example of such a system, nowadays indexing
is performed by XML annotation-oriented approaches,
such as described by Robertson [90]. These initiatives
should consider the emerging RDFa, microformats and
microdata technologies (see Section 2.2) to study the
ways they fit in the vast domain of historical text an-
notation systems.
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 17
4.4. Semantic interoperability
In this section we analyze to what extent contri-
butions consider the problem of data integration and
use the Semantic Web to deal with it. The specific
problems encountered are data model mismatching,
schema incompatibilities and disparate source for-
mats. Semantic interoperability has much to do with
data integration, namely, how to commonly query
and uniformly represent data that come from multiple
sources (i.e. fitting several, probably non-compatible
data models).
Semantic heterogeneity of historical sources is es-
pecially present on social history projects. The North
Atlantic population project [70] (publication of micro-
data of several Atlantic countries) has this problem of
data harmonization, in which heterogeneity of sources
requires an intense work on resolving data model in-
consistency between datasets.
The source material for the Historical Sample of the
Netherlands [48] (HSN) database consists mainly of
the certificates of birth, marriage and death, and of
the population registers. From those sources the life
courses of about 78.000 people born in the Netherlands
during the period 1812-1922 have been reconstructed.
Stored in a database and downloadable as files, this in-
formation forms a unique tool for research in Dutch
history and in the fields of sociology and demography.
As in the case of the HSN this type of sources is usu-
ally stored in archives, and, for the majority from a
more remote past, not yet machine readable and not
easy to analyse with NLP techniques. There is one
major pitfall in linking this kind of data: extracting
data about persons, events, institutions, locations is
one thing, but linking to their different instantiations
(for instance different name spellings, or persons with
the same name) and keeping good documentation is
the real challenge [62].
The CEDAR project [22], located in the crossroads
of the Semantic Web, statistical analysis and social his-
tory, exposes the Dutch historical census data in the
Semantic Web. Censuses are a great source of non-
biased socio-historical information, but they present
complex problems in both internal (i.e. between the
time series) and external (i.e. other datasets) interlink-
ing [67].
The work developed by Sieber et al. [100] provides
a deep analysis of how semantic heterogeneity can
be addressed exclusively with semantic technologies,
and describes how to achieve success in environments
with very disparate data models. In the history-related
domain of geographic information systems (GIS), al-
ready discussed in Section 4.1.1, Manso and Wachow-
icz [4] provide an extensive review on current issues in
interoperability.
4.4.1. Classification systems
Multiple publications in classification systems [31,
39,68,102] are especially aimed at solving interoper-
ability problems in historical data. Classification sys-
tems provide a standard mechanism to compare such
data, but their specific implementation and effective-
ness depends on the orientation towards source or
goals of the historical data (see Section 3.2.3) created
in phase 1 of the historical data life cycle (see Section
3.1).
When dealing with vast amounts of historical data,
classification systems are a necessity in order to or-
ganize and make sense of the data. The main goal of
a classification system is therefore to put things into
meaningful groups [10]. This entails an allocation of
classes which are created according to certain relations
or similarities. The main issue with historical classi-
fication systems is that they are not consistent over
time, making comparative historical studies problem-
atic. Historical census data is a typical example of this
problem [22,65]. Census data is the only historical data
on population characteristics which are not strongly
distorted and yields an extremely valuable source of
information for researchers [91].
However, major changes in the classification and
coding of the different censuses, have hindered com-
parative historical research in both past and present ef-
forts [87]. Researchers are forced to create their own
classifications systems in order to answer their re-
search question; however, this process often results in
disparate systems, which are not comparable, contain
a lot of expert knowledge, different interpretations of
the data and could not be easily (re)used by other re-
searchers. The fact that many of the modelling tech-
niques are destructive in nature (we cannot go back to
the source) makes it even more cumbersome to com-
prehend these sources. In order to deal with the chang-
ing classifications and vast differences at both national
and international level, we need to connect the gaps
between the datasets and conform to certain standard
classification systems.
Currently several significant efforts have been made
in this direction. The Integrated Public Use Micro-
data Series (IPUMS) project [52] for example faces
the problem of bridging 8 different occupational clas-
sification systems and a total of 3200 different cat-
18 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
egories, containing the richest source of quantitative
information on the American population. The North
Atlantic Population Project [70] (NAPP) project pro-
vides a machine-readable database of nine censuses
from several countries. The main focus of the NAPP
project is to harmonize these data sets and link indi-
viduals across different censuses for longitudinal and
comparative analysis. Their linking strategy involves
the use of variables which do not change over time. In
this process records are only checked if there is an ex-
act match for some variables, such as race and state of
birth. Other variables like age and name variables are
permitted to have some variations. Another significant
historical classification system is the Historical Inter-
national Standard Classification of Occupations [45]
(HISCO). As occupations are one of the most prob-
lematic variables in historical research, HISCO aims
to overcome the problem of changing occupational ter-
minologies over time and space. It encodes historical
occupations gathered from different historical sources
coming from different time periods, countries and lan-
guages, and classifies tens of thousands of occupa-
tional titles, linking these to short descriptions and im-
ages.
4.5. Transversal approaches
Finally, there are few but key contributions we have
classified as being transversal, because they cover a
wide spectrum of the list of overlapping tasks between
the Semantic Web and historical research. They also
influence almost every phase in the historical informa-
tion life cycle (see Section 3.1).
The CLIO system [125], a databank oriented system
for historians, is the first of such contributions. CLIO
was, for decades, the system for creating, enriching,
organizing and retrieving historical knowledge from
historical data in the pre-Web era. Although not using
Semantic Web technologies (see Section 2.2), it had
a strong emphasis on semantics as key for structuring
historical knowledge.
In the Linked Data universe, the Agora project [2] is
one of such transversal contributions. It generates his-
torical RDF of events extracted using NLP techniques
from unstructured texts, uses it for enhanced search
and retrieval, improves semantic heterogeneity and
gives context by linking to other datasets. Similarly,
the Verrijkt Koninkrijk [131] and Multilingual Access
to Large Spoken Archives (NSF-ITR/MALACH) [61]
projects perform these tasks in their particular domains
(see Section 4.1.2). The FDR Pearl Harbor project [85]
also contributes on this line, but additionally opening
the very promising field of historical knowledge infer-
ence through the formalization and usage of histori-
cal OWL ontologies. All these are good examples on
how historical data get much richer when their seman-
tics are explicitly expressed and they are interlinked
through standard vocabularies and ontologies.
Regarding tools, the Armadillo architecture of Se-
mantic Web Services [6] and the Fawcett toolkit [76]
contain the generic plot behind all these contribu-
tions, and cover the whole pipeline of semantic histor-
ical data management. The latter extracts RDF event-
oriented triples from unstructured texts, and addition-
ally allows historians to install a full semantic toolbox
with widgets to experiment with their data. Open Re-
fine [74], in combination with its RDF-export plugin,
allows the extraction, transformation, modelling and
publishing of historical Linked Data when the sources
come in tabular format.
Additionally, the theoretical study by Boonstra et al.
[16] envisages possibilities on how the Semantic Web
can enhance research by historians. It constitutes, be-
sides, a major work on the evolution of historical com-
puting, ehistory and historical information science, and
gives a deep intuition on how computer science can
help to solve ancient problems in historical research.
5. Solving historical problems
In this section we point to the open historical data
problems revisited in Section 3.3 which are addressed
or solved by the Semantic Web contributions reviewed
in Section 4 as tasks. The mapping between the open
problems and the tasks is shown in Table 5.
The first interesting result is that some of the prob-
lems identified in historical sources (Section 3.3.1) are
mostly solved by the approaches we review in his-
torical ontologies (Section 4.1.1). Concretely, our per-
ception is that the structuring of historical data and
the development of historical data models have been
a success due to the creation of standard vocabularies
and ontologies. These ontologies aid historians to de-
scribe, at least, the baseline historical entities and re-
lations in historical domains: events are combinations
of persons, places and moments in time when some-
thing historically relevant happened. The large number
of projects exposing historical Linked Data on the Web
using these ontologies (see Section 4.1.2) prove their
usefulness and success. There is space, though, for im-
provement. Although it is commonly agreed that cur-
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 19
Open historical data
problems
Historical
ontologies
(4.1.1)
Linking
historical data
(4.1.2)
Text processing
and mining
(4.2)
Search and
retrieval (4.3)
Classification
systems (4.4.1)
Transversal
approaches
(4.5)
Historical sources
(3.3.1)
X ◦
Relationships be-
tween sources (3.3.2)
X X
Historical analysis
(3.3.3)
◦
Presentation of
sources (3.3.4)
◦
Table 5
Mapping between the open problems of historical data (see Section 3.3) and the surveyed contributions in historical Semantic Web (see Section
4). The sign Xindicates that the problem is directly addressed in the Semantic Web task. The sign ◦ indicates that the problem is indirectly or
partially addressed in the Semantic Web task.
rent historical ontologies model the core semantics of
historical research, authors also agree that they are still
scarce and need further development [51,84].
As part of the problems in historical sources, pro-
vision of background historical knowledge has been
successful only partially. The infrastructure (Linked
Data cloud, SPARQL endpoints on historical data) is
set up and running. But the amount of historical data
available is still too low to give good support to any
historian creating historical datasets in the beginning
of the life cycle (see Section 3.1). Consequently, lit-
tle background knowledge can help today these his-
torians in solving e.g. errors or inconsistencies at that
phase. Similarly, the generic infrastructure for prove-
nance publishing and retrieval in the Semantic Web
is very mature and extensively used in other domains
[133], but scarce or non existing in the historical do-
main although being identified as a very important re-
quirement (see Section 3.3.1). The provision of such
provenance on historical datasets needs to be guaran-
teed in projects using semantic technologies to publish
historical data.
Solutions to the problem of relationships between
sources are probably the greatest achievement of the
application of semantic technologies to historical re-
search. The large number of projects linking historical
data we survey in Section 4.1.2 proves that the Seman-
tic Web delivers working solutions to the problem of
connecting isolated historical data sources. The usage
of developed ontologies and vocabularies has been key
to this end. Additionally, the existence of classification
systems (Section 4.4.1) helps on data comparability in
the Semantic Web. Because we see that the body of his-
torical knowledge in the Semantic Web is still small,
we expect the problem of finding related links between
historical entities and datasets to grow in the future, al-
though the Semantic Web has generic solutions for this
[99].
The problems in historical analysis and presenta-
tion of sources (see Sections 3.3.3 and 3.3.4) are only
partially addressed in approaches we have classified
as transversal. These works cover a wide spectrum of
the life cycle of (semantic) historical data, including
analysis and presentation (phases 5 and 6, Section 3.1).
Consequently, they deal with some analyses and vi-
sualizations. However, there is a lack of contributions
tackling directly the problem, or considering explicitly
historical research requirements with respect to anal-
ysis and visualization. The transversal tools are hence
very generic, and they could be inappropriate for some
historians. Therefore, it is very important to distin-
guish what analysis requirements are specific to histor-
ical research, and which ones are domain-independent.
Our hypothesis is that these problems overlap only par-
tially with the goals of the Semantic Web (i.e. rep-
resenting and linking meaning on the Web). How-
ever, historians could benefit from analysis and visu-
alization tools for historical semantic data, not as spe-
cific as project-oriented, but not as generic as domain-
independent.
In Table 5 all open problems have Semantic Web
tasks providing solutions, but not all tasks are mapped
to some historical open problem. Concretely, the tasks
of text processing and mining (Section 4.2) and search
and retrieval (Section 4.3) do not seem to solve any
of the identified problems. Why do we find contribu-
tions on these areas? First, although not being iden-
tified by historians as primary problems, they con-
stitute secondary problems that need to be solved
when representing and linking semantic historical
20 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
data. These problems are not exclusively historical,
but they needed to be reimplemented in the Semantic
Web realm (e.g. natural language processing for ex-
tracting historical RDF triples, SPARQL to query his-
torical semantic data on the Web). Secondly, the goals
these tasks aim at were quite well solved in historical
research before the inception of semantic technologies
(e.g. manual input of historical data, SQL queries in
historical relational databases), and thus historians did
not consider them into the primary problem space.
6. Open challenges
The use of semantic technologies has contributed
significantly to solving the open problems of histor-
ical data (see Section 5). However, there is a lot of
room for improvement. The open problems are being
addressed as shown, but they are far from being solved
until they get additional attention. The scarce amount
of historical data on the Semantic Web is a good exam-
ple. Other problems, some more specific, some more
generic, could be also tackled with semantic solutions.
In this section we explore some aspects of the Seman-
tic Web that have not been used yet or could be fur-
therly exploited in historical research.
6.1. Semantics of time, change, language, uncertainty
and interpretation
Classifications and ontologies in history do exist,
but not for all areas, not in Semantic Web languages
and not always agreed upon. Although several histori-
cal ontologies have been developed (see Section 4.1.1),
these models are insufficient for the vast amount and
variety of historical data that still has to be published
in the Semantic Web, especially when key issues for
historians like interpretations or evidences need to be
modelled and conveniently linked. Historical ontolo-
gies and vocabularies have been a reality in recent
approaches. Ontologies describing classes and prop-
erties of some historical concern, such as concepts
around the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 [50], are an
exciting modelling exercise for researchers but also a
necessary step for better structuring historical infor-
mation in the Web. Ontologies and vocabularies offer
a way of controlling the predicates, classes, proper-
ties and terms that the community uses as a standard
for describing factual and terminological knowledge
about history. Designing good ontologies for histori-
cal domains is also an area with plenty of challenges:
how can ontologies comprise the many conceptions
of history depending on the temporal dimension of
events described [51]? Moreover, how can differences
in meaning and relations between concepts be traced,
as time and historical realities change these concepts
[140]? To what extent these meaning differences re-
late to the complexity of the language (e.g. Latin, Mid-
dle languages) and uncertainty (e.g. fuzzy dates and
locations)? These questions, which comprise seman-
tic technologies, knowledge acquisition and knowl-
edge modelling techniques, are not yet completely un-
derstood and are a significant challenge in semantic
historical research. On the other side, over the cen-
turies, dictionaries, thesaurus, classification systems
have been developed. How to mount those specifically
grown ordering principles to the Web in a way that
makes them explorable and linkable to other ontolo-
gies is one interesting challenge which requires a close
collaboration between historians, knowing and design-
ing those specific tools, and computer scientists, often
relying on much broader and generic ontologies.
6.2. Reasoning
From the point of view of Linked Data, ontologies
and vocabularies are designed in order to control the
terms in which datasets may express data, as well as
the data model in which these data are represented.
However, in a more Semantic Web perspective, one
may expect these ontologies and vocabularies to facili-
tate new knowledge discovery; that is, to make explicit
some implicit fact that was not trivial to deduce for the
human eye, especially in big knowledge bases.
Reasoning is one of the key mechanisms of the
Semantic Web still to be used in historical research.
The absence of specific methods and tools for auto-
matic historical inference, so that new, implicit histor-
ical knowledge can be derived, is another issue. We
claim that reasoning could be fundamental for histori-
cal analysis 3.3.3 and tasks in the phase 5 (analysis) of
the historical information life cycle (see Section 3.1).
Historical ontologies can be used to facilitate his-
torical knowledge discovery using reasoners. Assum-
ing that a particular domain is completely formalized
as historical ontologies, then it is possible to run a
reasoner on these ontologies to produce derived, im-
plicit rules and facts that were not present in the orig-
inal model as explicit knowledge (i.e. specifically en-
coded in the ontology), but that were there as underly-
ing knowledge. For instance, if an ontology describes,
on the one hand, the fact that a letter was sent from one
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 21
government to another, and on the other hand, the fact
that governments have a person responsible of send-
ing and receiving letters, then it may be possible for
the reasoner to infer what concrete persons sent and
received what letters. As the knowledge base grows,
implicit knowledge is not evident anymore and reason-
ers can facilitate an enormous work and produce high-
value pieces of historical knowledge.
Since historians have different interpretations and
no clear research question when starting an investiga-
tion, abductive reasoning (i.e. given the conclusions
and a rule, try to select possible premises that sup-
port the conclusion) may be more convenient than de-
ductive reasoning (i.e. deduce true conclusions given
a premise and a rule) in historical research [23,47].
These would revert the order of some phases of the
life cycle of historical information (see Section 3.1),
generating a more bottom-up, data-based generation of
hypotheses supporting evidence. The impact of abduc-
tive reasoning in historical research and its relationship
with the life cycle needs further study and clarification.
The introduction of any kind of reasoning in the life
cycle needs to be done with the goal of supporting,
not replacing, the task of the historian, who must keep
control of the implementation of the different phases.
6.3. Linking more historical data
We show in Section 4.1.2 that great efforts are be-
ing devoted to publish historical Linked Data. How-
ever, the amount of structured historical knowledge
available on the Web is still insufficient to aid tasks
that need high amounts and different kinds of histori-
cal background knowledge. While many different data
and information sources exist, they are not always in-
terlinked. This isolation of historical data sources ham-
pers that they can be found, but it also inhibits how
they can be further processed and connected.
One of the big claims of linked data is that, by link-
ing datasets, relations established between nodes of
these datasets highly enrich the information contained
in them. That way, browsing datasets is not an isolated
task anymore: by allowing users (and machines) to ex-
plore entities through their predicate links, data get
new meanings, uncountable contexts and useful per-
spectives for historians.
For example, consider a scenario with three different
SPARQL endpoints exposing RDF triples of a census
with occupational data, a historical register of labour
strikes, and a generic classification system for occupa-
tions (in the context of one particular country, for in-
stance). Suppose that: the occupational census of the
data exposes triples with countings on occupations (for
example, how many men and women worked in a par-
ticular occupation in a concrete city), the historical
register of labour strikes contains countings on how
many people participated in labour strikes (number of
women and men, per occupation and city), and the
generic classification system harmonizes names of the
occupations between both previous datasets (for exam-
ple, gives a common number for representing occupa-
tion names that may vary between census occupations
and labour strike occupations). Then, it is clear that
several SPARQL queries can be constructed to give
very meaningful and interesting linked data to the his-
torian. For instance, such a query may return, given a
city and an occupation code, which ratio of men and
women followed a particular well-known labour strike.
Another SPARQL query may return an ordered list of
historical labour strikes by relevance, according to sev-
eral indicators (strike successfulness ratio, total num-
ber of workers on strike, density of people on strike
depending on the location, etc.). It is obvious that the
possibilities increase if we think of more related histor-
ical sources to link, like datasets describing historical
weather or historical geographical names and areas.
6.4. Flexibility of data models
It is considered to be a bad practice in historical re-
search not doing the historical data modelling at phase
1 of the historical information life cycle (see Section
3.1). The choice of a particular data model to repre-
sent historical data is a critical issue for most histor-
ical computing projects. The election of some appro-
priate data model may seem a good design decision at
some stage of the project. However, new requirements,
research directions or stakeholder priorities may con-
vert that data model into an obstacle more than an aid.
Flexibility of data with respect to the data model used
to represent historical domains is desired to avoid re-
structuring entire databases. Comparison in historical
research requires flexibility of the models to be able to
match them to one another. At the end, that enforces
historians to make their data selection and processing
dependent of a certain data model that can not be easily
replaced or altered if needed. This happens usually in
environments with changeable and creep requirements
[53].
Applying semantic technologies and Linked Data
principles to historical data may have a major advan-
tage regarding historical data models, providing flexi-
22 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
bility at the historical data modelling phase. Two dif-
ferent approaches regarding historical data modelling
have been followed traditionally in historical comput-
ing: the source-oriented representation, and the model-
oriented (also known as goal-oriented) representation
(see Section 3.2.3). Do semantic technologies allow a
flexible representation of historical data? Can the Se-
mantic Web found a new standard on a source-and-
goal, hybrid approach? RDF databases (see Section
2.2) can store the middleware representation of fur-
ther views on the data [65]. These views can be mod-
elled as close to any particular historical interpretation
as needed. This way, the decision of what data model
suits better the historical source can be postponed un-
til the very end of the life cycle (see Section 3.1), or
adopted as early as necessary.
Moreover, additional questions arise when consider-
ing the traditional perspectives on data modelling: the
conceptual, logical and physical data models. These
perspectives help in detaching data management tech-
nology, like relational databases or RDF triplestores,
from conceptual schemas (i.e. the semantics of a do-
main). While conceptual data models are currently
shared on the Web as e.g. historical ontologies (see
Section 4.1.1), the flexibility of the whole modelling
stack towards semantic changes needs to be better un-
derstood.
6.5. Non-destructive data transformations
The non-flexibility of data models (see Section 6.4)
is related to the non-flexibility of historical data trans-
formations. Historical data are modified in the life cy-
cle of historical information (see Section 3.1). But if
update, enrichment, analytic and interpretative oper-
ations are not controlled, these transformations lead
to different historical data representations which can
hardly be related to each other any more, nor in terms
of provenance nor in terms of relatedness.
Another issue is supporting data transformations un-
der two constraints: (a) without modifying source data
(so the originals stay intact); and (b) with tracking of
changes. Consequently, destructive updates are a ma-
jor concern when selecting, aggregating and modify-
ing historical data. On the one hand, modifications to
specific encodings (CSV, spreadsheets, XML) do not
support non-destructive updates, and version control
systems are necessary to retrieve previous states. On
the other hand, relational databases can be inefficient
when querying all recorded transformations, edits and
manipulations.
Non-destructive updates are well supported by cur-
rent Semantic Web technology like SPARQL (see Sec-
tion 2.2). SPARQL CONSTRUCT allows the construc-
tion of RDF triples according to the supplied graph
pattern, facilitating data transformations without alter-
ing consistency of previous states in the knowledge
base. SPARQL SELECT selects, according to some
graph pattern, the desired data in the RDF graph, and
disposes them according to any desired view format
(for example, columns matching some interesting his-
torical variables). However, standardization on how se-
mantic technologies cover data transformations in all
phases of the historical data life cycle (see Section 3.1)
is needed.
7. Discussion and conclusions
In this paper we present a general overview of se-
mantic technologies applied to historical research. We
describe a general approach to historical research and
the Semantic Web, and motivate why the combination
of the two is an interesting field of research. We in-
troduce core elements of historical research, such as
the life cycle of historical information, several clas-
sifications for historical data, and the open problems
shared by historians and computer scientists. Then, we
overview contributions to the young historical Seman-
tic Web in form of papers, projects and tools, articulat-
ing the work into several tasks and trends within these
tasks. We provide a mapping to see to what extent the
work on these tasks is helping to solve the open prob-
lems of historical data and historical research. Finally,
we dig out a list of interesting open challenges for the
future, like working out the semantics of critical as-
pects for historians, such as interpretation and time,
and encouraging reasoning in the historical Semantic
Web.
It is interesting to observe the sparsity in Tables 1,
2, 3 and 4. There is a significant difference in the num-
ber of empty spaces (i.e. specificity of the contribu-
tions) between Tables 1 and 4 (papers and tools, on-
tologies), and Tables 2 and 3 (projects and online re-
sources). While the former set has essentially lots of
holes, the latter has lots of complete lines. The rea-
son for this is probably the specificity researchers think
research papers and useful tools need. Usually writ-
ten by computer scientists, papers and tools need to
be grounded and tackle a very concrete problem to
be worth written or implemented. On the other hand,
projects (Table 2) are written in a very generic way
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 23
covering all tasks, with probably intensive participa-
tion of historians and clear aims to solve the whole
pipeline. In practice, though, these goals are material-
ized in very concrete research contributions. This leads
us to think that Semantic Web solutions need very spe-
cific requirements in order to be correctly deployed in
history. They need to be applied to historical data in a
complex, layered and properly adapted pipeline. Good
practices and standards, and their relationship with the
life cycle of historical information, are still needed for
the field to continue evolving.
We show how the Semantic Web and history com-
munities understand the need for representing inner se-
mantics implicitly contained in historical sources, and
how these semantics can be conveniently identified,
formalized and linked. With the appropriate pipelines,
algorithms can extract entities from digital historical
sources and transform these occurrences into RDF
triples, according to some historical ontology or vo-
cabulary. These entities can be linked between them
and with other historical Linked Data, contributing to
an open, world wide, online persistent graph of histor-
ical knowledge: an historical Semantic Web. The work
presented in this survey contributes in one phase or an-
other in this graph-building pipeline. We leave to the
reader if this historical Semantic Web building pipeline
is, in fact, the Semantic Web version of the life cycle
of historical information.
The challenge of the realisation of a historical Se-
mantic Web meeting as many requirements as possi-
ble may bring new facilities for a number of stakehold-
ers. On the one hand, humanities researchers, also out-
side history, will be able to integrate the historical Se-
mantic Web to their own information life cycle. They
will be able to search, retrieve and compare historical
knowledge and use it for the construction of their nar-
ratives, still the final outcome of historical research. On
the other hand, practitioners will be able to search new
data sources to develop history-aware applications for
public institutions, private companies and citizens.
Acknowledgements
The work on which this paper is based has been sup-
ported by the Computational Humanities Programme
of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sci-
ences, under the auspices of the CEDAR project
(see http://ehumanities.nl), the European
Union’s 7th Framework Programme via the News-
Reader Project (ICT-316404), and by NWO’s CATCH
programme via the Agora project, grant 640.004.801.
This work has been supported by the Dutch national
programmes COMMIT.
The authors want to thank all contributing col-
leagues, especially the interviewees Onno Boonstra,
Peter Doorn, Jan Kok, Henk Laloli and Dirk Roorda.
References
[1] Ad van der Meer and Onno Boonstra. Repertorium van
Nederlandse Gemeenten, 1812-2006, waaraan toegevoegd de
Amsterdamse code. DANS Data Guide 2, The Hague, 2006.
[2] Agora Project. http://agora.cs.vu.nl.
[3] Ian Anderson. History and computing. Mak-
ing History, 2008. http://www.history.ac.
uk/makinghistory/resources/articles/
history_and_computing.html.
[4] Miguel Ángel Manso and Monica Wachowicz. GIS Design:
A Review of Current Issues in Interoperability. Geography
Compass, 3(3):1105–1124, 2009.
[5] Grigoris Antoniou and Frank van Harmelen. A Semantic Web
Primer (Cooperative Information Systems). The MIT Press,
Cambrdige, Massachusetts, April 2004.
[6] Armadillo: Historical Data Mining Project. http://www.
hrionline.ac.uk/armadillo/armadillo.html.
[7] Isabelle Augenstein, Sebastian Padó, and Sebastian Rudolph.
LODifier: Generating Linked Data from Unstructured Text.
In Elena Simperl, Philipp Cimiano, Axel Polleres, Oscar Cor-
cho, and Valentina Presutti, editors, The Semantic Web: Re-
search and Applications. 9th Extended Semantic Web Confer-
ence, ESWC 2012, Proceedings, volume 7295 of LNCS, pages
210–224, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag.
[8] James Cook University Australia. Primary, secondary and
tertiary sources. http://libguides.jcu.edu.au/
primary.
[9] Franz Baader, Ian Horrocks, and Ulrike Sattler. Description
Logics as Ontology Languages for the Semantic Web. In Di-
eter Hutter and Werner Stepahn, editor, Mechanizing Math-
ematical Reasoning, volume 2605 of LNCS, pages 228–248,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer-Verlag.
[10] C Beghtol. Classification Theory. Encyclopedia of Library
and Information Science, 2010:1045–60, 2010.
[11] Jules R. Benjamin. A Student’s Guide to History. Bedfors/St.
Martin’s, Boston, 2004.
[12] Tim Berners-Lee. Linked Data – Design Issues. http://
www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html.
[13] Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, and Ora Lassila. The Se-
mantic Web. Scientific American, 284(5):34–43, 2001.
[14] Tim Berners-Lee and Jeffrey Jaffe. The World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C). http://www.w3.org/.
[15] David M. Berry, editor. Understanding Digital Humanities.
Palgrave Macmillian, New York, 2012.
[16] Onno Boonstra, Leen Breure, and Peter Doorn. Past, present
and future of historical information science. NIWI-KNAW,
Amsterdam, 1st edition, 2004.
[17] B. Bos and G. Welling. The significance of user-interfaces
for historical software. Proceedings of the Eight International
24 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
Conference of the Association for History and Computing,
pages 223–236, 1995.
[18] Paolo Bouquet, Fausto Giunchiglia, Frank van Harmelen, Lu-
ciano Serafini, and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Contextualizing
Ontologies. Journal of Web Semantics: Science, Services and
Agents on the World Wide Web, 1(4):325–343, 2004.
[19] BRIDGE Project. http://ilps.science.uva.nl/
node/735.
[20] Marc Bron, Bouke Huurnink, and Maarten de Rijke. Linking
Archives Using Document Enrichment and Term Selection.
In Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries.
15th international conference on Theory and practice of digi-
tal libraries, proceedings., volume 6966 of LNCS, pages 360–
371, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer-Verlag.
[21] CCEd Project. http://www.theclergydatabase.
org.uk/publications/jeh_article.html.
[22] CEDAR Project. http://www.cedar-project.nl/.
[23] Eugene Charniak and Drew McDermott. Introduction to Ar-
tificial Intelligence. Addison-Wesley series in computer sci-
ence. Addison-Wesley, Boston, 1985.
[24] CHORAL Project. http://hmi.ewi.utwente.nl/
choral/.
[25] Circulation of Knowledge and Learned Practices in the 17th-
century Dutch Republic (CKCC Project). http://ckcc.
huygens.knaw.nl/.
[26] Edgar F. Codd. Derivability, Redundancy, and Consistency
of Relations Stored in Large Data Banks. Technical Report
RJ599, IBM Research, San Jose, California, 1969.
[27] Panos Constantopoulos, Martin Doerr, Maria Theodoridou,
and Manolis Tzobanakis. Historical documents as monu-
ments and as sources. In Bernard Frischer, Jane Webb Craw-
ford, and David Koller, editors, Making History Interactive.
Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archae-
ology (CAA). Proceedings of the 37th International Confer-
ence, volume S2079 of BAR International Series, Oxford,
2009. Archaeopress.
[28] The Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI). http://
www.dublincore.org/.
[29] Stefan Dormans and Jan Kok. An alternative approach to
large historical databases. Exploring best practices with col-
laboratories. Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative
and Interdisciplinary History, 43(3):97–107, 2010.
[30] The eHumanities Group. http://ehumanities.nl/.
[31] Albert Esteve and Matthew Sobek. Challenges and Meth-
ods of International Census Harmonization. Historical Meth-
ods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History,
36(2):37–41, 2003.
[32] Europeana Data Model (EDM) Documentation. http://
pro.europeana.eu/edm-documentation.
[33] The Event Ontology. http://purl.org/NET/c4dm/
event.owl#.
[34] Mary Feeney and Seasmus Ross. Information Technology
in Humanities Scholarship British Achievements, Prospects,
and Barriers. Historical Social Research, 19(1):3–59, 1994.
[35] Giorgos Flouris, Dimitris Manakanatas, Haridimos Kondy-
lakis, Dimitris Plexousakis, and Grigoris Antoniou. Ontology
change: classification and survey. The Knowledge Engineer-
ing Review, 23(2):117–152, 2008.
[36] FRED. http://wit.istc.cnr.it/stlab-tools/
fred.
[37] Aldo Gangemi. A Comparison of Knowledge Extraction
Tools for the Semantic Web. In The Semantic Web: Se-
mantics and Big Data. 10th International Conference, ESWC
2013, Proceedings, volume 7882 of LNCS, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2013. Springer-Verlag.
[38] The GeoNames Ontology. http://www.geonames.
org/ontology/documentation.html.
[39] Ronald Goeken, Marjorie Bryer, and Cassandra Lucas. Mak-
ing Sense of Census Responses Coding Complex Variables in
the 1920 PUMS. Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantita-
tive and Interdisciplinary History, 32(3):37–41, 1999.
[40] Thomas R. Gruber. Toward Principles for the Design of On-
tologies Used for Knowledge Sharing. International Journal
Human-Computer Studies, 43:907–928, 1993.
[41] Bernhard Haslhofer, Rainer Simon, Robert Sanderson, and
Herbert van de Sompel. The Open Annotation Collabora-
tion (OAC) Model. Computing Research Repository, CoRR,
abs/1106.5178, 2011.
[42] H-BOT Project. http://chnm.gmu.edu/tools/h-
bot/.
[43] Tom Heath and Christian Bizer. Linked Data: Evolving the
Web into a Global Data Space. Morgan and Claypool, 1st
edition, 2011.
[44] HEML Project. http://heml.mta.ca/heml-
cocoon/description.
[45] HISCO Project. http://historyofwork.iisg.nl/.
[46] HiTime Project. http://ilk.uvt.nl/hitime/.
[47] Jerry R. Hobbs, Mark E. Stickel, Douglas E. Appelt, and
Paul A. Martin. Interpretation as Abduction. Artificial Intel-
ligence, 63(1-2):69–142, 1993.
[48] Historic Sample of the Netherlands (HSN). http://www.
iisg.nl/hsn//.
[49] Eero Hyvönen, Jouni Tuominen, Tomi Kauppinen, and Jari
Väätäinen. Representing and Utilizing Changing Historical
Places as an Ontology Time Series. In Ramesh Jain and Amit
Sheth, editors, Geospatial Semantics and the Semantic Web:
Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications, Semantic Web
and Beyond: Computing for Human Experience, pages 1–25.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
[50] Nancy Ide and David Woolner. Exploiting semantic web tech-
nologies for intelligent access to historical documents. Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC), pages 2177–2180, 2004.
[51] Nancy Ide and David Woolner. Historical Ontologies, chapter
Words and Intelligence II: Essays in Honor of Yorick Wilks,
pages 137–152. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007.
[52] Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS). http:
//www.ipums.org/.
[53] C. Jones. Strategies for managing requirements creep. Com-
puter, 29(6):92–94, June 1996.
[54] Maximilian Kalus. Semantic networks and historical knowl-
edge management: Introducing new methods of computer-
based research. Ann Arbor, MI: MPublishing, University of
Michigan Library, 2007.
[55] Max Kemman and Martijn Kleppe. PoliMedia - Improving
Analyses of Radio, TV and Newspaper Coverage of Political
Debates. In T. Aalberg and E. Al, editors, 15th international
conference on Theory and practice of digital libraries, TPDL
2013, Proceedings., volume 8092 of LNCS, pages 401–404,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer-Verlag.
[56] Jan Kok and Paul Wouters. Virtual Knowledge in Family
History: Visionary Technologies, Research Dreams, and Re-
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 25
search Agendas. In Paul Wouters, Anne Beaulieu, Andrea
Scharnhorst, and Sally Wyatt, editors, Virtual Knowledge. Ex-
perimenting in the Humanities and the Social Sciences, pages
219–244. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2013.
[57] Thomas Kuczynski, editor. Wirschaftsgeschichte und Math-
ematik. Beiträge zur Anwendung mathematischer, insbeson-
dere statistischer Methoden in der wirtschafts- und sozialhis-
torischen Forschung. Akademie-Verlag, Berlin, 1985.
[58] Linking History in Place. http://cv.vic.gov.au/
linking-history/.
[59] Links Project. http://www.iisg.nl/hsn/news/
links-project.php.
[60] LODE: An ontology for Linking Open Descriptions of
Events. http://linkedevents.org/ontology/.
[61] NSF-ITR/MALACH Project. http://malach.umiacs.
umd.edu/.
[62] Kees Mandemakers and Lisa Dillon. Best Practices with
Large Databases on Historical Populations. Historical Meth-
ods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History,
37(1):34–38, 2004.
[63] Willard McCatry. Humanities Computing. In Miriam Drake,
editor, Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science,
pages 1124–35. Taylor and Francis, New York, 2nd edition,
2003.
[64] Albert Meroño-Peñuela. Semantic Web for the Humani-
ties. In P. Cimiano, O. Corcho, V. Presutti, L. Hollink, and
S. Rudolph, editors, The Semantic Web: Semantics and Big
Data. 10th International Conference, ESWC 2013, Proceed-
ings, volume 7882 of LNCS, pages 645–649, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2013. Springer-Verlag.
[65] Albert Meroño-Peñuela, Ashkan Ashkpour, Laurens Ri-
etveld, Rinke Hoekstra, and Stefan Schlobach. Linked Hu-
manities Data: The Next Frontier? A Case-study in Historical
Census Data. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Work-
shop on Linked Science (LISC2012). International Semantic
Web Conference (ISWC), volume 951. CEUR Workshop Pro-
ceedings, 2012.
[66] Albert Meroño-Peñuela, Christophe Guéret, Rinke Hoekstra,
and Stefan Schlobach. Detecting and Reporting Extensional
Concept Drift in Statistical Linked Data. In Proceedings of
the 1st International Workshop on Semantic Statistics (Sem-
Stats 2013), ISWC. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 2013.
[67] Albert Meroño-Peñuela, Rinke Hoekstra, Andrea Scharn-
horst, Christophe Guéret, and Ashkan Ashkpour. Longitudi-
nal queries over linked census data. In The Semantic Web:
Research and Applications. 9th Extended Semantic Web Con-
ference, ESWC 2012, Satellite Events, pages 306–307, 2013.
[68] Peter B. Meyer and Anastasiya M. Osborne. Proposed cate-
gory system for 1960-2000 census occupations. U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics, 2005.
[69] Richard Moot, Laurent Prévot, and Christian Retoré. A dis-
cursive analysis of itineraries in an historical and regional cor-
pus of travels: syntax, semantics, and pragmatics in a uni-
fied type theoretical framework. In Constraints in Discourse
2011, pages 14–16, 2011.
[70] North Atlantic Population Project. http://www.
nappdata.org/napp/.
[71] Michael Nentwich. Cyberscience: Research in the Age of the
Internet. Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, Vienna, 2003.
[72] University of Maryland. Primary, Secondary and Tertiary
Sources. http://www.lib.umd.edu/ues/guides/
primary-sources.
[73] Jan Oldervoll. CENSSYS: A System for Analyzing Census-
Type Data. Computer Applications in the Historical Sciences:
Selected Contributions to the Cologne Computer Conference,
pages 17–22, 1989.
[74] OpenRefine. https://github.com/OpenRefine/
OpenRefine.
[75] Semantic Web approaches in Digital History: an Intro-
duction. http://www.slideshare.net/mpasin/
presentations/.
[76] Fawcett: A Toolkit to Begin an Historical Semantic Web.
http://www.digitalstudies.org/ojs/index.
php/digital_studies/article/view/175/217.
[77] Spatial cyberinfrastructures, ontologies, and the human-
ities. http://www.pnas.org/content/108/14/
5504.full.
[78] SIG:Ontologies. http://wiki.tei-c.org/index.
php/SIG:Ontologies.
[79] CultureSampo - Finnish Culture on the Semantic
Web 2.0: Thematic Perspectives for the End-user.
http://www.museumsandtheweb.com/mw2009/
papers/hyvonen/hyvonen.html.
[80] Text Mining for Historical Documents: Topics and Papers.
http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/courses/
tm-hist/readings.html.
[81] RDF vocabularies for historic place-names and relations be-
tween them. http://groups.google.com/group/
caa-semantic-sig/browse_thread/thread/
ae1db7fa31a1b5a0?pli=1.
[82] The Semantic Web for Family History. http://jay.
askren.net/Projects/SemWeb/.
[83] Data portal for Social Sciences Open data with SPARQL end-
point. http://www.rechercheisidore.fr/.
[84] J. B. Owens, May Yuan, Monica Wachowicz, Vitit Kantabu-
tra, Emery A. Coppola Jr., Daniel P. Ames, and Aldo
Gangemi. Visualizing Historical Narratives: Geographically-
Integrated History and Dynamics GIS. In National En-
dowment for the Humanities workshop. Visualizing the Past:
Tools and Techniques for Understanding Historical Pro-
cesses, 2009.
[85] FDR Pearl Harbor Project. http://www.fdrlibrary.
marist.edu/.
[86] Polimedia Project. http://www.polimedia.nl/.
[87] Bart van de Putte and Andrew Miles. A Social Classification
Scheme for Historical Occupational Data. Historical Meth-
ods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History,
38(2):61–92, 2005.
[88] Thomas Riechert, Ulf Morgenstern, Sören Auer, Sebastian
Tramp, and Michael Martin. Knowledge Engineering for His-
torians on the Example of the Catalogus Professorum Lip-
siensis. In The Semantic Web – ISWC 2010. 9th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference, Proceedings, volume 6496
of LNCS, pages 225–240, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. Springer-
Verlag.
[89] B. G. Robertson. Visualizing an historical semantic web with
Heml. In WWW’06. The 15th International World Wide Web
Conference 2006, Proceedings, pages 1051–1052, New York,
NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press.
[90] Bruce Robertson. Exploring Historical RDF with
Heml. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3(1), 2009.
http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/
26 A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey
vol/003/1/000026.html.
[91] Steven Ruggles and Russell R Menard. The Minnesota His-
torical Census Projects. Historical Methods: A Journal of
Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, 28(1):6–10, 1995.
[92] SAILS Project. http://sailsproject.cerch.kcl.
ac.uk/2010/07/about-the-sails-project/.
[93] Voyage of the Slave Ship Sally Project. http://www.
stg.brown.edu/projects/sally/.
[94] Schema.org. http://schema.org/.
[95] Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth, edi-
tors. A Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell Pub-
lishing Inc, Malden, MA, 2004.
[96] Scratch Project. http://www.ai.rug.nl/alice/
nwo-catch-scratch/index_english.html.
[97] Roxane Segers, Marieke van Erp, Lourens van der Meij,
Lora Aroyo, Jacco van Ossenbruggen, Guus Schreiber, Bob
Wielinga, Johan Oomen, and Geertje Jacobs. Hacking His-
tory via Event Extraction. In Proceedings of the sixth interna-
tional conference on Knowledge capture, K-CAP ’11, pages
161–162, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM Press.
[98] Nigel Shadbolt, Wendy Hall, and Tim Berners-Lee. The Se-
mantic Web Revisited. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 21(3):96–
101, 2006.
[99] Pavel Shvaiko and Jérôme Euzenat. Ontology matching: State
of the art and future challenges. IEEE Transactions on Knowl-
edge and Data Engineering, 25(1):158–176, 2013.
[100] Renee E. Sieber, Christopher C. Wellen, and Yuan Jin. Spa-
tial cyberinfrastructures, ontologies, and the humanities. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 108(14):5504–5509, 2011.
[101] Semantic MediaWiki (SMW). http://semantic-
mediawiki.org/.
[102] Matthew Sobek. The Comparability of Occupations and the
Generation of Income Scores. Historical Methods: A Journal
of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History. Special Issue:
The Minnesota Historical Census Project, 28(1):47–51, 1995.
[103] W.A Speck. History and computing: some reflections on the
past decade. History and Computing, 6(1):28–32, 1994.
[104] TabLinker. https://github.com/
Data2Semantics/TabLinker/.
[105] NLP2RDF. http://nlp2rdf.org/.
[106] SIMILE/Timeline. http://www.simile-widgets.
org/timeline/.
[107] Gapminder. http://www.gapminder.org/.
[108] TokenX. http://tokenx.unl.edu/.
[109] TAPoR. http://portal.tapor.ca/portal/
portal.
[110] SEM event model. http://www.cs.vu.nl/~guus/
papers/Hage11b.pdf.
[111] OpenCYC. http://www.opencyc.org/.
[112] XCES. http://www.xces.org/.
[113] GATE. http://gate.ac.uk/.
[114] WordNet. http://wordnet.princeton.edu/.
[115] FrameNet. https://framenet.icsi.berkeley.
edu/fndrupal/.
[116] SUMO. http://sigmakee.cvs.sourceforge.
net/viewvc/sigmakee/KBs/Merge.kif.
[117] MILO. http://sigmakee.cvs.sourceforge.
net/viewvc/sigmakee/KBs/Mid-level-
ontology.kif.
[118] AskSam. https://www.asksam.com/.
[119] TEI (Text Encoding Initiative). http://www.tei-c.
org/index.xm.
[120] Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML).
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_
Generalized_Markup_Language.
[121] TACT. http://projects.chass.utoronto.ca/
tact/.
[122] Wordcruncher. http://www.wordcruncher.com/
wordcruncher/default.htm.
[123] Atlas.ti. http://www.atlasti.com/index.html.
[124] Natural Language Toolkig (NLTK). http://www.nltk.
org/.
[125] M Thaller. Automation on Parnassus. CLIO - A databank
oriented system for historians. Historical Social Research /
Historische Sozialforschung, 15:40–65, 1980.
[126] U. Thiel, H. Brocks, A. Dirsch-Weigand, A. Everts,
I. Frommholz, and A. Stein. Queries in Context: Access
to Digitized Historic Documents in a Collaboratory for the
Humanities. In Matthias Hemmje, Claudia Niederée, and
Thomas Risse, editors, From Integrated Publication and In-
formation Systems to Information and Knowledge Environ-
ments, volume 3379 of LNCS, pages 117–127, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2005. Springer-Verlag.
[127] John Tosh. The Pursuit of History: Aims, Methods, and New
Directions in the Study of History. Pearson Education: Har-
low 2010, 5th edition, 2010.
[128] Matje van de Camp and Antal van den Bosch. A link to
the past: Constructing historical social networks. In A. Bal-
ahur, E. Boldrini, A. Montoyo, and P. Martinez-Barco, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the ACL-HLT Workshop on Compu-
tational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis
(WASSA-2011), pages 61–69, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2011.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[129] Chiel van den Akker, Susan Legêne, Marieke Van Erp, Lora
Aroyo, Roxane Segers, Lourens Van der Meij, Jacco van Os-
senbruggen, Guus Schreiber, Bob Wielinga, Johan Oomen,
and Geertje Jacobs. Digital Hermeneutics: Agora and the
Online Understanding of Cultural Heritage. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Web Science (WebSci
2011), pages 1–7, 2011.
[130] Willem Robert van Hage, Véronique Malaisé, Roxane Segers,
Laura Hollink, and Guus Schreiber. Design and use of the
Simple Event Model (SEM). Journal of Web Semantics: Sci-
ence, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 9(2):128–
136, 2011.
[131] CLARIN-VK Project. http://
verrijktkoninkrijk.nl/.
[132] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). OWL Web On-
tology Language Overview. http://www.w3.org/TR/
owl-features/.
[133] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). PROV-O: The
PROV Ontology. http://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/.
[134] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). RDFa: Rich Struc-
tured Data Markup for Web Documents. http://www.
w3.org/TR/rdfa-primer/.
[135] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Resource Descrip-
tion Framework (RDF). http://www.w3.org/RDF/.
[136] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). SPARQL Query
Language for RDF. http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-
sparql-query/.
[137] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). XML Path Lan-
A. Meroño-Peñuela et al. / Semantic Technologies for Historical Research: A Survey 27
guage (XPath). http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath/.
[138] The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). XQuery 1.0: An
XML Query Language (Second Edition). http://www.
w3.org/TR/xquery/.
[139] WAHSP and BILAND. http://www.wahsp.nl/.
[140] Shenghui Wang, Stefan Schlobach, and Michel C. A. Klein.
Concept drift and how to identify it. Journal of Web Seman-
tics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web,
9(3):247–265, 2011.
[141] Rene Witte, Ralf Krestel, Thomas Kappler, and Peter C.
Lockemann. Converting a Historical Architecture Encyclope-
dia into a Semantic Knowledge Base. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 25(1):58–67, 2010.
[142] Peter Wittek and Walter Ravenek. Supporting the Exploration
of a Corpus of 17th-Century Scholarly Correspondences by
Topic Modeling. In B. Maegaard, editor, Supporting Digi-
tal Humanities 2011: Answering the unaskable, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 2011.

