Informing Science Information Sciences Volume 4 No 1, 2001 
Role of Librarian in Internet and  
World Wide Web Environment 
K. Nageswara Rao and KH Babu 
Defence Research & Development Laboratory 
Kanchanbagh Post, India 
raokochi@hotmail.com and khbabu@hotmail.com  
Abstract 
The transition of traditional library collections to digital or virtual collections presented the librarian with new opportunities. The Internet, Web en-
vironment and associated sophisticated tools have given the librarian a new dynamic role to play and serve the new information based society in bet-
ter ways than hitherto. Because of the powerful features of Web i.e. distributed, heterogeneous, collaborative, multimedia, multi-protocol, hyperme-
dia-oriented architecture, World Wide Web has revolutionized the way people access information, and has opened up new possibilities in areas such 
as digital libraries, virtual libraries, scientific information retrieval and dissemination. Not only the world is becoming interconnected, but also the 
use of Internet and Web has changed the fundamental roles, paradigms, and organizational culture of libraries and librarians as well. The article 
describes the limitless scope of Internet and Web, the existence of the librarian in the changing environment, parallelism between information sci-
ence and information technology, librarians and intelligent agents, working of intelligent agents, strengths, weaknesses, threats and opportunities in-
volved in the relationship between librarians and the Web. The role of librarian in Internet and Web environment especially as intermediary, facilita-
tor, end-user trainer, Web site builder, researcher, interface designer, knowledge manager and sifter of information resources is also described. 
Keywords: Role of Librarian, Internet, World Wide Web, Data Mining, Meta Data, Latent Semantic Indexing, Intelligent 
Agents, Search Intermediary, Facilitator, End-User Trainer, Web Site Builder, Researcher, Interface Designer, Knowledge Man-
ager, Sifter. 
Introduction 
Traditionally librarian is known as a person located in the li-
brary building carrying out the tasks like acquiring, organiz-
ing, preserving the printed documents besides helping the 
readers in locating the information needed by them. In the last 
decades of the twentieth century this picture has rapidly 
changed under the influence of advances in computer and 
communication fields. The paper collections have given place 
to networked, computer resident, user searchable collections 
like bibliographic databases, Online Public Access Catalogues 
(OPAC) obliterating the need for the user to visit the library 
building. With the digitization of ever increasing number of 
collections and advances made in computer/communication 
hardware and software seamless access to digitized informa-
tion located in geographically diverse locations has become a 
reality. The walls of library are thus pulled down and a "Vir-
tual Library" in Cyber Space came into being. The Virtual Li-
brary brought in its wake new flavors in the form of digitizing 
not only printed material but also pictures, maps, scenarios, 
paintings and sounds and presenting them all in a lively show 
in a theatre like environment. Where do librarians stand in this 
scenario and where their profession is headed is the nagging 
question faced by one and all in the profession. This article 
tries to focus on the impact of Internet and World Wide Web 
on the traditional library profession and on the opportunities 
and options open to the librarians. 
Traditionally librarians have been information providers for 
centuries. They now have the opportunity to use modern tools 
to provide quicker, more complete, and more sophisticated 
service to the users. Databases and reference sources can be 
queried via the Internet and World Wide Web; remote library 
catalogs are available on desktops; newsgroups and mailing 
lists provide a wonderful opportunity to discuss mutual con-
cerns quickly and electronic mail allows librarians to find out 
and contact those who might be able to help in solving the 
problems. Perhaps no innovation has impacted the library pro-
fession to such a great extent as the Internet, World Wide Web 
and networked resources. The interconnection of world 
through the use of Internet and Web has changed the funda-
mental roles, paradigms and culture of libraries and librarians 
once for all. 
The base of recorded information is growing at an accelerat-
ing rate in increasing variety of formats such as texts, nu-
meric, graphic, video, audio, images, etc. In addition, increas-
ing arrays of computing and telecommunication technologies 
are emerging to create new options and opportunities for the 
development of information capture, storage, retrieval and de-
livery. The seamless access of information available anywhere 
Material published as part of this journal, either on-line or in print, 
is copyrighted by the publisher of Informing Science. Permission to 
make digital or paper copy of part or all of these works for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that the copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage 
AND that copies 1) bear this notice in full and 2) give the full cita-
tion on the first page. It is permissible to abstract these works so 
long as credit is given. To copy in all other cases or to republish or 
to post on a server or to redistribute to lists requires specific per-
mission and payment of a fee. Contact Editor@inform.nu to re-
quest redistribution permission.  
Role of Librarian in Internet 
26 
on the globe has brought people so close that the phrase 
"Global Village" is coined to describe the scenario. 
In the prevailing situation the librarian is called upon to as-
sume new roles and perform tasks like guiding, facilitating, 
sifting information resources and preserving the access to the 
information. The collaboration with computer and information 
technology scientists in the design and maintenance of infor-
mation access systems for the effective use of Internet and 
Web in the interest of information seekers has become 
imperative. 
Limitless Scope of Internet  
and World Wide Web 
Internet, network of networks, connects several computers 
and resources around the world using the language called 
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol). 
During the early years of Internet use, the access was mainly 
for basic database searching in large systems such as Online 
Computer Library Centre (OCLC), Research Libraries Infor-
mation Network (RLIN), Bibliographic Retrieval System 
(BRS), and DIALOG.  With the growth of the Internet and the 
addition of more diverse electronic resources, the capacity for 
searching the Internet also increased. Since 1993, the Internet 
has experienced unprecedented growth in terms of networks, 
host computers and users. Prior to the Internet dissemination 
of information was limited to the delivery of formal print pub-
lications. In contrast, nowadays a person is able to create a 
Web page or send an e-mail message for disseminating infor-
mation. Furthermore, people are able to use e-mail or telecon-
ferencing to exchange information with others in real-time 
collaborative sessions.   
World Wide Web (WWW) or Web is the practical and existing 
real world application of the age-old dreams of a universal in-
formation database - information that would not only be ac-
cessible to people around the world, but information that 
would link to other pieces of information so that only the most 
useful information would be quickly found by a user. World 
Wide Web, developed by Tim Berners-Lee of European Parti-
cle Physics Laboratory (CERN), can be defined as a "distrib-
uted heterogeneous collaborative multimedia information sys-
tem".  The most fundamental and powerful features of the 
Web are its: 
• Support to distribute information in a number of different 
sites all over the Internet; 
• Capacity to incorporate all types of media objects (video, 
sound, images, text, etc.) into a single document; 
• Utilization of hypertext or hypermedia-oriented architec-
ture in which a document has embedded links to other 
documents, which can exist locally or anywhere in the 
world;  
• Ability to span the depths of heterogeneous client/server 
platforms. One can view from any client platform (DOS, 
UNIX, etc.) a data object stored on virtually any server 
platform that supports almost all protocol types i.e. E-
Mail (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), Telnet (Telnet Pro-
tocol), FTP (File Transfer Protocol), USENET (Network 
News Transfer Protocol), Gopher (Gopher Protocol) and 
Web pages (HyperText Transfer Protocol); 
• Ability to support construction of information resources 
all over the Internet; 
• Revolutionizing the way people access information, and 
opening new possibilities in areas such as digital libraries, 
virtual libraries, scientific information retrieval and dis-
semination, education, commerce, entertainment, gov-
ernment and health care. 
Many libraries are in transit from the traditional towards the 
digital library. Not only recent publications, but also many 
historical library holdings are being digitized. These digital 
collections allow users from anywhere at any time to consult 
the material without doing any harm to the fragile documents. 
Despite numerous digitization projects, electronic media is 
still not as dominant as print media. There are still a lot of 
printed pages in our libraries, and we expect this to be the 
case for a long time to come. The paper-based library will co-
exist with the digital library for the foreseeable future, be-
cause electronic publications are not developing at the ex-
pense of print media, but in addition to them (Grothkopf, 
1997). Also physical convenience and emotional attachment 
of people to printed books are factors that ensure their sur-
vival. 
The tools used by the librarians in their daily work have 
changed vastly during recent years. In addition to traditional 
card catalogs and microfiche readers, most libraries now offer 
an Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC), public PCs 
equipped with CD-ROM drives, DVD drives, scanners, or 
terminal connected to the Internet. An increasing number of 
libraries are building home pages on the World Wide Web 
from where users have access to a variety of services without 
physically entering a library. Also, information push and pull 
technologies have given librarian an opportunity to automate 
the required information gathering and dissemination to the 
users. 
Librarian in the Changing Environment 
The environment in which librarians work is changing in 
terms of greater access to a range of information, increased 
speed in acquiring information, greater complexity in locat-
ing, analyzing and linking information, constantly changing 
technology and adaptation, lack of standardization of both 
hardware and software, continuous learning for users and 
staff, management of financial investment for technology.  
The question of role of librarian in the new environment of 
exponentially growing Internet and World Wide Web has been 
addressed by a number of authors. On one hand, it has been 
postulated that librarians would play a more dynamic role 
than at present as guides to the information seekers in an ex-
 Rao and Babu 
 27 
ploding universe of information. In another way, the rise of 
digitized information is an opportunity to elevate the role of 
librarian and leads to the emergence of a new breed of librar-
ian: "The Cyber Librarian" or "Cybrarian" - a specialist in lo-
cating information on the Internet (Hathorn, 1997).  At the ex-
treme of the spectrum, on the other hand, total obsolescence 
and eclipse of library professionals in a scenario where 
knowledge base is diversified and wide and the developments 
in the fields like Artificial Intelligence, Neural Networks re-
sult in powerful, cost effective, user-friendly search strategies 
and methods (Brodie, 1995). 
The future scenario, however, may not be near any of these 
extremes. This is apparent from the facts like the information 
quantity has enormously increased and codification and clas-
sification of this information to facilitate easy location is best 
done now as well as in foreseeable future by the librarians. 
The familiarization with new gadgets and methodology of lo-
cating information for vast majority of population requires 
guides and librarians can easily fit into this role with training. 
The leveraging of the available information to suit the needs 
of the clientele is also best done by the librarians. 
Parallelism Between Information  
Science and Information Technology 
The advent of high-speed high memory computers and the 
developments in the sciences like Artificial Intelligence and 
Neural Networks, Statistical and Computational Methods 
have resulted in casting the traditional library operations in 
new light.  
The task of distilling information from a universe of data is 
addressed by the librarian, technologist and analyst in their 
own way. For the librarian it is the "searching the literature", 
for the technologist it is "data mining" and for the analyst it is 
"asking critical questions". The common feature in their en-
deavor is that the request for the information must be pre-
sented to the technology in a highly precise manner at the 
man-machine interface (Dallape and Bonski, 1997). For the 
librarian the aids for framing a query in a precise manner are 
linguistics, semantics, and context. The precise mechanisms 
developed by the technologist include Structured Query Lan-
guage (SQL) for relational data and Z39.50 WAIS (Wide Area 
Information Service) standard for accessing and retrieving 
free text data. 
The task of locating and finding the correct information is 
made easy by the technologist by introducing what is called 
"Metadata". Metadata is nothing but the data about data and 
describes the attributes and contents of an original document 
or work. Metadata makes information access easy by labeling 
the contents consistently and it leaves a pathway to the users 
to follow and find the information all in one place (Milstead 
and Feldman, 1999). For the librarian the traditional tasks of 
cataloguing and indexing are equivalent to the task of meta-
data by the technologist. 
The practice of classification of documents in a library aims at 
bringing related documents close together in the physical ar-
rangement in the stacks so that the users time is saved in lo-
cating all the documents relevant to a subject. The librarians 
use the standard classification schemes such as Universal 
Decimal Classification (UDC), Dewey Decimal Classification 
(DDC) etc for this purpose. The concept similar to classifica-
tion developed by technologist is "Clustering" or "Cluster 
Analysis". Clustering attempts to divide a collection of docu-
ments into groups or clusters, such that, the documents in the 
same cluster have high degree of homogeneity and the docu-
ments in different clusters have high degree of heterogeneity. 
Most of the existing methods for document clustering are 
based on either probabilistic method such as Bayesian classi-
fication or distance and similarity measures such as K-Means 
analysis, hierarchical clustering and Nearest-Neighbor cluster-
ing.  
Another development in the field of context information re-
trieval is the Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). Most of the ex-
isting approaches to retrieving textual material from scientific 
databases depend on a lexical match between words in users 
request and those in or assigned to documents in a database. 
Because of the diversity in the words people use to describe 
the same document, lexical methods are necessarily incom-
plete and imprecise. LSI tries to overcome the problems of 
lexical matching by using statistically derived conceptual in-
dices instead of individual words for retrieval. LSI assumes 
that there is some underlying or latent structure in word usage 
that is partially obscured by variability in word usage. In LSI, 
truncated Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is used to es-
timate the structure in word usage across documents. Re-
trieval is then performed using the database of singular values 
and vectors obtained from the truncated SVD. LSI is a com-
pletely automatic yet intelligent indexing method, widely ap-
plicable, and a promising way to improve users access to tex-
tual documents. 
Another information technology application similar to the 
document delivery or information dissemination in library 
science is the "Push and Pull technologies".  These technolo-
gies have emerged as useful concepts to describe the opera-
tion of distributed information resources in different formats 
i.e. text, images, sound, and video. Traditional information 
distribution applications are based on request/reply model, 
whereas push and pull technologies are based on client/server 
model. Web browsing, library searches, FTP, GOPHER, 
WAIS are examples of pull technology and e-mails, telephone 
newscasts, electronic newsletter are the examples of push 
technology. Another category of push technology is the Quasi-
push technology, which includes off-line web browsing, ena-
bling publishers to deliver customized information to niche 
audiences, notifying Web site visitors of updated content, and 
the distribution of software updates (Sigmon, 1997). Though 
the push technology may not meet the needs of the typical 
knowledge worker, it facilitates librarian to locate and auto-
Role of Librarian in Internet 
28 
mate distribution of relevant information to a large number of 
users. 
Librarians have traditionally concerned with certain functions 
in the print era i.e. collection development and acquisition, 
classification and cataloguing, circulation, reference service, 
preservation, conservation and archiving. Most of these have 
their parallel roles in the internetted information era. For ex-
ample, in the traditional library, acquisition of documents in-
volved a decision between either buying a physical item, or 
not buying it. For the electronic information available on the 
Web, "acquisition" offers a spectrum of choices such as: 
download, print or store on disks and facilitation to make 
electronic information available on a local area network. The 
distinction between types of library, defined by the nature of 
their collection may change with the availability of Internet 
and World Wide Web. 
It is often suggested that some or all of these functions be-
come redundant in an era when increasing amount of informa-
tion is available directly to users via Internet and World Wide 
Web. This argument is contradicted by a complaint that the 
Internet and World Wide Web is completely chaotic and peo-
ple waste much time in fruitless search for the precise infor-
mation they need. 
Librarians and Intelligent Agents 
The rapid growth of unstructured data on Internet and World 
Wide Web has created significant problems related to the effi-
ciency and accuracy of information retrieval. In addition, in-
formation repositories on Internet are heterogeneous, incon-
sistent and sometimes incomplete (Bowman et.al, 1994). To 
make effective use of this wealth of information, a number of 
resource discovery tools have been created. In Internet brows-
ing, the user follows the hypertext links to locate the informa-
tion. When the size of the Web increased beyond few sites and 
a small number of documents it became clear that manual 
browsing through a significant portion of the hypertext struc-
ture is no longer possible (Koster, 1995). To solve this prob-
lem and locate information required by the user search en-
gines have been developed. Many of the search engines use 
the concept of a ‘robot’ or ‘spider’, an automated browsing 
program. A web robot is a piece of program that traverses the 
Web’s hypertext structure by retrieving a document, and re-
cursively retrieving all documents that are referenced and de-
velops huge index database. When a user performs a search 
on a topic or keyword, Web search engines returns several 
thousands of hits, many of which may not be relevant to the 
user’s enquiry. The size and wide coverage of such a database 
can make it difficult to quickly and effectively track down 
relevant information using the limited searching features that 
are available (Stanley, 1997). In order to provide a solution to 
this problem, Intelligent Agents have been developed.  
Intelligent Agents are autonomous and adaptive computer 
programs operating within software environments such as op-
erating systems, databases, or computer networks. Intelligent 
Agent technology combines artificial intelligence (reasoning, 
planning, natural language processing, etc), and system de-
velopment techniques (object-oriented programming, script-
ing languages, human-machine interfaces, distributed process-
ing, etc) to produce a new generation of software that can, 
based on user preferences, perform routine tasks for users 
(Meek, 1995). Although they are still in their infancy, the In-
telligent Agents of tomorrow have the promise to relieve users 
of the time-consuming and tedious searches through a mas-
sive, intricate and globally dispersed Web of electronic infor-
mation. These agents will find, assemble and analyze infor-
mation that users need to solve problems, become better in-
formed and make intelligent decisions (Roesler and Hawjins, 
1994).  
Librarians have been efficiently accomplishing many of the 
tasks at which the artificial intelligence community is now 
working to make software agents competent. Therefore, the 
software agents can be developed by a look at how human in-
formation agents carryout their work. (Zick, 2000). Intelligent 
Agents will accelerate the change in the librarian’s role, ena-
bling more complex tasks like gathering a portfolio of infor-
mation on particular topic to be done electronically. This need 
not be construed as a threat, for, it is also an opportunity to re-
lieve the librarian of the drudgework of searching for informa-
tion, which more often than not is a boring task. If machines 
can do this work, librarians can spend their time on more in-
teresting tasks (Library Association, 1997). 
Qualities of Software to Become Intelligent 
Agent 
It is reasonable to say that the intelligence level of agents can 
be correlated to the degree to which they implement the fol-
lowing properties or qualities. 
Autonomy - Autonomous agents use their knowledge to han-
dle user-defined tasks independent of the user and often with-
out the user’s guidance or presence. 
Adaptive - Adaptive agents should be able to learn as they re-
act to or interact with external environment, so that their per-
formance improves over time. The external environment may 
include the physical world: users (humans), other agents, or 
the Internet and other resources. For this reason, adaptive 
agents are sometimes called as learning agents. 
 Rao and Babu 
 
Collaborative - When the task of finding the same informa-
tion in different sources is given to sets of agents, they may 
perform the task in parallel. In order to avoid the duplication, 
they must work together to establish which agent will carryout 
each task, and how they will merge the information they col-
lect for presentation to the users. Also, agents should be able 
to work in concert with other agents, possibly via an agent-
communication language, to achieve a common goal. 
Mobility - This concept refers to the ability of agents to mi-
grate in a self-directed way from one host to another on a 
network in order to perform their assigned duties. 
Modus Operandi of Librarians 
Librarian interacts with the user to provide reference service, 
learns and assesses user’s information needs. Librarian and 
the user work together to refine the information need itera-
tively as many clients are unclear about their needs. During 
this process librarian learns about the user’s context: history, 
preferences, constraints, etc. 
The next step the librarian may take is the formation of search 
strategy such as selection of databases resources, search terms 
and operators. Subsequently he executes the search and finds 
the information. Past experience with the user and the knowl-
edge of user context for each information request guides the 
librarian to find more relevant information. 
Librarian follows certain steps to filter information while se-
lecting a database, choosing search terms and operators. Fi-
nally he eliminates the false drops and duplicates from the re-
sults using the knowledge of the context of the information 
need and the profile he had constructed for the user. 
Librarians usually arrange search results into customized sets 
for the user such as sorting the results by relevance, chrono-
logical, author alphabetical, collection-wise, and indication of 
availability of articles in their library. Intelligent Agents also 
perform similar procedure for providing information to the 
user.  
Working of Intelligent Agents 
The creator of Intelligent Agents utilizes the abilities that are 
available in artificial intelligence, computer hardware, soft-
ware, communication and databases technologies, etc. to 
mimic the task of the librarians explained above. Figure be-
low shows the general working process of intelligent agents. 
Librarian Vis-a-Vis Intelligent Agents 
Will the librarian exists in the Internet environment due to 
proliferation of Intelligent Agents? What roles the librarians 
are going to play? Librarians are becoming more important in 
the information-centric universe. Intelligent Agents will act as 
catalysts to enhance the role of librarians. Librarians are al-
ready fulfilling new roles as content providers, search strate-
g
r
t
e
(
T
q
i
e
t
t
t
b
t
l
O
S
n
w
s
i
e
b
t
1
e
s
L
t
s
a
o
Results Retrieved  Packaging of  29 
ists, digital catalogers and information mechanics. These 
oles will only grow and new opportunities will flourish with 
he development of truly intelligent agents that build upon the 
xperience of librarians and information professionals 
Valauskas, 1997).  
he precise information needs of a user/person can be grasped 
uickly and correctly by another human being. To convert the 
nformation needs or queries into a machine-readable and ex-
cutable form often is very involved and time consuming. Yet 
he full essence of the user needs may remain un-captured in 
his process. The adequacy, appropriateness, and timeliness of 
he information gathered by Intelligent Agents can be judged 
est either by the librarian or the user of the information. In 
he event of non-availability of the user for consultation 
ibrarian is the best judge. 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Threats and 
pportunities for Librarians in the Web 
ince the 1800s, the field of librarianship has seen the tech-
ology grow from handwriting to electronic pen, to type-
riter, to word processor, and now to computer. Electronic re-
ources and the Internet now help to make the task of obtain-
ng reference material more accessible and much faster than 
ver before. Already computer databases have rendered the 
ulky card catalogs obsolete and new media have broadened 
he range of materials available for browsing (Percovitz, 
995). The technology changes have been affecting almost 
very type of library including public, school, academic and 
pecial. Very few libraries have been immune to technology. 
ibrarianship is one of the oldest professions in the world and 
he times call for a new breed of librarians, those who under-
tand and integrate technology, information and learning into 
 new model (Drake, 1996). However, to sustain in the field 
f librarianship, librarians need to equip with technical skills 
USER INTELLIGENT  AGENT 
INTELLIGENT 
AGENTS
HUMAN 
USERS
INTERNET
USER 
PROFILE 
User Enquiry or
Information Needs
Process 
Search Request 
for the Request Information to User
Working of Intelligent Agents 
Role of Librarian in Internet 
30 
such as knowledge of HTML, programming languages, 
knowledge of hardware basics and troubleshooting, under-
standing of software programs, and the skill to search, display, 
and retrieve data effectively in a variety of information re-
trieval systems (Morris, 1999). 
The following are strengths and weaknesses inherent in the li-
brary science profession.  
Strengths 
• By the nature of their profession, librarians are service 
oriented. 
• Librarians are able to identify, evaluate and organize print 
as well as electronic information resources. 
• Librarians understand what the user wants and are very 
close to the user information requirements than other pro-
fessionals. 
• Librarians are able to train users to search and retrieve in-
formation, which is a part of user education in his profes-
sion. 
• Librarians believe in the value of information sharing and 
networking. 
• Librarians are experienced in knowledge management 
concepts, which are most identical to the classification, 
cataloguing, documentation, storing and making informa-
tion available on networks. 
• Last, but not least, ‘human touch’ they can impart. 
Weaknesses  
• The general feeling of the librarians is that they are 
threatened by technological change. 
• Librarians lack same level of technical knowledge in 
dealing with computer hardware, software, etc. as the 
concerned professionals. 
• Librarians are no longer acting as controllers of informa-
tion especially while using Internet. 
• They are struggling with the user’s false perception that 
the Internet can meet all information needs. 
• Librarians need to interact with knowledgeable users and 
IT professionals to understand their specific needs and to 
add value to their products. (Smee et.al, 1999).  
Threats (Challenges) 
Is the Internet a threat to librarians? Will the increasing use of 
Internet lessen library traffic? Can the libraries not online 
compete with those with online? These are some of the ques-
tions that are asked by those who all of a sudden became 
aware of what is happening in the library and information sci-
ence field. It is a fact that information is no longer print based 
alone. It is a fact that Internet has become part of day-to-day 
life of a majority of academic, business and Government 
communities. It is every day scene that information resources, 
library users are turning to electronic media and phenomenal 
storage capabilities have been built into DVD-ROMs, port-
able hard disks, etc. Information, in a nutshell, is digital plus 
print. If libraries have to stay as information providers this re-
ality has to reflect in their content, constitution, and working. 
This reality also should reflect in all budgeting and funding 
action of the libraries. The change that is called for is best 
viewed as an opportunity to stay tuned to the times rather than 
something undesirable. Inherent improvement has taken place 
in the normal work of the librarian and the opportunities that 
opened up as a result of digitization of information could be 
summarized as below. 
Opportunities 
There are numerous opportunities for the librarian in Internet 
and Web environment in providing information services eas-
ily, timely and appropriately to the users.  
• Universal Accessibility of Material – Same electronic 
document will be viewed by multiple users simultane-
ously, which eliminates the waiting periods for popular 
documents in the library. Rare and fragile historical 
documents will be scanned and stored for electronic 
viewing by numerous users around the world for indefi-
nite periods. 
• Patron Initiated Inter-Library Services – In the cyber li-
brary links will be provided for searching electronically 
stored material as in the traditional method by author, title 
or subject. Once the appropriate material is located, users 
can view at their terminal. If the desired material is not 
located during the search, the user will electronically for-
ward a request to the librarian to arrange the document on 
inter-library loan from another library. 
• Book and Reading Lists – Reader’s advisory services 
have not disappeared from the list of functions libraries 
traditionally perform. Web versions of book and reading 
lists are available for users. 
• Online Catalogs – The catalogs of many of leading librar-
ies these days are available in Web-based and telnet based 
formats for platform independent easy browsing. 
• Local Databases – Creation and provision of access to lo-
cal information by the librarians has taken new life on the 
Internet.   
• E-Newsletters – Communicating the news of the library 
to its users of both physical and virtual collections takes 
many forms such as electronic newsletters-bulletins, etc. 
• Virtual Reference Desks – Earlier, reference librarian was 
available in person, or on phone. Because of the Web, vir-
tual reference librarian is available via e-mail or through a 
Web form for providing reference services to the users. 
Many find that this facility is highly useful as it replaces 
the rigidity of sticking to timings for person-to-person 
contact. 
• Virtual Tours – Virtual tours have been created by the li-
brarian to describe the physical library. 
• Web Forms – Web forms increasingly allow online provi-
sion of services formerly reserved for inside the wall 
 Rao and Babu 
 31 
transaction like Inter-library loan form, book and journal 
requisition form, suggestion form, etc. 
• Cooperative Cataloguing – Librarians use the Web to as-
sist in cooperative catalog of Web-based resources. 
• Distance Education Support, provision of access to E-
Journals, coordination of Electronic Bulletin Boards, 
posting guides, and hosting online tutorials are some of 
the opportunities for librarians in the Web environment. 
It is an indisputable fact that knowledge is power in the mod-
ern organizations. Acquiring greater skill, wider knowledge 
and familiarity with the important facets of individuals work 
will definitely contribute to the enlargement of ones knowl-
edge base. A knowledgeable librarian is better placed to face 
the changes and the uncertainties in the emerging scenario. 
Earlier times, library & information science courses were not 
very demanding and used to attract mediocre students. This 
situation is not the same any more. A library & information 
science student should possess the aptitude and ability to work 
with modern technologies in the field of information science. 
In order to serve in the modern information age, the erstwhile 
traditional librarians would be better placed if they change 
their mindset and make efforts to become familiar, if not pro-
ficient, in the use of modern day tools. 
Role of Librarian in Internet and  
World Wide Web Environment 
Internet and World Wide Web are very powerful and bringing 
changes not only in librarianship but also in his daily profes-
sional activities. Ever since the creation of United States Ma-
chine Readable Cataloguing (USMARC) record in the late 
1960's and the resulting proliferation of online catalogs, li-
brarians have been spurred by technological developments to 
become more efficient organizers, indexers, abstractors, ar-
chivers, in addition to assuming new roles such as, intermedi-
ary, facilitator, end-user trainer/educator, web organizer & de-
signer, researcher, interface designer, knowledge manager/ 
professional and sifter of information resources. 
While the librarian plays many roles in an organization, it is 
difficult to identify a role as primary one as the same changes 
from time-to-time depending on the organizational objectives 
and requirements. 
Librarians As Search Intermediary 
In an organization, though librarians began training end-users 
to perform their own searches, the demand for searches by in-
formation professionals have not decreased. End-users having 
been trained and having performed some of their own 
searches became aware of the complexities of searching, the 
limitations of some of the resources and of the searching 
process especially on World Wide Web. So, a more educated 
user who continues to perform simple searches on his own 
behalf, returns to the librarian or information specialist to per-
form the more complex searches. The effect on librarians has 
been an increase in workload because the searches are more 
complex and the amount of time per search has increased. 
Hence, there will always be a role for the search intermediary.  
An Intermediary is defined by Peter Ingwersen (Ingwersen, 
1992) as "A person or mechanism placed physically between 
IR (Information Retrieval) systems and actual user with the 
purpose to transform interactively requests for information to 
query formulations that suit the retrieval components of one 
or several IR systems, to model and support the actual user as 
to his information need and underlying goals, and to provide 
information of potential value to that user from IR systems". 
Traditionally a human intermediary is a librarian or an infor-
mation specialist. An IR system includes text-presentations, 
classification and indexing systems, and IR techniques in 
catalogues and databases or other information sources. How-
ever, research in this field is directed towards implementing 
non-human intermediary functions into online IR systems 
through user interfaces and system setting. 
In addition to more efficient and more effective searches by 
librarians, research has determined that a single librarian or 
information professional can save the equivalent amount of 
time of three, or four, or even five end-users. In other words 
librarians are three, or four, or five times more efficient and 
more effective than end-users are at performing their own in-
formation searching activities (Griffiths, 1995). This, proba-
bly, is the most important point to remember, because it is 
why librarians will continue to play a role in the newly emerg-
ing digital information world. So, those searches which are 
not straightforward will always tend to be delegated to an in-
termediary for querying and providing packaged answer, 
drawing on a range of resources like print, online biblio-
graphic databases, Internet and Web documents. 
In India, the availability of infrastructure for exploiting the 
Web fully like high speed Internet connectivity, access to CD-
ROM databases are in the process of catching up with the ad-
vanced countries like USA. However, the lack of the same is 
not a damper to the enthusiast of young library & information 
science professionals in the making. They have the idea and 
vision of what the Web can do and means to them. 
Librarian As Facilitator 
The availability of electronic documents on Internet and the 
support extended by World Wide Web to access these docu-
ments have recently increased tremendously. Several print 
journals have shifted their platform to Web, which includes 
free and paid publications.  In this scenario, it is imperative 
for the traditional librarian to acquire necessary skills in effec-
tive use of modern gadgets and associated software to locate 
and retrieve the widely dispersed information in the cyber-
space. Not only he has to acquaint himself but also gain a de-
gree of proficiency to effectively guide and train the informa-
tion seekers in their usage. Thus, the traditional librarian has 
Role of Librarian in Internet 
32 
to play the role of facilitator in identification, gathering and 
arranging information infrastructure such as network access, 
software access, licenses and passwords to use charged re-
sources like FirstSearch, UnCover, Ovid etc. 
The role of the facilitator if characterized by qualifications 
would be closely related to the ones of the librarian. It is 
likely to emerge that the traditional intermediary function of 
the librarian by its nature could create a basis for the role of 
the facilitator in a networked community (Schreiber and Mor-
ing, 1997). Normally, the facilitator does not solve the total 
information problems of users. He addresses the communica-
tions and information needs of the users in one way or another 
and makes an identification of resources for fulfilling the 
needs of users.  
Librarians As End-User Trainer/ Educator 
The number and variety of information sources available, 
whether locally or remotely via the WWW have increased 
greatly, and users in many cases have not been able to keep up 
with all of the choices open to them. Few users of the libraries 
are effective and efficient in accessing information resources. 
However, no matter how sophisticated interfaces and search 
engines come up in future information access systems, people 
still would need to be educated regarding their usage. Users 
will need to possess an understanding of essential information 
gathering skills and tools. The areas in which training is given 
by the librarian would include not only the use of electronic 
primary journals from many different publishers, but also the 
use of abstracts and indexing databases, databanks, CD-ROM 
publications and document delivery services. End-user train-
ing aspect of librarian would also include organization of in-
formation resources, search strategies, tools, information 
searching skills, awareness of resource constraints and alerts 
to users on new resources in their subject area. The librarian 
therefore, has a critical role in the digital library of future as 
educator or end-user trainer. 
Librarian As Web Site Builder or Publisher 
The traditional skill of a librarian in locating, evaluating and 
organizing the information would be of immense use in the 
creation, development and content filling of a Web site for the 
organization and library. Web site of an organization provides 
access to external resources, where Web pages specific to 
their discipline are available. Managing organization's own in-
formation on the Web site includes details of course informa-
tion, directories, statutes, annual reports, etc., The role of the 
librarian while creating a web page is to deliver information 
about the library and its services like hours of service, loca-
tion of services, details of library staff, library policies, an in-
terface to the library Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC), 
etc, 
Librarian As Researcher 
Librarians are highly skilled in the research process and pos-
sess a unique knowledge of the breadth and depth of informa-
tion resources in various subject specialties. Librarians are in-
creasingly going to participate in and be critical members of 
research teams. By facilitating access to information - finding 
it, analyzing, synthesizing, and packaging - librarians would 
move to the beginning of the information production cycle, 
playing a more substantial role in the information creation 
process. Teams within an organization should have an infor-
mation professional who is responsible for the information-
gathering skills of the team. 
Librarian As Interface Designer 
Interface design is going to become increasingly important 
and increasingly relevant to the way people access and use 
digital technologies. A beneficial way for librarians to break 
out of their insularity is to become much more closely in-
volved and collaborate in the work of computer and informa-
tion scientists in tasks such as design, organization, develop-
ment, and maintenance of digital library repositories, inter-
faces, search engines, networks and Web documents. Librar-
ian can help in the design of technology-based information 
services and share their intimate knowledge of what users 
want and need as they have years of experience in helping pa-
trons utilize electronic media and subsequently using Internet 
and World Wide Web. 
Librarian As Knowledge Manager/ Profes-
sional 
Knowledge Management (KM) involves the identification and 
analysis of available and required knowledge, and the subse-
quent planning and control of actions to develop knowledge 
assets so as to fulfill organizational objectives.  Organizations 
worldwide are realizing the advantages of enlisting librarians 
in the KM systems. Librarian as a part of KM system can ef-
fectively participate in the process of knowledge creation 
which include mechanisms for knowledge capture, exploita-
tion and protection besides in required infrastructure creation 
by the virtue of capabilities gained as Information Managers 
of the organization. 
The creation of the knowledge center in an organization nor-
mally involves contributions from three groups of experts 
such as users, knowledge professionals and technology ex-
perts. Knowledge professionals are the individuals in the 
knowledge center who have the skills, training and know-how 
to organize knowledge into systems and structures that facili-
tate the productive use of knowledge resources. They include 
librarians, managers, archivists, and others.  
Librarians to become Knowledge Managers or Professionals 
should possess variety of talents and perform the work with 
high level of skill and expertise. They should be able to ex-
 Rao and Babu 
 33 
tract, filter and disseminate vital external knowledge, and 
work side by side with users in collecting and analyzing stra-
tegic intelligence throughout the organization. Librarians, in 
future, would move from the background to the center of the 
organization. They would shed their traditional role as a part 
of support group, uninvolved in any critical functions, to a 
prominent position to jointly hold the reins of knowledge 
management with users and the technology experts. They 
would help steer and shape the knowledge policies, structures, 
processes, and systems that will nurture organizational learn-
ing (Seonghee, 1999).  
Librarian As Sifter of Information Resources 
Normally, sifter or siftware is described as "software pro-
grams to extract unknown, valid, and actionable patterns, as-
sociations, changes, anomalies, and rules from large data-
bases". This process is also known as "Data Mining". The 
Internet and Web provide access to vast information re-
sources. The term "sifter" may be used for the skilled librarian 
who helps users make sense and order of the resources. The 
future belongs neither to the conduit or content players but to 
those who control the filtering, searching, and sense-making 
tools to navigate through the expanses of cyberspace (Saffo, 
1994). In another words, the librarian can be a key player in 
the emerging scenario. 
Conclusion 
The role of librarians is continuing to evolve with the adop-
tion of Internet and World Wide Web into the profession of li-
brarianship. Though it is difficult to predict with certainty 
how active the role of librarians would be in this evolving 
scenario, it can be said with confidence that their services 
cannot be dispensed with because they have the necessary 
qualification and historically the first right to attend to the in-
formation needs of the seekers. 
Acknowledgements 
The encouragement and support given by Mr. Prahlada, Di-
rector, DRDL, Hyderabad in promoting information technol-
ogy in general and for preparing this article in particular are 
acknowledged. 
References 
Bowman, C.M., Danzig, P.B., Manber, U., and Schwart, M.F. (1994). 
Scalable Internet Resource Discovery: Research Problems and Ap-
proaches. Communication of the ACM, 37(8), 98-107. 
Brodie, M.(1995). Process Reengineering in Academic Libraries: Shift-
ing to Client-Centered Resource Provision". CAUSE/EFFECT, 
18(2). Accessed April 4, 2001 at: 
http://www.educause.edu/pub/ce/cem95/cem952.html . 
Dallape, L., and Bonski, D.J.(1997). Do Digital Libraries Need Librari-
ans? An Experimental Dialog. ONLINE, 21(6). Accessed April 5, 
2001 at: 
http://www.onlineinc.com/onlinemag/NovOL97/matson11.html. 
Drake, M.A.(1996). Information, Librarians, and Learning: The chal-
lenge Ahead. Follett Lecture Series. Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/services/papers/follett/drake/paper.html 
Griffiths, J.(1995). The Changing Role of Librarians: Managing New 
Technologies in Libraries. In: Library and Information Services in 
Astronomy II, ESO, Garching,Germany, 10-12 May. Accessed 
April 5, 2001 at: http://www.eso.org/gen-fac/libraries/lisa-
ii/papers/griffiths/ jose-marie-griffiths.html 
Grothkopf, U.(1997).  Bits and Bytes and Still a Lot Of Paper: Astron-
omy Libraries and Librarians in the Age of Electronic Publishing. 
Astrophysics and Space Science, 247, 155-174. 
Hathorn, C.(1997). The Librarian is Dead, Long Live the Librarian. 
PRETEXT Magazine. Accessed April 4, 2001 at: 
http://www.pretext.com/oct97/ features /story4.htm  
Ingwersen, P.(1992). Information Retrieval Interaction. London: Taylor 
Graham. pp.228 
Kim, S.(1999). The Roles of Knowledge Professionals for Knowledge 
Management. In: 65th IFLA Council and General Conference, 
Bangkok, Thailand, 20-28 August. Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.ifla.org.sg//IV/ifla65/papers /042-115e.htm 
Koster, M.(1995). Robots in the Web: Threat of Treat?. ConneXions, 
9(4). Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://info.webcrawler.com/mak/projects/robots/threat-or-treat.html 
Library Association.(1997). Intelligent Agents: Is this software after 
your job? Library Association Record, 99 (7). Accessed April 5, 
2001 at: http://www.la-hq.org.uk/directory/record/r199707/ 
agents.html 
Meek, J.(1995). Intelligent Agents, Internet Information, and Interfaces. 
Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 11(2), 75-90. Ac-
cessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://cleo.murdoch.edu.au/gen/aset/ajet/ajet11/su95p75.html . 
Milstead, J. and Feldman, S.(1999). Metadata: Cataloguing by Any 
Other Name. Online, 23(1). Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
www.onlineinc.com/onlinemag/OL1999/milstead1.html . 
Morris, B.A.(1999). Digital Libraries: Their Impact on the Future of the 
Library and Librarians. Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.biermans.com/culminating/spring1999.htm 
Percovitz, D.(1995). The Future of Libraries. Wired, 3.12. Accessed  
April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.wired.com/wired/3.12/departments/reality.check  
Roesler, M. and Hawjins, D.T. (1994). Intelligent Agents: Software Ser-
vants for an Electronic Information World (And more!). Online, 
18(4), 18-32. 
Saffo, P. (1994). It's is the content, stupid. Wired, 2(3). Accessed April 
5, 2001 at: http://www.wired.com/wired/archie/2.03/context.html . 
Schreiber, T. and Moring, C(1997). The Communicative and Organiza-
tional Competencies of the Librarian in Networked Learning Sup-
port: A Comparative Analysis of the Roles of the Facilitator and the 
Librarian. In: 2nd International Symposium on Networked Learner 
Support: New Services, Roles and Partnerships for the On-line 
Learning Environment, 23rd - 24th June, Sheffield, England. Ac-
cessed April 5, 2001 at:  
http://www.netways.shef.ac.uk/rbase/papers/moring.htm  
Sigmon, T.(1997). The Push of the Internet. Virginia.edu, 1(2). Ac-
cessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.itc.virginia.edu/virginia.edu/fall97/newtech/all.html 
Role of Librarian in Internet 
34 
Smee, P., North, S., and Jones, H.(1999). The Information Triangle. In: 
8th Asia-Pacific Specials, Health and Law Librarians Conference. 
Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.alia.org.au/conferences/shllc/1999/papers/smee.html 
Stanley, T.(1997). Intelligent Searching Agents on the Web. Ariadne 
Journal, 7. Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue7/search-engines/ 
Valauskas, E.J.(1997). Who’s Afraid of an Intelligent Agents?”. Internet 
Trend Watch for Librarians, 2(3). 
Zick, L.(2000). The Work of Information Mediators: A Comparison of 
Librarians and Intelligent Software Agents. First Monday, 5(5). 
Accessed April 5, 2001 at: 
http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue5_5/zick   
 
 

