Working Paper Series, 15 
 
 
 
 
 
              From the 'Digital Divide' to 'Digital Inequality':  
              Studying Internet Use as Penetration Increases* 
 
 
 
                Paul DiMaggio and Eszter Hargittai  
                Working Paper #15, Summer 2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Center for Arts and Cultural Policy Studies 
          artspol@princeton.edu 
          (609) 258-5180 
 
 
 
Keywords 
Digital divide, Internet, World Wide Web, computer use, social inequality 
• Support from the Center for Arts and Cultural Policy Studies, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton 
University through a grant from the Pew Charitable Trusts is gratefully acknowledged, as is support 
from NSF grant # Z362401 and assistance from the Russell Sage Foundation.  The authors’ names 
are in alphabetical order, each having contributed equally to the paper.  The authors can be reached 
at eszter@princeton.edu or dimaggio@princeton.edu. 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
We contend that as Internet penetration increases, students of inequality of access to the 
new information technologies should shift their attention from the “digital divide” --- ine-
quality between “haves” and “have-nots” differentiated by dichotomous measures of access 
to or use of the new technologies --- to digital inequality, by which we refer not just to 
differences in access, but also to inequality among persons with formal access to the 
Internet. After reviewing data on Internet penetration, we describe five dimensions of 
digital inequality --- in equipment, autonomy of use, skill, social support, and the purposes 
for which the technology is employed -- that we believe deserve additional attention.  In 
each case, we develop hypotheses to guide research, with the goal of developing a testable 
model of the relationship between individual characteristics, dimensions of inequality, and 
positive outcomes of technology use.  Finally, because the rapidity of organizational as 
well as technical change means that we cannot presume that current patterns of inequality 
will persist into the future, we call on students of digital inequality to study institutional 
issues in order to understand patterns of inequality as evolving consequences of interactions 
among firms’ strategic choices, consumers’ responses, and government policies. 
From the 'Digital Divide' to 'Digital Inequality': Studying Internet Use as 
Penetration Increases 
Paul DiMaggio and Eszter Hargittai  
Princeton University 
 
The Internet boosts immeasurably our collective capacity to archive information, search through 
large quantities of it quickly, and retrieve it rapidly.  It is said that the Internet will expand access to 
education, good jobs, and better health; and that it will create new deliberative spaces for political 
discussion and provide citizens with direct access to government.   In so far as such claims are 
plausible, Internet access is an important resource and inequality in Internet access is a significant 
public policy issue.    
Policy makers and social scientists have worried about the distribution of Internet access 
since the emergence of the Internet as a mass medium in the mid-1990s.  At first, observers 
believed that the Internet, and especially the World Wide Web, would enhance equality of access to 
information by reducing dramatically information’s cost.  As technological euphoria wore off, 
however, observers noted that some kinds of people were more likely to use the Internet than others 
--- and that, for the most part, groups with higher levels of access to the Internet were the same 
groups (whites, men, residents of urban areas) that had greater access to education, income, and 
other resources that help people get ahead (Hoffman and Novak, 1998, 1999; Benton 1998; Strover 
1999).  This concern about inequality, and about the possibility that the new technology might 
prove to exacerbate inequality rather than ameliorate it, focused on what analysts have called “the 
digital divide” between the online and the offline, the information “haves” and “have-nots.”    
 Concern over this form of inequality emerged as early as 1995 (Anderson et al. 1995), when 
just 3 percent of Americans had ever used the World Wide Web (Pew Center 1995).  Over the past 
five years, researchers in government and the private sector have undertaken numerous surveys that 
have documented persistent differences in the rates at which members of different groups use the 
new medium (NTIA 1995, 1998, 1999, 2000).   
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---2--- 
 Although operational definitions of access have varied from study to study, most attention has 
been devoted to exploring the dichotomous distinction between people who use the Web and other 
Internet services and people who do not.  In earlier work, the term “access” was used literally to 
refer to whether a person had the means to connect to the Internet if she or he so chose.  More 
recently, “access” is sometimes used as a synonym for use.   This is unfortunate, because studies 
that have measured both access and the extent of Internet use have found, first, that more people 
have access than use it (NTIA 1998); and, second, that whereas resources drive access, demand 
drives intensity of use among people who have access.  Thus young adults are less likely to report 
having access than adults between the ages of 25 and 54 (NTIA 2000); but in homes with Internet 
access, teenagers spend more time online than adults (Kraut et al 1996).  Similarly, using 
multivariate methods and multiple access measures, Bimber (2000) reported that gender differences 
in income and other resources account for the gap between men and women in access to the Inter-
net, but that among people with access, women use the Internet less frequently than otherwise 
comparable men, independent of differences in income. 
The dichotomous view of the “Digital Divide” as a distinction between people who do and do 
not have Internet access was natural and appropriate at the beginning of the diffusion process.  
Moreover, in the United States it was consistent with a federal-government policy paradigm dating 
back to the Eisenhower administration, and based on the experience of the telephone  --- a 
paradigm that focussed exclusively on access (defined in a binary fashion) at the household level, 
with special concern for inequality between rural and urban areas (a distinction that was salient due 
both to the economics of establishing telephone networks in rural areas and to the bipartisan appeal 
of programs that assist rural America).   This tradition is evident in the National Tele-
communications and Information Administration's (NTIA) first study of the digital divide (Falling 
Through the Net, 1995).   The authors of that report carefully framed attention to the Internet as 
continuous with existing policy, noting:   
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---3--- 
At the core of U.S. telecommunications policy is the goal of  'universal service' – the idea 
that all Americans should have access to affordable telephone service. The most 
commonly used measure of the nation’s success in achieving universal service is 
'telephone penetration' – the percentage of all U.S. households that have a telephone on-
premises (1). 
 Consistent with this tradition, that report included data only on households, emphasized 
a binary distinction between “haves” and “have-nots,” and – most strikingly – presented all 
data separately for rural, urban, and central-city categories.  (The latter reflected the grafting of 
Great Society concerns with racial inequality onto traditional concerns with rural America --- a 
union reflected as well in references to rural “have-nots” and “disadvantaged” central-city 
dwellers.)   As the NTIA’s research program evolved, the practice of reporting all data separ-
ately for rural and other Americans was abandoned, and separate reports for new categories of 
“have-nots” – based on race, income, education, age, and, most recently, disability status 
(NTIA 2000) have been added.  Beginning in 1999, data have been reported at the individual 
as well as the household level.      
 Research on access establishes a baseline of success for a fundamental policy goal and has 
been valuable for both scholars and policy makers.  Now, however, we believe that the time is ripe 
for a shift of emphasis.  We agree that public policy should strive to create a society in which the 
benefits of the new information technologies are distributed equally, as a source of opportunity 
rather than as a reinforcement of privilege.   But we believe that the research questions and 
methods appropriate for illuminating distributive issues are different now than they were at an 
earlier stage of the Internet’s diffusion. 
 Specifically, we raise questions about both the beginning and the end of the phrase “access 
to the Internet.”  First, we would redefine “access”: in social as well as technological terms:  As the 
technology penetrates into every crevice of society, the pressing question will be not ‘who can find 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---4--- 
a network connection at home, work, or in a library or community center from which to log on?’, 
but instead, ‘what are people doing, and what are they able to do, when they go on-line.’  Second, 
we would recognize that the “Internet” itself is not a fixed object, but rather a protean family of 
technologies and services that is being rapidly reshaped through the interacting efforts of profit-
seeking corporations, government agencies and nongovernmental organizations.  Patterns of 
inequality will reflect not just differences in individual resources, but also the way in which 
economic and political factors make such differences matter.   We focus our empirical remarks on 
the United States, but believe that our perspective applies to other societies as well. 
Why Rising Penetration Levels Require an Expanded Paradigm 
In its rapid diffusion, the Internet is repeating in a different and somewhat compressed form a 
process witnessed in other communication technologies like telephones, radio, and television.  At 
first, access to the new technology is restricted to an elite (defined either by wealth, institutional 
location, or both), and the great distinction is between haves and have-nots.  Gradually, penetration 
increases, reducing the gap in access between rich and poor, urban and rural dwellers, old and 
young, the well educated and the unschooled.   As access diffuses to parts of the public who were 
initially excluded, dimensions related to quality of use become important bases by which the 
benefits of the technology are stratified.   
Access to and use of the Internet has spread widely and swiftly.  The number of Americans 
online grew from 25 million in 1995 (Pew 1995) to 83 million in 1999 (IntelliQuest 1999), with 55 
million Americans using the Internet on a typical day by mid-2000 (Pew 2000:5).  In 1994, just 11 
percent of U.S. households had on-line access (NTIA 1995).  By December 1998 this figure had 
grown to 26.2 percent.  Less than two years later it stood at 41.5 percent, and well over 50 percent 
of individuals between the ages of 9 and 49 reported going on-line at home, work, or some other 
location (NTIA 2000).   A November/December 2000 survey by the Pew Internet and American 
Life project found 58 percent of a national sample on-line (Horrigan 2000b: 7).  Other estimates 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---5--- 
place the proportion of Americans who use the Internet at as high as 67 percent (Lebo 2000: 10).   
Many more have “Internet access,” in the sense that term was used in the early Digital Divide 
reports (NTIA 1995, 1998): i.e., they have an available on-line connection (whether or not they 
choose to use it) at home, work, school, library or other community access center. 
 Other things equal, as use of a new technology diffuses, intergroup variation in the odds of 
having access declines.  So long as the individual characteristics and group memberships with 
respect to which access is unequally distributed are only moderately correlated with one another), 
purely structural factors account for this greater equality (this argument draws on the theoretical 
insights of Blau 1977).  The reason is this: access to new technologies is ordinarily associated with 
advantaged positions with respect to a number of weakly or moderately correlated statuses or 
resources – for example, income, white-collar work, educational level, race, rural residence, and 
gender.   When penetration is low, access is dominated by persons occupying privileged positions 
on all of these parameters.   Note, however, that a much smaller proportion of the population is 
privileged with respect to all parameters than is privileged with respect to each.   For example, 
there are many more white-collar employees than there are high-income, white, male, white-collar 
workers who are college graduates living in urban areas.   As penetration grows, access overflows 
the most multiply privileged population groups, extending to individuals who are privileged with 
respect to some parameters but disadvantaged with respect to another.  
This tendency is reinforced by the fact that social relations are homophilous with respect to 
many status characteristics at the same time (Marsden 1987).  This means that new adopters who 
are disprivileged with respect to one or more status parameters may serve as conduits through 
which information about the new technology flows to others who share those disadvantaging 
characteristics.  For example, if an Hispanic white-collar worker who lives in a rural area gains 
access to the Internet at her workplace, she may use the knowledge and skills she acquires to help 
family members who are not white-collar workers gain access to the Internet as well, thus tending 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---6--- 
to reduce inequality in access between Hispanic and non-Hispanic Americans, and between urban 
and rural dwellers. 
Consistent with this argument, as penetration has increased, inequality of access has 
declined.  In 1998 and, again, in 2000, surveys found that new users had lower incomes and less 
education than Americans who had been on-line longer (Horrigan 2000a).   Indeed, the most recent 
report from the Department of Commerce (NTIA 2000) emphasizes that groups that have been 
behind in achieving computer ownership and access to the Internet have made significant steps, 
“suggesting that digital inclusion is a realizable goal.” 
The proportion of Americans who go on-line is certain to continue to rise, even if the rate of 
growth may have moderated around mid-1999 (Robinson and Neustadtl 2001).   A Spring 2000 
poll by the Pew Center reported 41 percent of the 50 percent of Americans who did not use the 
Internet intended to do so (Lenhardt 2000: 2).  If they did (and if those who said they probably or 
definitely would not go on-line did not), the proportion of Internet users would rise above 70 
percent.   Moreover, non-users’ expectations are strongly correlated with age --- of nonusers 50 
years old or younger, 65 percent expect to go on-line, compared to just 36 percent of nonusers over 
50.   This indicates that generational succession will send Internet usage rates even higher.  Based 
on these cohort differences, the Pew study’s author writes, “Perhaps in a generation, Internet 
penetration will reach the levels enjoyed by the telephone…and the television” (ibid). 
At that point, access to the Internet could no longer contribute significantly to social ineq-
uality, simply because nearly everyone would have it.   Like efforts to extend telephone service, the 
attempt to ensure that every American could go on-line, while important from a policy perspective, 
would represent a mopping-up operation.  
But would this mean that the “digital divide” had been overcome, in the sense that equality 
of access to the benefits of the Internet would have been achieved?  Some policy analysts have 
implied that this is the case.  Drawing on the history of telephone access, Compaine (2000) argues 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---7--- 
against legislation to ensure universal access because the combination of market forces and 
government programs currently in place are achieving that goal already.   
We question whether the telephone is the right analogy.   For one thing, the view of 
telephone access as a binary good – a good for which the critical distinction is simply whether one 
has it or not – is only appropriate to the last quarter of the 20th century.  In the early and middle 
years of telephony, service varied in quality, some Americans connected through party lines and 
were thus unable to use the technology for confidential communication whereas others had indiv-
idual connections, and long-distance service rates were discriminatory (Fischer 1992).  In the first 
part of the 21st century, the rise of cell phones, palm pilots, and other devices that blur the 
distinction between telephones and computers are re-differentiating telephone access.   
By the same token, the ability to log on to the Internet differs from the ability to pick up a 
receiver and find a dial tone in that the range of uses to which one can put the Internet, and the 
extent to which many of these uses depend on the quality of connections and equipment, user 
know-how, and social support, are far greater than was the case for the telephone even a decade 
ago.  In this respect, the Internet is less similar to the late 20th-century version of telephony than to 
many other goods and services that are distributed unequally.   And researchers can draw profitably 
on the histories of research in these fields, where scholars first collected and reported dichotomous 
measures of access to broadly defined resources and then, as access and scholarly sophistication 
increased, came to define their object in more differentiated terms, shifting their attention to 
inequality in specific features upon which the benefits of the good or service were conditioned.  
Studies of educational opportunity, for example, initially focused on intergroup differences in rates 
of high school and college attendance and graduation.   As these rates increased, the focus 
expanded to include differences among high school and college students: for example, inequality in 
access to college-preparatory tracks and elite universities, or variations among different kinds of 
children in class size, school resources, or the availability of advanced placement courses (see Brint 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---8--- 
1998 for a review).  This shift in focus reflected both researchers’ belief in the intrinsic importance 
of such factors and their interest in understanding the social processes that accounted for variation 
in achievement, educational attainment, and the effects of schooling on career and financial 
outcomes. 
As was the case for education, we anticipate that high rates of Internet penetration will not 
eliminate inequality so much as increase the salience of new kinds of inequality --- inequality 
among Internet users in the extent to which they are able to reap benefits from their use of the 
technology.  It is to these forms of inequality that we now turn. 
Beyond the “Digital Divide”: Differentiating Access, Support, and Use 
Going beyond the binary view of access to a more detailed conception of inequality of 
technological opportunity involves four steps:  
1. Identifying critical dimensions of inequality; 
2. Documenting differences among groups; 
3. Explaining the antecedents of inequality on these dimensions; and 
4. Modeling the relationship among different forms of inequality and between these and 
critical outcomes.   
In this section, we focus on the first of these steps: Identifying critical dimensions of inequality.  
We call attention to five broad forms of inequality.   The first is variation in the technical means 
(hardware and connections) by which people access the Web.   The second is variation in the extent 
to which people exercise autonomy in their use of the Web – for example whether they access it 
from work or home, whether their use is monitored or unmonitored, or whether they must compete 
with other users for time on-line.   The third is inequality in the skill that people bring to their use 
of the Internet.   The fourth is inequality in the social support on which Internet users can draw. 
The fifth is variation in the purposes for which people use the technology.   We view each of these 
types of inequality as likely to shape significantly the experience that users have on-line, the uses to 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---9--- 
which they can put the Internet and the satisfactions they draw from it, and their returns to Internet 
use in the form of such outcomes as human capital, social capital, earnings or political efficacy.    
Inequality in technical apparatus.   Kling (1998) distinguished between technological and 
social access, calling attention to the importance of  “the physical availability of suitable equip-
ment, including computers of adequate speed and equipped with appropriate software for a given 
activity.”  How does inequality in the adequacy of hardware, software, and connections, limit the 
ways in which different kinds of users can employ the Internet?   As bandwidth increases and more 
and more Web sites require late-model browsers to display Java applications, sophisticated 
graphics, or streaming audio or video, to what extent can users without access to expensive systems 
access the full range of Internet content?    
We hypothesize that inferior technical apparatus reduces the benefits users can gain from the 
Internet directly and indirectly.  First, users with slow connections, older software, and old 
hardware are simply unable to access certain sites.   Second, because their experience on the Web is 
less gratifying, they are likely to use the Internet less and acquire fewer of the skills that enable 
users to derive the full benefits that access can provide.   
Inequality in autonomy of use.  How much control do people exercise over their Web use?   An 
important aspect of this dimension is the question of where users have access (Bimber 2000).   
Among persons with Internet access, are there significant intergroup differences in the extent to 
which that access is at home, as opposed to work, school, libraries, or other community access 
centers?   If access is outside the home, how much flexibility does the user have in determining the 
hours at which she or he can access the Internet?   How far does the user have to travel?   To what 
extent is use circumscribed by regulations, time limits, filters or other technical impediments to 
access?   If access is at work, what kinds of use are permitted (and how does this vary with 
organizational role), what kinds of filtering or monitoring systems are in use, and how stringently 
are rules enforced (O’Mahoney and Barley 1999)?   If access is at home, to what extent may 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---10--- 
autonomy be limited by the actions of other family members or the policies of the ISP (Lessig 
1999)?   Does in-home access have different effects on educational or occupational outcomes than 
access from other locations?   Of people who have access at work, what predicts the degree of 
autonomy they possess in determining how they use the technology?  
All studies show strong associations between educational attainment, income, race, and having 
Internet access at home.   We further hypothesize that, where individuals have access to the Internet 
at work, the autonomy with which they can exercise that access is associated with their 
organizational rank and functional position.  Finally, we hypothesize that among people with 
access to the Internet, the greater the autonomy of use, the greater the benefits the user derives. 
Inequality in skill. Kling (1998) pointed to the importance of inequality in users’ possession of 
“know-how, a mix of professional knowledge economic resources, and technical skills, to use tech-
nologies in ways that enhance professional practices and social life.”   Wilson (2000) refers to 
inequality in “cognitive access”: the extent to which users are trained to find and evaluate the in-
formation they seek. Internet users vary in their possession of at least four kinds of relevant 
knowledge: recipe knowledge about how to log on, conduct searches, and download information; 
background knowledge (e.g., of Booleian logic for designing search algorithms) helpful to Web 
users but not specific to Internet use; integrative knowledge about the way the Web operates that 
can enable users to navigate more effectively; and technical knowledge about software, hardware, 
and networks necessary for troubleshooting the problems that invariably emerge, or for ensuring 
that one acquires the most up-to-date resources available (e.g., downloadable browser plug-ins).   
Taken together, these four kinds of knowledge constitute what we might (after sociolinguists’ 
notion of “communicative competence” [Hymes 1974]) call “Internet competence”: the capacity to 
respond pragmatically and intuitively to challenges and opportunities in a manner that exploits the 
Internet’s potential.   
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---11--- 
We know very little about what explains inequality in the know-how or competence needed to 
find information on-line.  While basic access to the medium is increasing, evolution in Web site 
construction and continual growth in the volume of information flooding the market requires more 
skills for efficient use of the medium.  Many sites use flashy and glitzy technology without 
sufficient attention to human factors, rendering many sites inaccessible to all but the savviest of 
users with the latest hardware and software and sophisticated know-how about Web navigation.  
Moreover, limitations in search technology – most search engines index no more than a small 
percentage of all content online (Lawrence and Giles 1999) – make many sites difficult to find for 
the average user.  In-depth studies of how people locate content online are necessary to understand 
how different people use the Web differently (Hargittai 2000b).  
We hypothesize that Internet competence is related directly to individuals’ capacity to use the 
Internet for the purposes they choose.  A study of on-line sessions of an experimentally designed 
sample of new users (Neuman et al. 1996) demonstrated that the emotional impact – whether users 
felt frustrated or gratified at the session’s end --- was a function of their success in attaining their 
objectives.  Thus we further hypothesize that Internet competence is related to the satisfaction users 
derive from the experience, the extent to which they find it stressful or rewarding, and therefore, 
the extent to which they persist in Internet use and acquire additional skills.     
     Inequality in the availability of social support.  Based on these observations about 
competence, we would expect inequality in competence to deepen inexorably, as skillful users find 
the Internet rewarding and acquire greater skill and users without know-how are frustrated and turn 
away.   Yet we know that this is not the case: most new users do become more competent.  We 
suspect that a major reason for this is that they can draw on social support from more experienced 
users when they reach the limits of their own skills.    
Access to social support has become more important as the technology has penetrated new sec-
tors of the population.   Anecdotal evidence suggests that early Web users were embedded in dense 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---12--- 
networks of technically sophisticated peers.   By contrast, more recent converts to the Internet are 
often less sophisticated and more isolated.   We would suggest the utility of exploring the distrib-
ution and impact of at least three kinds of support: formal technical assistance from persons 
employed to provide it (for example, office staff in workplaces, customer support staff in 
businesses, librarians, and teachers); technical assistance from friends and family members to 
whom the user can turn when he or she encounters problems; and emotional reinforcement from 
friends and family, in the forms of both commiseration when things go wrong and positive interest 
in sharing discoveries when things go right.   
We hypothesize that social support of all kinds increases users’ motivation to use the 
technology and the extent to which they develop their own digital competence.   We further predict 
that variation in social support influences the returns to Internet access, however these are 
measured. 
Variation in use.  Finally, how do income, education, and other factors influence the 
purposes for which one uses the Internet?  From the standpoint of public policy, not all uses are 
equal.  The Internet prophets who foresaw that the Web would empower citizens, increase social 
capital, and enhance equality of opportunity probably did not have gambling or pornography sites 
in mind when they made these predictions.  We place high priority on examining determinants of 
different kinds of use, especially distinguishing among uses that increase economic productivity 
(e.g., skill-enhancement, learning about employment opportunities, consumer information, or 
education) or political or social capital (e.g., using the Internet to follow the news, gather 
information relevant to electoral decision-making, learn about public issues, engage in civic 
dialogue, or take part in or organize social-movement activities [Norris 2001]), and those that 
represent consumption of entertainment.    
We know relatively little about how different kinds of users vary on these dimensions.   On 
the one hand, NTIA (1998, 2000) reports that lower-income and less-educated Internet users are 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---13--- 
more likely than wealthy users to use the Internet to find jobs, and Spooner and Rainey (2000) 
found that African-American Internet users are more likely than their white counterparts to use the 
Web for education and job-hunting.  How much using the Internet to find jobs will increase the 
status of individuals excluded from the informal social networks through which social scientists 
have found that information about the most desirable jobs is distributed (Lin 2000) is an open 
question.   Nonetheless, egalitarians should find such results encouraging.   Yet the relatively early 
adopters by groups that have had lower levels of adoption may be atypical in ways that make it 
unwise to use their behavior as a basis for predicting the behavior of later adopters from the same 
groups.    
 We hypothesize that, in the long run, education will be a strong predictor of the use of the 
Internet for the enhancement of human capital, the development of social capital, and political 
participation.   We further predict that such uses of the Internet will be more strongly associated 
with positive life outcomes than will forms of Internet use that represent pure consumption 
activities.  
Towards a model of technological inequality.   Implicit in concern about the “digital divide” 
is the assumption that people who use the Internet will garner returns in the form of greater access 
to goods and services they value and to enhanced life chances in the form of more education, better 
jobs, and higher incomes.   In this sense, the “Digital Divide” is related to the larger issue of 
inequality in access to new technologies and to the effects of such inequality on the relative life 
chances of members of different groups.   Researchers have found some evidence that computer 
use enhances learning in schools and earnings in the workplace, with higher returns to some groups 
than to others (Krueger 1993; Attewell and Battle 1999).   It is not too early to ask similar questions 
about access to the Internet. 
 If one aggregates the hypotheses set out in the previous sections, one may discern a model 
of the influence of technological inequality on individual life chances that may both apply to the 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---14--- 
Internet and generalize beyond it.  Briefly, we would predict that the quality of technical apparatus, 
autonomy of use, skill, and social support influence the efficacy with which Web users employ the 
technology.  Skill and social support constitute a feedback loop with learning, which, along with 
efficacy, increases satisfaction and therefore encourages greater use.  The dependent variables --- 
increases in human capital (including educational attainment), social capital (including political 
agency), and earnings --- are direct functions of the efficacy, intensity, and purposes of use, and 
indirect consequences (through these mediating variables) of apparatus quality, autonomy, skill, 
and support.    
Other forms of inequality.  In focusing on inequality in individuals’ ability to gain effective 
access to the full range of content and services that the Internet provides, we have given short shrift 
to two other forms of inequality that warrant scholarly attention.  One of these is cross-national 
variation in Internet access and use.  Studies of the “digital divide” are invariably carried out within 
national societies or smaller units.  Were they based on multinational samples, citizenship might 
well be as important a predictor as income, education, gender, or race.  Norris (2001) identifies a 
“global divide” that separates wired countries from those with little access to the network.  
Hargittai (1999) documents and explains cross-national variation in connectedness to the World 
Wide Web among OECD countries.    
Wilson (2000) has called attention to another dimension of inequality between social and 
linguistic groups: the availability of suitable content.  This, in turn, is related to access to the skills 
and time required to mount a Web site and to the capital necessary to promote it and keep it 
current.  Little empirical research bears on the question of the availability of culturally and ling-
uistic specific Internet content of different kinds (except to document the dominant position of 
English as the language of the Web [OECD 1997]), but the issue has received substantial attention 
from policy makers and technology critics.  When scholars turn to this topic, it will be important to 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---15--- 
study not just the amount and quality of culturally and linguistically specific Web sites, but also 
their availability from the portals to which most Web users have ready access. 
Social Organization of Technological Inequality  
Our critique of the paradigm that has guided much research and policy discussion about inequality 
in access to and use of the Internet has thus far focused on the binary view of inequality implicit in 
the notion of  “digital divide.”  In this section, we depart from a second implicit assumption in most 
research on the “digital divide”: that to understand inequality in “access” it is sufficient to focus 
exclusively on individual resources and behavior.   
By contrast, we believe that access to and use of the Internet is continually transformed by 
the interactions of corporations’ strategic choices, individual users’ responses to these choices, pro-
grammers’ decisions about code (Lessig 1999), and government regulation (including intellectual-
property legislation, privacy rulings, antitrust actions, and economic regulation).   Corporate 
strategies, as modified by government regulation and consumer response, must be taken into 
systematic account because they continually alter individual-level incentives and constraints that 
produce inequality of access to the technology (Neuman, McKnight, & Solomon 1998).  
For example, the extent to which differences in the quality of hardware, connections, or 
software shape one’s effective access to the full range of information on the Web is in part a 
product of how companies decide to design their Web sites, and whether they provide “low-
graphics” or “text-only” options for users with less advanced equipment.  Decisions on the part of 
companies supplying the market with browsers and of ISPs responsible for the software people use 
to access the Internet also influence people’s ability to navigate the Web.  The importance of fin-
ancial inequality in limiting Internet access depends, as well, on regulatory and legislative 
decisions that expand definitions of “intellectual property” (and constrict the definition of “fair 
use”) in ways that may lead Internet firms to substitute pay-information services for free-
information services.  The fact that the government issues accessibility standards for electronic and 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---16--- 
information technology by which all government Web sites have to comply (Access Board 2000) 
also exemplifies how institutional measures can contribute to the degree to which sites are 
accessible to users with different needs and resources. 
Decisions about investments in network infrastructure are another example of how 
institutional factors shape patterns of access.  For example, Internet connectivity in rural America is 
limited by relatively weak telecommunications infrastructure investment.  As a result, there is less 
competition among ISPs, rates are higher, and fewer households subscribe (Strover 1999).  By 
contrast, the superior availability of infrastructure in urban areas is responsible for relatively rapid 
penetration of high-speed Internet access in urban public libraries, a development that has helped to 
increase formal access for the low-income and minority communities that many such libraries serve 
(Bertot & McClure 1998). 
A significant institutional change – and the one that leads us to regard differences in nav-
igational skills as an increasingly important dimension of inequality – is the expansion of 
commercial content and the rise of portal sites and search-engine technologies that render some 
sites difficult to access and award prominent positions to others based on financial compensation or 
other nonrandom criteria, thus increasing the human-capital investments required for effective 
access to the Web as a whole.  Most people “satisfice” when they gather information on the Web, 
trading off comprehensive coverage in favor of minimizing the costs of search.  An analysis of 
almost one billion queries on the Altavista search engine revealed that 77 percent of sessions in-
cluded but one query and 85 percent of users viewed only the first screen of search results (Sil-
verstein et al 1998).  Content creators can only reach large audiences if online gatekeepers (the 
term by which we refer to Web services that categorize online information and provide links and 
search facilities to other sites) channel users to them (Hargittai 2000b).  During the late 1990s, 
entrepreneurs developed comprehensive and strongly branded “portals” – Web sites containing 
search engines, category guides, and various shopping and information services – to match users 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---17--- 
and content.  By 1999, such sites accounted for one in four of the most visited destinations of the 
Web (Waxman 2000b).  Internet traffic is highly concentrated: 80 percent of “hits” (successful 
efforts to contact a site) go to just .5 percent of Web sites, and “portal sites” account for one in four 
of these most visited destinations (Waxman 2000a, 2000b).  The search engines featured by such 
sites are often biased in their choice and, especially, their ranking of sites in response to user 
queries  (Introna & Nissenbaum 2000).  Web destinations that portal sites display prominently or 
that search engines rank high are likely to monopolize the attention of all but the most sophisticated 
and committed Internet users.  If Castells (1996) is right in his prediction that that Internet users 
will soon divide into “two distinct populations, the interacting and the interacted,” then 
understanding the economic and political economic determinants of this process will be an 
essential step in understanding and explaining digital inequality.   
 Policies of public institutions also shape patterns of inequality in effective Internet access 
and use.  The capacity of different kinds of Americans to use the Internet to gain access to inform-
ation about government and politics will depend upon the extent to which government agencies and 
political institutions make information available, the form in which they present the information, 
the strategies they use to promote their sites, and the manner in which they interact with different 
types of users (Fountain 2001; Norris 2001).     
  Policies of one level of government may be counteracted by practices at another.  Federal 
(and corporate) policies contributed to a large jump in Internet connectivity in U.S. public schools 
(from 3 percent in 1994 to 63 percent in 1999 [U.S. Department of Education 2000]).  But Internet 
use in schools is limited by weakness in training and support staffing, which has made it difficult 
for teachers to integrate the Internet effectively with other curricular materials (Bolt & Crawford 
2000). 
Conclusion 
 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---18--- 
The “digital divide” paradigm served researchers and policy makers during the opening years of 
Internet diffusion.   But the ongoing expansion of Internet access, along with continuing 
institutional change, requires that we move beyond that paradigm if we are to document and 
explain important dimensions of digital inequality as Internet penetration continues to increase.   In 
particular, we call for researchers to: 
1. Expand the focus of research the “Digital Divide” between “haves” and “have-nots” (or 
between users and non-users) to the full range of digital inequality in equipment, autonomy, skill, 
support, and scope of use among people who are already on-line. 
2. Go beyond documenting inequality to developing and testing models of the processes 
that engender or ameliorate inequality by mediating the relationship between individuals’ social 
identities and their access to and use of new technologies. 
3. Extend such models to the relationship between the use of these technologies and valued 
individual-level outcomes, and investigate variations in rates-of-return to technology use for 
different subgroups within the population. 
4. Supplement individual-level research with analysis of institutional factors that shape and 
modify over time the relationships between individual characteristics and individual outcomes. 
Accomplishing this agenda will require an expansion of surveys of Internet users and non-
users to cover an expanded menu of topics.   Students of digital inequality will also need to expand 
their methodological armory to include observational designs, analyses of user behavior based on 
massive data sets in which sessions rather than persons are the unit of analysis, analyses of link 
patterns among Web sites, ethnographies of use, cross-national comparisons, experimental survey 
designs, and political-economic research on industrial organization and regulatory issues.  
This is a large agenda, but not impossibly so.  The digital revolution is the first major 
technological change that has occurred after the institutional development of the social sciences 
that accompanied the emergence of federal science funding and the expansion of research univer-
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---19--- 
sities in the 1960s.  As such, it represents a challenge to the social sciences (in collaboration with 
colleagues in computer science and engineering) to demonstrate their ability to help society 
understand and anticipate the consequences of technological change as it is taking place.  Properly 
conducted, such work can serve as an example for social scientists concerned with the effects of 
biotechnology and other technological revolutions that are sure to come. 
 
 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---20--- 
 References 
Access Board. 2000. Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards. 
http://www.access-board.gov/sec508/508standards.htm 
Anderson RH, Bikson TK, Law SA, Mitchell BM. 1995. Universal Access to E-Mail - Feasability 
and Societal Implications. Santa Monica, CA: RAND. 
Attewell P, Battle J. 1999. Home computers and school performance. The Information Society 15: 
1-10. 
Benton Foundation. 1998. Losing Ground Bit by Bit: Low-Income Communities in the Information 
Age. Washington DC: Benton Foundation and National Urban League. 
Bertot JC, McClure CR. 1998. The 1998 National Survey of U.S. Public Library Outlet Internet 
Connectivity: Final Report. Washington: American Library Association and National 
Commission on Libraries and Information Science. 
Bimber, B. 2000. The Gender Gap on the Internet. Social Science Quarterly. 81:3. pp. 868-876. 
Blau, Peter M. 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: A Primitive Theory of Social Structure.  New 
York: Free Press. 
Bolt D, Crawford R. 2000. Digital Divide: Computers and Our Children’s Future. NY: TV Books. 
Brint, Steven G. 1998.  Schools and Societies.  Pine Forge Press. 
Castells, Manuel. 1996. The Rise of the Network Society. Vol. 1 of The Information Age: Economy, 
Society and Culture. Boston: Blackwell.  
Compaine, B. 2000. Re-Examining the Digital Divide. Paper Presented at the 28th Telecommunic-
ations Policy Research Conference in Alexandria, VA. September 23-25. 
Fischer, Claude S. 1992. America Calling: A Social History of the Telephone to 1940. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Fountain, Jane.  2001. The Virtual State: The Politics of Digital Government. Washington, D.C.: 
The Brookings Institution. 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---21--- 
Hargittai, Eszter. 1999. Weaving the Western Web: Explaining difference in Internet connectivity 
among OECD countries. Telecommunications Policy 23: 701-18. 
Hargittai, Eszter. 2000a. How People Locate Content on the World Wide Web. Paper presented at 
the 28th Telecommunications Policy Research Conference (TPRC), Alexandria, VA, 2000 
Hargittai E. 2000b. Open portals or closed gates?  Channeling content on the World Wide Web. 
Poetics 27: 233-253. 
Hoffman, D.L., and T.P. Novak. 1998. Bridging the Racial Divide on the Internet. Science, April 
17. 
Hoffman, D.L., and T.P. Novak. 1999. Examining the Relationship of Race to Internet Access and 
Usage Over Time. Working Paper. Nashville, Tenn: eLab Manuscripts. Vanderbilt 
University. 
Horrigan, John. 2000a. New Internet Users: What They do On-Line, What They Don’t, and 
Implications for the "Net’s" Future. Pew Internet and American Life Project. 
Horrigan, John. 2000b. The Holidays On-Line: E-Mails and E-Greetings Outpace E-Commerce. 
Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet and American Life Project. 
Hymes, Dell. 1974. Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An Ethnographic Approach. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. 
IntelliQuest. 1999. Intelliquest study shows 83 million U.S. Internet users and 56 million online 
shoppers. Press release, April 19. http://www.intelliquest.com/press/release78.asp. 
Introna L, Nissenbaum H. 2000. Shaping the Web: Why the politics of search engines matters. The 
Information Society 16. 
Kling, R. 1998. Technological and Social Access on Computing, Information and Communication 
Technologies. White Paper for Presidential Advisory Committee on High-Performance 
Computing and Communications, Information Technology, and the Next Generation 
Internet. 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---22--- 
Kraut R, Scherlis W, Mukhopadhyay T, Manning J, Kiesler S. 1996. The HomeNet field trial of 
residential Internet services. Communications of the ACM 39: 55-63. 
Krueger AB. 1993. How computers have changed the wage structure: Evidence from micro data. 
Quarterly J. of Economics 108: 33-60. 
Lawrence, S. and C.L.Giles. 1999. Accessibility of information on the Web. Nature. 400, 107-109. 
Lebo, Harlan. 2000. The UCLA Internet Report: Surveying the Digital Future. Los Angeles: UCLA 
Center for Communication Policy. 
Lenhardt, Amanda. 2000. Who’s Not on Line? 57 Percent of those Without Internet Access Say they 
do not Plan to Log On. Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet and American Life Project. 
Lessig, Lawrence 1999. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New York: Basic Books. 
Lin, Nan. 2000. Social Capital. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Marsden, Peter V. 1987. "Core discussion networks of Americans." American Sociological Review 
52:122-131. 
NTIA (National Telecommunications and Information Administration). 1995. Falling Through the 
Net: A Survey of the "Have Nots" in Rural and Urban America. July. 
NTIA 1998. Falling Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide. July. 
NTIA 1999. Falling Through the Net: Defining the Digital Divide. November. 
NTIA 2000. Falling Through the Net: Toward Digital Inclusion. October. 
Neuman WR, McKnight LW, Solomon RJ. 1998 The Gordian Knot: Political Gridlock on the 
Information Highway. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Neuman, W. Russell, S.R. O’Donnell and S.M. Schneider. 1996. “The Web’s Next Wave: A Field 
Study of Internet Diffusion and Use Patterns.” Manuscript. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
M.I.T. Media Lab. 
Norris, Pippa. 2001. Digital Divide? Civic Engagement, Information Poverty and the Internet in 
Democratic Societies. NY: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
DiMaggio and Hargittai: Digital Inequality ---23--- 
O’Mahony S., Barley SR. 1999. "Do digital telecommunications affect work and organization? The 
state of our knowledge." Research in Org.l Behavior 21: 125-61. 
OECD (Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development). 1997. Webcasting And Con-
vergence: Policy Implications. Paris: OECD. (http://www. oecd.org/ dsti/sti/it/ cm/prod/ 
e_97-221.htm) 
Pew Center for the People and the Press. 1995. Technology in the American household. 
Washington, D.C. http://www.people-press.org/tech.htm. 
Pew Internet and American Life Project. 2000. Tracking Online Life: How Women Use the Internet 
to Cultivate Relationships with Family and Friends.  Washington, D.C.  
Robinson, John and Alan Neustadtl. 2001. “The On-Line Data Archive for Internet Research: Some 
Features and an Example.” Manuscript, University of Maryland, Jan. 12. 
Silverstein C, Henzinger M, Marais H, Moricz M. 1998. "Analysis of a very large AltaVista query 
log." SRC Technical Note 1998-014. October 26. 
Spooner, Tom and Lee Rainey. 2000. African-American and the Internet. Washington, D.C.: Pew 
Internet and American Life Project. 
Strover, S. 1999. Rural Internet Connectivity. Columbia, MO: Rural Policy Research Institute. 
U.S. Dept. of Education. 2000. "Internet access in U.S. public schools and classrooms: 1994-1999." 
Stats in Brief. National Center for Educational Statistics. February. 
Waxman, J. 2000a. The Old 80/20 Rule Take One on the Jaw. Internet Trends Report 1999 Review. 
San Francisco: Alexa Research. 
Waxman, J. 2000b. Leading the Pack... Internet Trends Report 1999 Review. San Francisco: Alexa 
Research. 
Wilson EJ. 2000. Closing the Digital Divide: An Initial Review. Briefing the President. 
Washington: The Internet Policy Institute. May.http://www.internetpolicy.org/ 
briefing/ErnestWilson0700.html. 

